
Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a carer is claiming or receiving CA only 009-03020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines determining eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)
(child) when caring for a person under 16 years of age.

On this Page:

General information

CA (child) is an income supplement for people who provide additional
daily care and attention for a child with a disability or medical
condition. CA is not taxable or assets tested, however there is an
income test. CA can be paid in addition to wages, or another income
support payment.

To be eligible for CA a carer must be providing additional care and
attention for a child (under 16 years), who needs care permanently or
for a minimum of 12 months. CA for child care receivers provides two
levels of assistance depending on the care needs of the child.

The first level of assistance for CA (child) provides a Health Care Card
(HCC) only and no fortnightly payment. The second level provides an
income supplement and a Health Care Card for a child care receiver.

Eligibility for CA (child) is determined by the Disability Care Load
Assessment (Child) Determination (DCLAD) (2010). The DCLAD (2010)
assesses the functional ability, behaviour, and special care needs for
eligibility Carer Payment (CP) (child) and/or CA (child) claims.

A person may qualify for CA even if they are utilising the services of a
commercial carer to assist with care provided by the carer. See Example
1 in the Resources page.

Commercial carers do not qualify for CA. Additionally, the care provided
by a commercial carer cannot be used towards qualifying another person
for CA. See Example 2 in the Resources page.

Note: while there are no legislative age limits for carers, claims from
carers under 18 years of age, or 80 years of age or older, require
careful consideration. It is necessary to ensure that the carer can and
does provide the care receiver with the care and attention that is
required on a daily basis. Where the carer is under 18 years of age or
aged over 80 years, they must be referred to a social worker for
assessment of the care situation. This may require a phone call or a
home visit with the carer.

Age considerations

There are no legislative age limits applicable to carers, however,
claims from carers under 18 years of age, or 80 years of age and over,
require a referral to a social worker.

-   For carers under the age of 18, a pre-grant referral is required
-   For carers 80 years of age and over, a post-grant referral is
    required

It is necessary to ensure that the carer can and does provide the care
receiver with the level of care and attention on a daily basis that is
required. A very young or elderly carer may have difficulty accessing
support services and resources. A social worker can provide assistance
in this regard.

Social workers provide information that contribute to decisions about
qualification. They do not make the final decision regarding
qualification.

Referrals to a social worker can be done via the Social Work guided
procedure, by selecting from the options:

-   Under 18 years of age, or
-   Over 80 years of age

See Social worker assessment of care situations for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA) claims.

Testing eligibility

CA (auto) is payable automatically to carers who are paid Carer Payment
(CP) (child).

Note: carers should be encouraged to apply for CA (child) when they
apply for CP (child), so that if their CP (child) is rejected they can
still be considered for CA (child).

If the carer is not eligible for CP (child) and therefore CA (auto) is
not payable, the customer may test their eligibility for:

-   1 carer and 1 care receiver for a payment of CA
-   1 carer and 1 care receiver for the Health Care Card (HCC) only
    level of CA
-   2 carers who share the care of 1 care receiver, or
-   1 carer who provides care for 2 care receivers under 16 whose
    combined disabilities have a significant impact when assessed
    against the Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD)

If a carer is in receipt of CA (child) and the child care receiver turns
16, the carer will need to test their eligibility for Carer Allowance
(CA) for a person aged 16 years or over.

Basic CA (child) qualifications

To qualify for CA for a child under 16 years of age the following must
apply:

The care receiver must be a dependent child of the carer and be aged
under 16 years

Both carer and care receiver are Australian residents

The care receiver's condition is:

-   Permanent, or
-   Expected to last a minimum period of 12 months

The carer provides care and attention on a daily basis in a private home
that is the shared residence of both the carer and care receiver

The care receiver has a recognised disability, or has been given a
qualifying rating of intense under the DCLAD (2010). The References page
contains links to Guide to Social Security Law 1.1.R.90 Recognised
disability (CA (child)), Guide to Social Security Law 1.1.R.95
Recognised medical condition (CA), and 3.6.12 DCLA (child)

Note: if the care is not being provided in the residence of both the
carer and the care receiver because the care receiver is temporarily
hospitalised, the procedure Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment
(CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) contains further information.

HCC only CA

If a care receiver does not qualify their carer for payment of CA and
the carer meets the CA income test, consideration is given to CA Health
Care Card (HCC) only, where no payments are made, but recognition is
given to the high cost of medications, and a HCC is issued for that
purpose. To qualify for CA HCC only, the condition must be either
permanent or expected to last 12 months or more.

The carer is not required to describe the effects of the disability or
the level of care that is provided. Once the claim is completed and
lodged, the entitlement will be assessed, and the claim granted or
rejected.

CA income test

To be eligible for CA, the carer’s and their partner’s combined Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) must be under $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
amount from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or more. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner. The income test does not affect the rate of CA.

CA Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) details are collected in a CA claim or
combined Carer Payment (CP) and CA claim unless the claimant is already
exempt from providing their income details for the CA income test at the
time they complete their claim.

A CA claimant can become exempt or lose their exemption from providing
their income details for the CA income test.

-   If the claimant is not already exempt at the time they complete
    their claim, they may become exempt due to being granted CP or when
    they or their partner are granted a payment or card that qualifies
    for an exemption
-   A CA claimant may be exempt at the time they complete their claim
    but when it is processed they have lost their exemption - in this
    case the Service Officer will manually issue a Carer Allowance
    adjusted taxable income details (SA489) form by selecting Request
    Documents through the More Options icon located in Process Direct.
    The Resources page contains a link to this form

For more information see Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining
reference tax year and assessable income components.

Other assistance

Other assistance available for carers:

-   Detailed information relating to eligibility for the Carer
    Supplement (CS) can be found in the procedure Carer Supplement (CS)
-   Carers receiving the Carer Allowance (CA) (child) payment may be
    entitled to the annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

The Resources page contains forms and examples relating to 'commercial
care'.

Related links

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
under 16

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Supplement (CS)

Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

Assessing a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) using the combined assessment
scores of two children

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 carers in respect of the same
care receiver

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

Assessing a recognised disability

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Social work services

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
