
Carer Payment (CP) (child) terminal illness 009-04070070

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to customers claiming Carer
Payment (CP) (child) and Carer Allowance (CA) (auto) for care receivers
who have a terminal illness.

Carer Payment (CP) (child) terminal illness

For the purposes of CP (child), a terminal condition is where a child
under 16 years has a terminal condition and is not expected to live more
than 24 months.

Where a medical practitioner has certified the child care receiver has a
terminal condition, they do not need to undergo the Disability Care Load
Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) and are granted CP
automatically, provided they meet all other eligibility criteria.

CA (auto) is automatically payable for each child care receiver for the
period for which the carer is paid CP (child) for that care receiver,
where the carer is not already receiving CA (child) for the care
receiver/s under the standard CA provisions.

This means CA (auto) may be payable even if the standard provisions for
CA (child) are not met. For instance, the condition is expected to last
for at least 6 months but not 12 months; or the child is not a dependent
child of the carer.

Continuing eligibility up to 18 years of age

When a child care receiver turns 16 years of age they are considered an
adult for social security purposes. Carers current on CP (child) and CA
(auto) under the terminal illness criteria, will remain on CP and CA
(auto) and can remain payable up until the day before the care receiver
turns 18 years.

When the care receiver is 17 years and 9 months of age, the carer is
sent an invitation letter to complete an [] online Carers Child to Adult
Transfer (CTAT), which is used for an assessment under CP and/or CA
(adult) criteria.

Carers subscribed to get their letters to their myGov Inbox are advised
in their invitation letter to select the link in their myGov Inbox. The
link takes them to the online CTAT.

Carers who are not subscribed to get their letters to their myGov Inbox
but have a Centrelink online account can create a myGov account and link
it to their Centrelink online account. They will get a message and a
link in their myGov Inbox that takes them to the online CTAT.

If the carer does not have a myGov subscription or Centrelink online
account, a paper invitation letter will include instructions of how to
register online. If the carer does not wish to use the online service
they will be advised to download the following forms from the Services
Australia website:

-   Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432)
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16
    years or over form (SA332A)

If the CTAT is not returned before the care receiver turns 18 years of
age and CP is cancelled the carer will need to lodge a new claim, this
can be completed online.

Before 1 July 2018

If CTAT paper forms were lodged before 1 July 2018 and CP was already
cancelled, they will be deemed as a new claim from the date they are
submitted. The additional 13 week backdating provisions which accepted
CTAT forms up to 13 weeks after the child level entitlement has ended
have been removed. Carers of children with a milestone age of 17 years
and 9 months on or after 2 December 2017 are no longer restored and
backdated to the date of cancellation.

Note: the extension of CP (child) until 18 years of age will only apply
to care receivers who were assessed by the Treating Health Professional
prior to turning 16. A grant of CP (child) can only occur after the
child turns 16, if the intent to claim has been lodged prior to the
child turning 16.

From 1 July 2018

Intent to claim provisions were amended on 1 July 2018 and only apply to
carers in vulnerable circumstances. See Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers.

CTAT paper forms lodged from 1 July 2018 (where CP has already been
cancelled), are deemed as a new claim from the date they are submitted.

Completion of medical form

A Treating Health Professional (THP) may complete the medical report
form, however, they must provide the contact details (including the
provider number if available) of the medical practitioner who has
assessed and certified the terminal condition for Services Australia's
verification purposes.

Care receiver already 16 years or over

If the care receiver is 16 years or over at the time the terminal
illness is certified by a medical practitioner, the care receiver will
be assessed under the CP (adult) terminal illness provisions.

For the purposes of CP and CA (adult) a terminal condition is where a
person aged 16 years or over is in the final phase of a terminal illness
and is not expected to live more than 3 months.

Where a medical practitioner has certified the adult care receiver is
terminally ill, they do not need to undergo the ADAT assessment, as they
are granted payment automatically, provided they meet all other
eligibility criteria.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Reviews of terminal illness for Carer Allowance (CA) (adult)

Reviews of terminal illness for Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (adult)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
