
Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 carers in respect of the same care receiver 009-03020050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for actioning claims for Carer
Allowance (CA) claims when 2 carers claim for the one care receiver.

About Carer Allowance (CA)

Carers are an integral part of Australia's health system and are the
foundation of our aged, disability and community care systems. All
carers and care receivers, regardless of their cultural and linguistic
differences, age, disability, religion, socioeconomic status, gender
identification and geographical location, should have the same rights,
choices and opportunities as other Australians. They should be able to
enjoy optimum health, social and economic wellbeing and participate in
family, social and community life, employment and education.

CA is an income supplement for people who provide additional daily care
and attention for an adult or child with a disability or medical
condition, or an adult who is frail aged. CA is not taxable or assets
tested. There is an income test. CA can be paid in addition to wages, or
an income support payment. CA recognises the impact of a person's
disability on the carer.

CA income test

To be eligible for CA, the carer’s and their partner’s combined Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) must be under $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
amount from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or more. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner. The income test does not affect the rate of CA.

CA Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) details are collected in a CA claim or
combined Carer Payment (CP) and CA claim unless the claimant is already
exempt from providing their income details for the CA income test at the
time they complete their claim.

A CA claimant can become exempt or lose their exemption from providing
their income details for the CA income test.

-   If the claimant is not already exempt at the time they complete
    their claim, they may become exempt due to being granted CP or when
    they or their partner are granted a payment or card that qualifies
    for an exemption.
-   A CA claimant may be exempt at the time they complete their claim
    but when it is processed they have lost their exemption – in this
    case the Service Officer will manually issue a Carer Allowance
    adjusted taxable income details (SA489) form by selecting Request
    Documents through the More Options icon located in Process Direct.

For more information see CA income test - determining reference tax year
and assessable income components

CA can be shared

CA can be shared by 2 carers who are not members of a couple and who
share the care for the same care receiver or care receivers, provided
they meet the qualifications for CA, including the CA income test.
Before CA can be shared by 2 carers, a declaration must be made under
Section 981 of the Social Security Act 1991 (SSA) that CA is to be
shared between the 2 carers.

Note the following:

if 1 carer is already in receipt of CA, can claim [] online or the
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) can be run by a Service Officer with the
carer. The online claim and ACC will present relevant questions only as
information from their Centrelink record will pre-populate into the
claim

if both carers are members of the same couple, only 1 person will
receive CA. See information under the heading 'CA claim received from
the second member of a couple' below

if both carers are not members of the same couple, and they qualify for
Carer Payment (CP) (child) under the exchanged care provisions, the
payment of CA (auto) is shared in the same proportions. The care
receiver does not have to be tested a second time against the list of
recognised disabilities or the Disability Care Load Assessment (child)
Determination (DCLAD) 2010 or the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT)

in the case of a child care receiver, the child must be a dependent
child of both carers. If the care is shared between a parent and a
grandparent it is unlikely the child will be a dependent of both. CA can
only be paid to the carer who has the dependent child in their care. If
the shared care provisions do not apply and:

-   the arrangement is temporary, the temporary cessation of care (TCC)
    provisions may apply while the child is in the care of the other
    carer
-   the arrangement is not temporary, the carer may have lost
    entitlement to CA if daily care is not being provided and this must
    be investigated

in the case of an adult care receiver, CA may be shared between 2
co-resident carers (if not members of the same couple) or 2
non-co-resident carers. However, CA cannot be shared between a
co-resident and a non-co-resident carer. A separate procedure outlines
the eligibility for CA when caring for a disabled adult in a private
home not shared by the adult and carer

CA claim received from the second member of a couple

If 1 member of a couple receives CA and the other member of the couple
claims and is qualified, a decision must be made under section 965 of
the Social Security Act 1991 who is the primary carer. This will require
contact with both members of the couple.

If the second carer still wishes to claim CA and is determined to be the
primary carer, they should be granted from the date the other member of
the couple has been cancelled. Both members of a couple need to be
advised in writing individually of the decision as to who is the primary
carer.

If the first member of the couple (already receiving CA) is determined
to be the primary carer, the second member of the couple's claim must be
rejected. A free-text letter shell will generate to advise the second
carer, their partner, is regarded as the primary carer. A manual letter
must also be issued to the first member of the couple to advise of the
decision that they are regarded as the primary carer.

If 2 carers receive a shared care rate of CA for the same care receiver
advise they have become partnered, CA can no longer be paid to both
partners. See Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA).

The Resources page contains local processing service details, examples
of co-resident and non-co-resident carers, and a link to the Services
Australia Website.

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a customer is claiming
or receiving CA only

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring for a disabled adult in
a private home not shared by the adult carer

Annual Child Disability Assistance payment (CDAP)

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is under
16

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
