-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains information on re-use provisions, questionnaires
to assess, and coding of the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) for
Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) claim or review.

ADAT questionnaires

The ADAT has been designed specifically for use in the assessment of an
adult care receiver's functional ability, emotional state, behaviour and
special care needs, to determine their carer's entitlements to CP and/or
CA.

The ADAT consists of responses to a:

-   carer questionnaire, and
-   Treating Health Professional (THP) questionnaire (completed by an
    approved THP)

These questionnaires include questions about the amount of help the care
receiver needs to undertake basic activities of daily living such as:

-   mobility
-   communication
-   hygiene
-   eating, and
-   management in a range of cognitive and behavioural areas

This may include supervising and prompting the care receiver to
undertake these daily activities. The responses from the questionnaires
are used to calculate a score indicating the level of care needed
because of that person's disability or medical condition.

The ADAT does not assess higher activities of daily living such as
managing finances, housework, cooking, shopping, laundry or gardening.

The Treating Health Professional (THP) questionnaire is in the Carer
Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16 years or
over form (SA332a). The THP can complete the form if the care receiver
is aged at least 15 years and 6 months. The questions in the SA332a are
not about specific disabilities or medical conditions. The purpose is to
determine the level of care needed by the adult.

When an ADAT is not required

If an adult care receiver satisfies the re-use provisions they medically
qualify their carer for both CP and/or CA without the need for a new
ADAT assessment.

If an adult care receiver has a terminal illness, and the THP medical
report (Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person
16 years or over form (SA332a)) indicates they are not expected to live
more than 3 months, the care receiver is medically eligible to qualify
their carer for both CP and/or CA without the need for an ADAT
assessment.

If an adult does not meet the re-use provisions and does not have a
certified terminal illness, an ADAT will be needed.

Re-use and re-claim provisions

Information previously gathered under ADAT or terminal condition
assessment for CP and/or CA (adult) may be re-used for CP and/or CA
claims.

Re-use provisions do not apply to medical reviews, or where a carer has
provided a new medical report and new carer questionnaire and these
forms are an accurate reflection of the care receiver’s care needs.

The re-use provisions are automatically assessed if a carer claims
online, ACC or First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow is run. See
ADAT and reclaim provisions and ADAT and re-use provisions.

Even if the reuse provisions apply, the previous ADAT must reflect the
current care needs and the carer meets the daily care and constant care
requirements. Clarification of the provision of care should only be
sought if there are circumstances indicating the carer is not providing
constant or daily care.

If a medical report or carer questionnaire has been lodged when the
re-use or reclaim provisions may apply, see Process.

Two or more carers

An adult care receiver (aged 16 years or over) who is likely to suffer
from their disability permanently or for an extended period may qualify
2 or more carers for separate Carer Payments if the care receiver
achieves a qualifying ADAT score.

Qualifying ADAT scores

-   CA (adult) must have a THP score of at least 12, with a total ADAT
    score of at least 30
-   CP (adult) must have a THP score of at least 10, with a total ADAT
    score of at least 25
-   CP (adult) 2 carers may qualify if the care receiver's has a THP
    score of at least 32, with a total score of at least 80

Note: this does not qualify both carers for CA (adult).

Terminal Illness

If an adult care receiver is certified as being in the final phase of a
terminal illness,  only that part of the THP questionnaire Carer Payment
and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16 years or over form
(SA332a) is to be completed. The care receiver is automatically assessed
as having a qualifying ADAT score of 30.
However, if 2 or more carers wish to claim CP for a care receiver who
has been certified as being in the final phase of a terminal illness:

-   the care receiver must be reassessed using another SA332a, and
-   achieve the qualifying score for two carers (THP score of at least
    32, with a total ADAT score of at least 80)

Multiple medical reports

If a carer lodges multiple medical reports, the most recent medical
report is used for the CP/CA assessment. However, the following factors
must be considered if multiple medical reports are lodged, as some older
medical reports can be used for the CP/CA assessment.

For carers who lodge multiple medical reports, check the following:

-   is each medical report an accurate reflection of the care receiver’s
    care needs
-   the date of each medical report
-   the qualifications of the THP (they are on the approved THP list)
-   the relevance of the THP qualification in relation to all of the
    care receiver’s conditions

Where multiple medical reports have been lodged, but only 1 medical
report is being used for the assessment, only this report should be
recorded.

If this occurs, the carer may not be qualified at claim but:

-   subsequently become qualified and the early claim provisions apply
-   ceases to be qualified (this happens if a subsequent medical report
    is lodged and there has been a reduction is in the care needs which
    precludes payment. In this case both medical reports were an
    accurate reflection of the care needs at the time they were
    completed)

Note: it is possible for the latest medical report to reflect the care
receiver’s care needs from a date after the claim was submitted and for
the claim to be granted from the date of lodgement.

The Resources page contains:

-   a link to relevant forms
-   a list of ADAT screens
-   a link to a table indicating the impact of various ADAT scores, and
-   Level 2 Policy Help Desk contact details

Related links

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
16 years or over

Carer Payment (CP) for care receivers aged 16 or over

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
