
Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver commences or returns to work 009-06040080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the effect on Carer Payment
(CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver commences or
returns to work.

On this Page:

Carer Allowance (CA) (adult)

The adult care receiver may be absent from care to undertake education,
training, treatment and paid or unpaid work without an effect on the
carer's entitlement to CA, as long as daily care and attention is still
being provided by the carer, in a private home that is the home of the
carer and/or the care receiver. The care and attention does not have to
be substantial, but it cannot be delegated to others.

Carer Payment (CP)

A care receiver may be absent from care to undertake education, training
or employment without an effect on the carer's entitlement to CP, as
long as 'constant care' is still being provided by the carer. The '25
hour rule' does not apply to care receivers.

Where a carer receiving CP ceases providing care for more than 25 hours
per week their eligibility should be reviewed, as it is possible that
the qualification of 'constant care' may no longer be met. Each case
should be evaluated on its merits to determine continued qualification
for CP, and to ensure that constant care is still being provided.

CP qualification would only continue if the care receiver still requires
a qualifying level of personal care and/or supervision, and the carer
provides the equivalent of a working day of personal care over the 24
hour period. The need to provide constant care at home would have to
preclude the carer from undertaking substantial employment.

Note: if the care receiver returns to work and they are no longer in
receipt of a Centrelink or a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
income support payment, the care receiver should be assessed to ensure
they continue to require a significant level of care and that they meet
the care receiver's income and assets test.

If a carer in receipt of CP commences work, refer to Carer Payment (CP)
carer undertakes paid employment, self employment, voluntary work,
education or training activities

If the care receiver is absent to provide the carer with a break from
care, respite care provisions apply, or if the care receiver is in
hospital, hospitalisation care provisions may apply.

If the care receiver is imprisoned, this is also considered an absence
and the Carer's qualification for payment may continue under respite
conditions.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (XWP)

Constant care does not apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that is
paid under grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers.
However Temporary Cessation of Care (TCC) (respite and hospitalisation)
rules continue to apply to payment level CA as normal. This means that
where the care receiver commences or returns to work, a qualifying level
of care does not need to be assessed for CP (XWP), but still needs to be
met for CA.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason or changed to a CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will be
automatically be cancelled. When the carer’s only or last payment level
CA is cancelled from the first date the carer ceased providing care and
attention, then CP (XWP) will be automatically be cancelled. A carer
loses their qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if payment level CA
is not reinstated without a gap in entitlement. For more information see
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

The Resources page contains a link to the processing service teams for
Carer Allowance/Carer Payment.

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (auto) when a customer is also
receiving Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Carer is absent from caring situation

Carer Payment and /or Carer Allowance care receiver is absent from the
caring situation

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)
when the care receiver is absent

Coding a regular absence for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA) when care receiver is absent

Carer Allowance (CA) child care receiver undertakes education, training
or treatment

Lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score Carer Payment (CP)
where there is an absence of the adult care receiver or their dependent
child

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding absences for Carer Allowance (CA) where care of the care receiver
is shared

Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP) absences where qualification is
from the combined disabilities of more than one care receiver

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

Pensions income and assets tests

Carer Payment (CP) carer undertakes paid employment, self employment,
voluntary work, education or training activities

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
