
Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03110040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to restore CA after cancellation or
suspension.

Restoration of CA

When restoring CA:

-   re-establish the carer's eligibility, and
-   restart payment from the date they became eligible again

Before restoring payments, update the carer's record if there has been a
change in circumstances.

When restoring Carer Payment (CP) and CA, restore CA first and then CP.
Unless CP was cancelled reason CID.

Re-claiming CA

The carer will need to reclaim if they have been cancelled for more than
13 weeks. They can do this via:

-   [] online claim, or
-   Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) via a Service Officer

The online claim and ACC will determine if there is a need for a:

-   new medical report, or
-   Care Needs Assessment

See Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

Claiming CA manual (child) after payment of CP (child) stops

A carer may qualify for arrears back to the date they last received CP
(child).

A claim for CA (child) will be backdated to the date CP (child) stopped
if:

-   claimed within 28 days of CP (child) ceasing, and
-   the carer qualifies

Claims lodged outside the 28 day period cannot be backdated.

The Resources page contains links to forms and to mySupport for ICT
Service Desk referrals. It also contains a scenario on what to consider
before restoring CA.

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) inter-environment change of
address

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Allowance (CA)

Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Restoration workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Returning to Australia

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA) where previously
re-granted after a cancellation due to exceeding respite bank

Continuation of respite after the expiry of hospitalisation

Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
