
Recognised disability medical reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) 009-08040010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines certain medical conditions that may be considered
temporary in nature and subject to medical review.

On this Page:

Medical condition subject to review

Child care receivers with a recognised disability are not generally
medically reviewed. However, certain conditions are only considered to
be a recognised disability for certain periods of time, as some
recognised disabilities can be of a temporary nature. It may be relevant
to determine whether the child's medical condition has improved since
Carer Allowance (CA) was granted.

Requirement to notify of improvements to condition

In some cases, children who qualified with a recognised disability may
have an improvement in their condition and their carer may not have
realised they had an obligation to notify Services Australia. For
example, children who are granted soon after birth, with the recognised
disability of ventilator dependent, are likely to cease to be ventilator
dependent as soon as they leave hospital. If the carer fails to tell the
agency, this review may be the only opportunity to become aware of this
change.

A recognised disability is a condition or disability which is
consistently associated with severe levels of disability. There are 2
categories of recognised disabilities:

-   recognised disability, and
-   recognised medical conditions

Additionally, some disabilities and conditions are treated as recognised
disabilities for review purposes only, although they are not considered
a recognised disability or a recognised medical condition. In deciding
when to treat a disability or condition as a recognised disability for
review purposes, a delegate can apply discretion to disabilities and
conditions that display a consistently high level of severity but are
rare in the community.

Severe multiple and physical disability reviews

Child care receivers with a recognised disability are not generally
medically reviewed. However, some conditions are only considered to be a
recognised disability for certain periods of time, as the condition can
be of a temporary nature.

Carers paid CA for a child care receiver with a recognised disability of
Severe Multiple Disabilities - Seizures (SMS) will have a Manual
Follow-up (MFU) Care Load review when the child reaches 6 months of age.
If the carer is paid Carer Payment (child) and CA (auto) a manual follow
up Care Load review is not required.

Contact the customer to determine if the child's condition has improved,
if any circumstances have changed, and if they wish to continue to be
paid CA (child).

The following forms are required to proceed with the review:

-   Review of Carer Allowance - Care Needs Assessment (for a child under
    16 years) (SA420)
-   Review of Carer Allowance - Medical Report including functional
    assessment (for a child under 16 years) (SA403)

Once these forms have been issued, an MFU is recorded to check the forms
are returned within 21 days.

To process manual reviews for Severe Multiple seizures, see Carer
Allowance (CA) (child) Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews.

The Resources page contains details of recognised disabilities for
review purposes only, developmental milestones and milestone reviews,
and examples of conditions considered to be recognised for certain
periods of time. It also contains links to forms and information
available on the Services Australia website, and links to online forms
available to staff on the intranet.

Related links

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

Assessing a recognised disability

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
