
Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03110070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the cancellation of CA. CA can be cancelled
manually or automatically when a carer is no longer entitled to payment
due to a change in circumstances, or if they have failed to comply with
the requirements for payment.

Suspension of CA

Before suspending CA, the Service Officer must be certain that:

-   the information and/or evidence is sufficient to prove the carer is
    temporarily not eligible for CA
-   there is a legislative basis to suspend the payment, and
-   all appropriate action has been taken

If this information and/or evidence is not available at the time of
assessment, request further information and/or evidence. If the
information and/or evidence is not provided within the specified
timeframe, suspend CA as failed to reply to correspondence (FRC).

Only suspend CA if:

-   a determination is made that the carer is not qualified, or the
    payment is not payable, temporarily or for a specific period as a
    result of changes in their circumstances, or
-   the carer did not comply with a request that was reasonable. The
    request may be to provide information held by the carer, to attend
    an interview, or to take action (for example, to obtain a foreign
    payment)

If a decision to suspend CA is determined, advise the carer of the
suspension reason and their review and appeal rights, to avoid placing
them in financial hardship.

Auto-cancellation of CA

CA can be automatically or manually cancelled when a carer is no longer
entitled as a result of changes in their circumstances, or if they have
failed to comply with the requirements for payment.

Do not cancel CA unless it is established that the carer has lost
entitlement to CA. Key the changes in the carer’s circumstances on their
record so it accurately reflects the current circumstances of the carer
and the care receiver. This will allow the system to auto-cancel the
carer's payment following reassessments where no continuing entitlements
exist.

CA will auto-cancel when a child care receiver turns the maximum age for
CA (child) and they have not been assessed under CA (adult) provisions.
The maximum age for CA Health Care Card (HCC) only is 16 years. For CA
with payment and a CA HCC, it is 16 years and 3 months or 18 years where
the child care receiver has a terminal illness. See Carer Payment (CP)
and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT).

Examples of when the system will auto-cancel CA include:

permanent cessation of care

temporary cessation of care. In most cases, payment will only cancel
once the balance of 63 days per calendar year of respite care have been
used up. This would include the following situations:

-   Carer is absent from the caring situation
-   Care receiver is absent from the caring situation
-   Continuation of respite after the end of hospitalisation
-   Overseas absences

Death of a carer

Death of a child care receiver and the effect on CA

Death of adult care receiver and the effect on CA

CA income review processing. Cancellation can occur due to 'Failed to
reply to correspondence', excess income and estimate not accepted

ceasing to qualify for CP (child) will result in the cancellation of the
associated CA (auto) payment. See Eligibility for CA (auto) when a carer
is also receiving CP (child). The carer may test their eligibility for
CA (child) in some circumstances, for example if CP (child) is cancelled
due to income but the carer is still caring

imprisonment or psychiatric confinement of the carer. Note: respite may
apply when a care receiver is imprisoned but not when the carer is
imprisoned). If the carer is in gaol or psychiatric confinement for:

-   more than 13 weeks because they have been charged with an offence,
    CA must be cancelled
-   13 weeks or less, CA is suspended from the date of confinement. If
    the carer is still in gaol or psychiatric confinement after 13
    weeks, the suspended CA will auto-cancel from the date of
    confinement

Manual cancellation of CA

If CA does not auto-cancel after the circumstances are keyed as the
Service Officer determines the carer is no longer entitled to CA, CA may
be manually cancelled.

If a care receiver advises Services Australia of a change in
circumstances that would result in CA being cancelled, do not cancel CA
unless the care receiver can provide evidence that the carer is no
longer entitled to CA. The Service Officer must send an ACTDOC to CD1
for further investigation. The Process page contains more details.

Note: if a care receiver or carer changes address and they no longer
live together and the carer still provides daily care, review the level
of care.

If the decision to cancel (or suspend) is made, ensure an advice is sent
to the carer with the cancellation reasons and information about their
review and appeal rights.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (XWP)

If a Carer Payment (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is
suspended or cancelled for any reason, or changed to CA HCC only or nil
rate due to Education, Training and Treatment (ETT), then CP (XWP) will
auto-cancel. However, CP (XWP), will auto-restore if payment level CA is
restored or reinstated without a gap within 13 weeks. A Manual Follow Up
(MFU) and work item will be produced to assess eligibility for CP (XWP)
restoration manually, where payment level CA is restored or reinstated
without a gap more than 13 weeks later.

Note: a carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they
have a break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020. A
break occurs where continuous entitlement stops and is not reinstated,
or where it is reinstated with a gap in entitlement. See Transfer from
Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment.

Consumer Price Index (CPI) activities for Carer Allowance customers

If a CA CPI activity presents, staff need to attempt to complete the
activity in the first instance.

A CA CPI activity can result in cancellation of the customer’s payments,
causing a potential overpayment. These outcomes must be investigated the
same as any overpayment.

Note: do not place these CPI activities on hold.

See Change of circumstances for Carer Allowance (CA).

Related links

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Notes, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) turning 16 years of age

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Allowance (CA) carer is absent

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
