
Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers 009-03050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the action required for changes in care for Carer
Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA).

On this Page:

Application for payment of CP and CA

When a carer stops caring for a care receiver, their payment should be
cancelled.

A carer who wishes to receive CP and/or CA for a care receiver who has
recently come into their care must make a CP and/or CA [] online claim
or have Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) run by a Service Officer. This
includes Health Care Card (HCC) only CA if the care receiver is a child.
See Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Medical report for an existing care receiver with a new carer

An existing care receiver who has entered the care of another person may
not have to be tested again using the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT) or the Disability Carer Load Assessment (child) Determination
(DCLAD).

If there is an existing link between the new carer and care receiver,
whether current or non-current, it may be possible to re-use the care
receiver's medical data under the re-use provisions for child or adult.

The Carers []online claim and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) will
determine if the medical data can be re-used.

If there is no link between the carer and care receiver, the online
claim and ACC cannot establish if medical data can be re-used (due to
system limitations). The online claim and ACC will request the medical
information in all these scenarios.

A medical report is required when either:

-   the claim is made within 6 months of the next scheduled medical
    review of entitlement, or
-   there is a reason to believe the care receiver's medical condition
    has changed

Change of CP care receiver for CA care receiver/s

If a carer is already getting CP for 1 care receiver and CA for 2 care
receivers, and:

-   the carer ceases to qualify for CP in respect of that care receiver,
    and
-   CP is cancelled

a re-claim is not required if the carer wishes to receive CP for the
current CA care receiver.

In these cases only, CP can be restored under Section 85 SSAA from the
date qualification is re-established. If this occurs, CP can be manually
‘restored’ as a new ‘claim’ and granted from DPT+1 of the previous CP
cancellation date. Forward any exceptional or complex cases to the Level
2 Carers Policy Helpdesk for advice.

Examples may include:

-   2 adult care receivers and the adult care receiver they receive CP
    for passes away or permanently enters an institution, or
-   2 child care receivers and the child care receiver they receive CP
    for passes away or leaves their care

The Resources page contains a link to relevant carer forms and Level 2
Policy Helpdesk.

Contents

Change of care for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 dependent children with
disabilities

Change of care for Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA)
(child)

Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Changes to Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the
same care receiver

Related links

Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Calculating the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a customer is claiming
or receiving CA only

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Medical reviews for child care receivers

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
