
Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03020000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relevant to eligibility for Carer
Allowance (CA). This payment acknowledges the impact of a disability at
significant levels of severity on the family in social, occupational,
emotional and financial terms. CA is not taxable or assets tested. There
is an income test. The income test applies to both levels of
entitlement; CA payment level and CA Health Care Card only for a child
care receiver.

On this Page:

CA (child) - Care receiver aged under 16 years

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) is paid to a person providing additional
daily care and attention to a child with a disability aged under 16, in
the shared residence of the carer and the care receiver. Eligibility for
CA (child) can be either a fortnightly payment and a Health Care Card or
a Health Care Card only.

CA (adult) - Care receiver aged 16 years or over

CA (adult) is assessed under the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT). The ADAT measures the functional ability and care needs, and
allows the care receiver to be assessed and have their level of
disability objectively determined.

CA (auto)

CA (auto) is automatically payable for each child care receiver for the
period that the carer is paid Carer Payment (CP) (child) for the same
care receiver, as long as the carer is not qualified under the standard
provisions for CA (child) for the care receiver/s.

CA (adult) - Caring in non shared private home

CA may be payable to carers of adult care receivers who do not live with
the person they provide care for. This qualification is contained in
Section 954A of the Social Security Act. The qualification for carers
who live with their care receiver in the same house is contained in
Section 954. This means CA (adult) may be paid if personal care is
provided in the private home of either the carer or care receiver, and
this care is provided on a daily basis.

More than one care receiver

A person may qualify for CA for:

-   2, but no more than 2, adults with a disability who meet the CA (16
    years or over) criteria
-   each dependent child with a disability that meets the CA (under 16
    years) criteria, regardless of the number of children.

Care should be taken when a carer who is already receiving Carer Payment
(CP) and/or CA contacts to claim CP and/or CA for a second care
receiver. A discussion should be had with the carer as to whether CP is
more appropriate for the new care receiver, this will all depend on the
individual aspects of the carer and care receiver's circumstances. If
the new care receiver is suffering from a terminal medical condition, it
may be more appropriate to claim CP for the new care receiver due to
bereavement provisions.

Two carers for same care receiver

CA can be shared by two carers who are not members of the same couple
and who share the care for the same care receiver or care receivers,
provided they meet the qualifications for CA. Before CA can be shared by
two carers who are not members of the same couple, a declaration must be
made under Section 981 of the Social Security Act 1991 (SSA) that CA is
to be shared between these two carers.

Residence assessment

A claimant for CA must satisfy the residence requirements necessary to
qualify for payment. The assessment includes whether the carer is
residentially qualified to lodge a legal claim for payment.

Carer Allowance income test

To be eligible for CA, the carer’s and their partner’s combined Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) must be under $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
amount from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or older. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner.

There is no assets test.

The carer's and their partner's income does not affect the rate of CA
paid.

The income test does not apply if the carer or their partner receive an
income-tested income support payment, Family Tax Benefit paid in
fortnightly instalments or is the holder of a Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC). The carer is exempt from providing their income
details for the CA income test.

Contents

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring in a private home not
shared by the adult and carer

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (auto) when a carer is also
receiving Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a carer is claiming or
receiving CA only

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 carers in respect of the same
care receiver

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
