
Assessing Carer Payment (CP) when the care is shared 009-04050010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed by Service Officers
when a Carer Payment (CP) customer notifies they are sharing the care of
a care receiver with another carer.

Shared care for CP

This includes carers currently receiving CP who start sharing the care
of the care receiver with another carer, and new carers claiming CP who
already share the care of the care receiver (pre-existing arrangement).

This must not be confused with CP for 2 or more carers in respect of the
same care receiver or shared care for Carer Allowance (CA).

When determining eligibility for CP and/or CA, it should be noted that
'shared care' for CP/CA and 'shared care' for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
are not the same:

-   shared care determinations made for CA and CP fall under the Social
    Security Act 1991
-   shared care determinations made for FTB fall under the A New Tax
    System (Family Assistance) Act 1999

It is important that these decisions are coded on the correct screens as
different rates of payment may apply if making a decision under social
security law and family assistance law.

Current carer assessing temporary cessation of care

If a carer is in receipt of CP for a care receiver and they start
sharing the care of the care receiver, the temporary cessation of care
(respite) (TCC) provisions will apply to CP while the care receiver is
in the care of the other person. Once all TCC is utilised, CP will be
cancelled.

For TCC purposes a 'day' must include an overnight stay. Customers only
need to tell us about the time the care receiver is out of their care if
the absence includes a whole 24 hour period, that is, 12:00 am to 12:00
am (midnight to midnight).

Part days do not count in the calculation of TCC absences for CP.

New claims for CP

Constant care is required to be provided on a daily basis from the start
date of the CP claims. In limited circumstances, CP can be granted when
the care is already shared at the start date of the claim. A request is
to be sent to Level 2 Policy Help Desk for these cases, unless stated
otherwise on the Process page.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk -
online form and information on parenting plans, registered parenting
plans and parenting or court orders.

Related links

Calculating the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score

Carer Payment (CP) absences for dual qualification Adult Disability
Assessment Tool (ADAT) 80+

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when 2 to 4 children each with a disability
or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) for care receivers aged under 16

Changes to Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the
same care receiver

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding a paper claim for Carer Payment (CP) where the care receiver is
16 years of age or over

Coding the paper Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Carer Needs
Assessment for a child under 16 years (SA408 and SA394)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
