
Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation (CLK) 009-06010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about temporary cessation of care
(respite) and hospitalisation provisions.

On this Page:

Temporary Cessation of Care and Hospitalisation provisions

Temporary cessation of care provisions allow carers to continue to
receive Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance when they take a break from
caring, for up to 63 days in each calendar year. These days may be used
for any purpose, including formal respite care such as community in-home
or residential respite, or informal respite that is provided by a friend
or family member.

A carer may temporarily cease providing care in the home to an adult
care receiver who has been hospitalised for up to 63 days per calendar
year and still claim or continue to qualify for payment. This temporary
cessation of care cannot be extended beyond 63 days under any
circumstances. This is known as the 'hospitalisation provision'.

Calculation of absences

For respite and hospitalisation purposes, a 'day' must be a whole 24
hour period from 12:00 am to 12:00 am (midnight to midnight). Part days
do not count in the calculation of absences for Carer Payment (CP) or
Carer Allowance (CA).

This principle also applies when calculating absences for education,
training and treatment.

This instruction does not change the special rules around coding of
respite in conjunction with the 25 hour rule - the 25 hour provision
cannot be extended by using a carer's TCC (respite) entitlement. For
more information, see Carer Payment (CP) carer undertakes paid
employment, self employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities.

[] CP carers can report their employment income, volunteer work,
training or study activities and the number of hours they worked per
week (including travel time) online, using the Report Employment Income
service. Carer's can also access respite days via the service if they
temporarily exceed the 25 hours per week rule. The procedure Reporting
options available online contains further information.

If a carer and/or care receiver travels overseas, respite rules and
portability rules need to be considered together.

Child care receivers only

If the carer is in receipt of CP (child) and/or CA (child), there is no
limit on hospitalisation days for the child care receiver, however the
63 day respite limit still applies, and all absences must be coded. If
they are paid under the short term care or episodic care provisions,
their respite limit will be a pro-rata amount, based on the period for
which CP (child) is being granted.

If separated or divorced parents are paid CP (child) under the exchanged
care provisions, either parent will only use their respite days if they
temporarily cease to provide care when the child is meant to be in their
care (provided they aren't making use of the hospitalisation provision
or 25 hour rule).

If the carer is paid CP (child) under the combined care provisions, the
current 63 day respite entitlement will still apply, however the
entitlement will not apply individually for each qualifying child, but
overall to the carer. Respite will be counted regardless of whether the
carer stops caring for one child or all children.

Adult and child care receivers

Standard CP and CA (adult) hospitalisation and temporary cessation of
care rules apply to the adult care receiver and, therefore, to the carer
who is in receipt of CP (child) under multiple care provisions if the
disabled adult enters hospital or respite care.

Adult care receivers only

Hospitalisation for an adult care receiver cannot be extended past the
63 allowable days per calendar year. However, if the adult care receiver
remains hospitalised for more than 63 days, any allowable respite days
remaining for that calendar year may then be used to allow the carer to
remain qualified for payment.

A temporary cessation of care (respite) absence may be extended beyond
the 63 days allowed for a 'special reason'. There is no discretion to
extend the number of days for an appropriate special reason with
hospitalisation as there is with respite days. If the hospitalisation
period exceeds the 63 day limit (for adults), the carer may access their
respite days for that calendar year (if they have any remaining).

These two 63-day periods are mutually exclusive in the sense that any
time a carer ceases to provide care cannot count against both temporary
cessation of care (respite) days and hospitalisation days:

-   If a person ceases to care for the care receiver in their own home
    because they have been admitted to hospital and the carer is
    participating in that treatment, the hospitalisation days are
    reduced
-   If a person ceases to provide care for any other reason, the
    'respite' days are reduced

If a care receiver is in respite (not hospital) at the time a carer
lodges a CA/CP claim, see Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP)
and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

If a care receiver is imprisoned, see Temporary Cessation of Care
(respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA).

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not
apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering
provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. However, Temporary Cessation
of Care (TCC) rules continue to apply to CA as normal. For more
information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

The Resources page contains examples of how to calculate the start and
end dates for coding of respite or hospitalisation days for Carer
Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP).

Contents

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Continuation of respite after the expiry of hospitalisation

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA) where previously
re-granted after a cancellation due to exceeding respite bank

Coding an absence where no Carer Payment (CP) link exists

Carer Payment (CP) absences for more than one carer under the Adult
Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) 80+

What to do with an absence Manual Follow-up (MFU)

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

View/Update Absence From Care online

Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
