
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP) 009-19081557

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the transfer process from Wife Pension
(Disability) and Wife Pension (Age) to Carer Payment (CP),
grandfathering rules, and how to manage claims, restorations and manual
follow ups for this customer group.

On this page:

Transfers from WP to CP

WP customers getting payment level Carer Allowance (CA) on 19 March 2020
were automatically transferred to CP if they were also receiving CA on
20 March 2020 and not in a bereavement period.

WP customers current on CA Health Care Card (HCC) only on 19 March 2020
were not eligible to be transferred to CP.

Some eligible WP customers paid under social security law by the
Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) were manually transferred to
Centrelink administration.

Special rules applied if payment level CA was not payable on both 19
March 2020 and 20 March 2020.

WP customers:

under Age Pension age getting CA on either 19 March 2020 or 20 March
2020 were grandfathered and transferred to JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

of Age Pension age getting CA on:

-   20 March 2020 but not on 19 March 2020 were grandfathered and
    transferred to Age Pension
-   19 March 2020 but not on 20 March 2020 were not eligible for
    grandfathering and are required to claim another appropriate payment

Date of transfer to CP

Most transfers from WP to CP occurred on and were effective from 20
March 2020.

WP customers in a bereavement period on 20 March 2020 are transferred to
CP at the end of the bereavement period. Where payment level CA is not
paid at the end of the WP bereavement period, CP is not payable, WP will
cancel and the customer will need to claim an appropriate income support
payment.

When WP is suspended on 19 March (and not in a bereavement period), the
transfer will be effective from 20 March 2020 and completed at the time
of restoration (provided this is within 13 weeks of 20 March 2020).

Some transfers to CP under WP provisions must be done manually. This is
when action is taken after 20 March 2020 to grant or restore CA with a
date of effect on or before 19 March 2020. WP customers became eligible
to transfer from WP to CP retrospectively after they were already
transferred to Age Pension or JobSeeker Payment on 20 March 2020. Manual
Follow Ups (MFUs) are produced to manually grant CP under WP provisions
from 20 March 2020. See the Resources page.

CP (XWP) vs CP (Standard)

CP (XWP) is CP paid under grandfathering rules to carers who were
receiving WP and payment level CA on 19 March 2020, and payment level CA
on 20 March 2020. The benefit status line shows CAR/CUR-XWP when
current. This can be viewed in Process Direct and on Customer Summary in
Customer First.

CP (Standard) is CP paid to carers who are not receiving CP under
grandfathering rules.

The terms CP (Standard) and CP (XWP) are for internal use only. When
assisting customers, both CP types should be referred to as ‘Carer
Payment’.

CP care receiver links

CP (XWP) records are not required to have links to CP care receivers:

-   CAR-CRP links for adult care receivers and CAR-CRC links for child
    care receivers do not appear on the Links Summary (LS) screen
-   a CP link does not appear on the Care Receiver Summary (CRS) screen
-   CP details do not display on the Carers Summary (!CARSUM) screen in
    Customer First, and
-   the Selection of Care Receivers for Assessment (SCRA) screen does
    not contain care receiver information
-   any existing CA links will remain and be displayed

Continued entitlement to CP under grandfathering provisions

CP (XWP) customers remain entitled to CP under grandfathering provisions
provided they continue to get payment level CA without a break in
payment entitlement since 19 March 2020.

It’s not necessary for CA to be paid for the same care receiver since 19
March 2020. The continuity of CA can be maintained by different CA care
receivers attracting payment level CA for the same or different periods,
provided the customer is continuously entitled to payment level CA for
any care receiver from 19 March 2020.

Identifying eligibility for CP (XWP)

Carers who have been eligible for CP (XWP) at some point can be
identified on the Grandfathering Summary (GFS) screen with a
grandfathering type 2020 Former WP-CARER. If the customer is no longer
eligible, the latest grandfathering status will be ‘NOT’ (not
grandfathered). However, a NOT status is automatically deleted if
payment level CA entitlement is re-instated without a gap. If currently
eligible, the latest status will be GRF, GRO or BRV. Customers currently
paid CP (XWP) also show CAR/CUR-XWP on the Benefit Status line.

The carer’s grandfathering status history is shown on the Grandfathering
Override (GFD) screen. For an explanation of the codes, see Updating the
2020 Former WP–CARER grandfathering type on Resources page.

In most cases grandfathering status changes will be automatic. Manual
updates to the GFD screen can be done by officers who are APS5 or above.

A CP that is currently assessed under Ex Wife Pension rules will show an
Assessment Type of XWP on the Care Assessment Result Summary (SCRR)
screen.

A Display on Access DOC will also indicate the carer has been
transferred from WP to CP under grandfathering provisions. These DOCs
are only created for CP XWP records as part of the bulk transfer.

Differences between CP Standard and CP (XWP)

The following do not apply to CP (XWP):

activity hours (employment, voluntary work, study) for example, the 25
hour rule

CP care receiver or care assessments including:

-   CP constant care requirement
-   CP temporary cessation of care (respite) (CA respite provisions
    continue to apply – see below)
-   CP hospitalisation rules for adult care receivers (CA
    hospitalisation provisions continue to apply – see below)
-   CP Care Receiver Income and Asset Assessment (CRIA) or
-   CP medical reviews (CA medical reviews will continue to apply)

Note: carers paid under CP (XWP) provisions are still subject to
existing CP assessments that are not linked to the care receiver or the
care provided. For example, income, assets and portability assessments.
All CA qualification and payability rules continue to apply.

25 hour per week rule

Self-service reporting channels do not request hours for paid employment
and other activities for CP (XWP) customers or partners.

Temporary cessation of care (respite and hospitalisation) rules

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not
apply directly to CP (XWP). However they continue to apply to CA and may
indirectly affect CP (XWP) entitlement.

When a carer has used their 63 Temporary Cessation of Care (TCC) days
for respite, or their allowable 63 days for hospitalisation for a care
receiver aged 16 and over, CA will cancel as per existing process.

Respite codes that relate only to CP should not be coded for a period
the carer is receiving CP (XWP). However, if coded for a period the
customer is getting CP (XWP), the days coded in that period will not
affect entitlement.

Other differences

-   CP (XWP) cannot be paid under an international agreement
-   Where the only or last CA care receiver permanently enters an
    institution, CP (XWP) is not payable for an additional 14 weeks

Bereavement provisions

The CP (XWP) 14 week bereavement continuation period only applies to CP
(XWP) customers where the last or only care receiver dies.

CP (XWP) Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) eligibility:

when a CP (XWP) partner dies, a bereavement lump sum may be payable

when the CA care receiver who dies is not the carer’s partner and a CP
(XWP) carer gets payment level CA for:

-   another care receiver, a bereavement lump sum is not payable
-   no-one else, a bereavement lump sum may be payable

CA bereavement payment eligibility:

CP (XWP) customers:

-   may be eligible for a CA bereavement lump sum for a child care
    receiver who dies. Entitlement does not depend on other payments the
    carer gets
-   are not eligible for a CA bereavement lump sum for an adult care
    receiver

Taxability

CP (XWP) is taxable if either:

-   the carer is Age Pension age, or
-   any of the care receivers the carer gets payment level CA for are
    Age Pension age

This means CP (XWP) can change from a taxable to non-taxable payment or
from a non-taxable to taxable payment.

An example of a change from a taxable to non-taxable payment is as
follows: the carer is under Age Pension age. Payment level CA ceases for
a care receiver who is Age Pension age and the carer continues to be
paid for another care receiver under Age Pension age.

CP (XWP) eligible carers claiming or reclaiming CP under non-grandfathered provisions

Carers will need to reclaim CP if their CP (XWP) has been cancelled and
cannot be restored, for example due to income or asset changes or a
break in payment level CA. A carer cannot claim CP (XWP) and will be
required to claim and first be assessed under CP (Standard) provisions.

If there has not been any break in payment level CA since 19 March 2020,
a carer will still be eligible for CP under WP grandfathering
provisions. If not eligible for CP (Standard), CP (XWP) will be auto
granted if eligible. They are notified of the reason for rejection of CP
(Standard) and the grant of CP (XWP) in the same letter.

A current CP (XWP) carer may wish to claim CP under Standard
(non-grandfathered) provisions for benefits not available under CP (XWP)
such as:

-   14 weeks CP continuation if their only/last CA care receiver is
    likely to be permanently admitted to an institution
-   caring for a terminally ill child and the carer wants to be paid CP
    (child) until they turn 18 years of age (e.g. to continue to get CA
    Auto and/or be eligible for an LBP if they also receive CA for
    another care receiver)
-   caring for more than one care receiver and wishing to be paid an LBP
    for one who is not their partner

If the claimant is not eligible for CP (Standard), the system will allow
CP (XWP) to be granted if eligible. The grandfathering status GRO needs
to be manually deleted.

CP cancellation rule when eligible for CP (XWP)

It is not possible to cancel CP (XWP) for a care receiver reason,
constant care or exceeding the 25 hour rule. This is because care
requirements do not apply to CP (XWP). An edit will be created when a
Service Officer attempts to code '25H' and certain other codes on the BA
screen. The edit will state the customer is eligible for CP (XWP).

If a CP (Standard) customer is eligible for CP (XWP) and CP should be
cancelled for a CP care receiver reason, constant care or failing the 25
hour rule, a warning is produced on the AWE screen. The grandfathering
status will automatically be updated to allow CP (XWP) to be paid
instead. A cancellation reason code of 25H is allowed on the BA screen.

The Resources page contains scenarios for Manual Follow Up (MFU)
messages to support CP (XWP) processing and coding information to
updating the 2020 Former WP - CARER grandfathering types.

Related links

Processing claims for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
or Carer Allowance

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
