
Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care 009-04070020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to help Service Officers assessing
episodic or recurring care provisions for customers claiming Carer
Payment (CP) (child).

On this Page:

Episodic care provisions

These provisions apply when a care receiver under 16 years of age has a
severe disability or a severe medical condition that is episodic or
recurring and episodes are expected to be at least 3 months in duration
and less than 6 months. It must also be likely to result in care being
required on and off (episodic) over a period of at least 24 months.

In addition to the above, to be eligible for CP (child) under the
episodic care provisions:

-   the carer must personally provide constant care to the care receiver
-   the care provided to the care receiver attains a qualifying rating
    of intense under the Disability Care Load Assessment (child)
    Determination (DCLAD) (2010)
-   the provision of the care by the person must severely restrict the
    person's capacity to undertake paid employment
-   the carer must complete the usual carer assessment process

Extension of episodic care

For an extension of episodic care, the carer will need to provide a
Medical Certificate for Carer Payment (for a child under 16 years)
Extension and Reclaim of Episodic Care/Extension of Short Term Care
(SA395).

This can be provided for subsequent episodes within 24 months of the
previous CP - Care Needs Assessment (CNA), and for extensions of a
current period of episodic care.

An extension can include an end date on or after the care receiver's 24
month anniversary of the previous CNA, as long as the period on the
medical certificate starts before the care receiver's 24 month
anniversary of the previous CNA.

Carer Allowance (CA) (auto)

CA (auto) is available to all recipients of (CP) (child).

If CP (child) cancels, CA (auto) will cancel automatically at the same
time. The carer will need to lodge a new claim for CA (child) if the
child still requires and receives additional daily care due to their
disability or medical condition.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information for carers and the medical certificate for reclaiming or
extending CP for episodic care.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for two to four children each
with a disability or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and one or
more children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Payment (CP) claims for care receivers aged under 16

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
