
Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules 009-03100010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the application of portability rules when the
carer and/or care receiver are overseas, and the circumstances when it
is necessary for Centrelink to record an absence due to any temporary
cessation of care.

Temporary absence

Both Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) are portable, for up to
a maximum of 42 days, subject to conditions.

Customers on CP and/or CA may have temporary absences throughout the
year and still remain eligible for payment under the respite or the
hospital care provisions. Under the respite provisions, the carer or the
care receiver may be absent for any purpose.

While the legislation talks about temporary absences, these are often
referred to as 'respite absences' or '63 days respite'. Note: a
temporary cessation of care (respite) does not have to be formal or
informal respite care to be counted against the allowable days. It could
be things such as the carer taking a holiday without the care receiver
or the care receiver going to spend a couple of days with another
relative.

Add-on payments such as Rent Assistance and Carer Supplement may be paid
during a temporary absence from Australia if the customer remains
qualified for the payment.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Wife Pension (WP) customers who were receiving payment level Carer
Allowance (CA) on 19 March 2020 were automatically transferred to Carer
Payment (CP) (XWP). CP (XWP) customers remain qualified as long as
payment level CA continues.

CA and CP are portable for a maximum period of 6 weeks as long as the
departure is temporary. If the care receiver remains in Australia the
carer can use their 63 respite days for CA without affecting payment.
However, CA and CP payability is subject to the maximum portability
period. When a carer remains overseas for more than 6 weeks or has
exhausted their respite days first, then payment level CA is suspended
or cancelled. When payment level CA is suspended or cancelled, CP (XWP)
is automatically cancelled. Where a carer returns to Australia, CA is
restored. However, as there has been a break in payment level CA, CP
(XWP) cannot be restored as entitlement and qualification was
permanently lost. For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension
(WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Coding requirements

The rules for temporary cessation of care and portability may differ
between CP and CA depending on the situation, however both rules must be
considered together in each case. There are separate procedures for
coding carer absences and for coding CP portability and/or CA
portability.

Portability Script - Departure and Returns

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns is to be used to
initially assess the customer's entitlement to payment while they are
outside Australia. The Portability Script will guide service centre
staff and Smart Centre staff when it is necessary to refer to Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Department of Home
Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Respite

If a carer goes overseas and temporarily stops caring for the care
receiver because the care receiver stayed in Australia, this is
generally deemed a 'respite period' and as such would allow the carer to
have a break from their usual caring role of up to 63 days in any
calendar year without affecting payment. However, this period would be
subject to the maximum portability period for the payment.

Note: there is a current system limitation which continues to count
Temporary Cessation of care (TCC) after expiration of portability. Where
the carer's payments will suspend after 42 days, the TCC end date should
reflect only 41 days, if care is provided on the day of departure.
Unless there is evidence to the contrary, accept that care was provided
on the date of departure and TCC will commence from the following day.
Code respite with start date equal to day after departure and end date
equal to the end of the limited portability period. Therefore, the TCC
period will be 41 days provided the carer has this number available. TCC
does not apply if payments are suspended or cancelled.

Portability provisions

If the carer is overseas without the care receiver, portability
provisions apply to the carer. See Carer Payment (CP) customer going
overseas and/or Carer Allowance (CA) customer going overseas.

If the carer is not overseas and the care receiver is, portability
provisions apply for the care receiver if they are in receipt of a
payment. The relevant portability provisions will be those specifically
relating to the type of payment the care receiver is paid.

If the care receiver is overseas with the carer, only portability
provisions apply. However, any subsequent temporary cessation in care
must also be coded as an absence as the carer's payment may be affected
before the portability period expires.

The Resources page contains examples of carers going overseas and a link
to the Services Australia website for information about payments while
outside Australia.

Related links

Absences for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Allowance (CA) customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Portability of Add-ons

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
