
Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT) 009-03060020

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the CTAT process for carers in receipt of CP
and/or CA when the child is turning 16 years of age (or 18 years for CP
child with a terminal condition).

CTAT invitation letter

When carers who receive CP and/or CA are eligible to complete a CTAT, an
invitation letter is issued when a child they provide care for turns:

-   15 years and 9 months, or
-   17 years and 9 months (for a child with a terminal condition)

The CTAT is simpler than a new claim as carers do not have to provide
income or assets details for assessment.

The invitation letter:

informs the carer of the cancellation date of:

-   payment, or
-   Health Care Card (HCC) only CA (child)

invites the carer to apply for a transfer to CP and/or CA for an adult
care receiver. Note: carers can only apply for a transfer for the
payment they currently receive. For example, if the carer currently only
receives CA, they cannot apply to transfer to CP

explains how to complete the transfer online, and

advises the carer of the date they must submit the transfer by to ensure
continued payment

Invitation letters are issued:

to the carer’s myGov if they are registered to get mail online:

-   a secure link directs them to the CTAT online service to complete
    their transfer application
-   carers who do not currently receive Centrelink letters online can do
    this by linking their myGov account to their Centrelink online
    account. Once linked, the carer can start their CTAT online

by post if the carer does not get their mail online:

-   the letter explains how to create a myGov account and link it to
    their Centrelink online account
-   carers who are unable or unsuitable to complete an online transfer
    can complete paper forms

Centrelink individual nominees are issued a letter telling them they can
apply for a transfer by choosing the person they are nominee for from
their own Centrelink online account > Menu > Claims and Payments >
Change of circumstances > Child to Adult Transfer.

Centrelink online help guides are also available on the Services
Australia website to assist carers.

SMS and myGov inbox reminder message

An automated reminder message will be sent out to carers who:

-   get Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance, and
-   have not yet submitted their CTAT

They will get the reminder message via SMS or their myGov inbox 2 months
before their CTAT is due. These messages will show on the carer’s
record.

The text of the SMS reminder is:

-   ‘Your Carer Child to Adult Transfer is due soon. Go to your online
    account to complete the transfer and upload required documents ASAP.
    Do not reply by SMS’

The text of the myGov message is:

-   ‘Your Carer Child to Adult Transfer is due soon. Select the ‘Child
    to Adult Transfer’ task from the link below and submit it before
    your child turns 16.’

If a carer contacts because they have received a reminder SMS or myGov
inbox message:

-   ask them to upload the required document/s, and
-   encourage them to submit the CTAT as soon as possible

CTAT due dates and lodgement

If the carer is assessed and eligible under the Adult Disability
Assessment Tool (ADAT) and relevant parts of the Social Security Act
before the child reaches their non-qualifying age, CP and/or CA will
continue with no break in entitlement if the CTAT is submitted and
processed before the:

-   child is 16 years for CA Health Care Card (HCC) only
-   child is 16 years 3 months for CP, CP and CA and CA
-   child is 18 years for CP (terminal), and
-   end of the eligibility period for CP short term/episodic

Encourage carers to lodge [] online. Carers can complete the online task
and upload documents such as supporting information for the care
receiver and the SA332A form via:

-   their myGov inbox and selecting the CTAT link
-   Centrelink online account, or
-   Express Plus app

The carer can also upload identity documents if their photo identity has
already been sighted.

The date of lodgement is the day the CTAT is submitted.

If a carer's child entitlement has been cancelled for more than 13
weeks, the carer must submit a new online claim for CP and/or CA or
request an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

The lodgement of a Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or
Carer Allowance (SA432) form is considered to be a claim if it is lodged
within 13 weeks of cancellation.

Carer cannot complete CTAT online

Forms are not included with the invitation letter. If a carer is unable
or unsuitable to complete the CTAT online, tell them they can:

get assistance from a Service Officer to complete the online task and
upload documents using Staff Assisted Claim by:

-   phoning Services Australia
-   going to a service centre, and
-   submitting the completed CTAT themselves from their online account.
    Note: Service Officers cannot submit the CTAT on behalf of the
    carer. Service Officers can only provide assistance with completing
    the online task. Tell the carer they must submit their CTAT online
    task themselves

download, print and complete the following 2 forms from the Services
Australia website:

-   Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432), and
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16
    years or over (SA332A). This must be completed by the care
    receiver’s current Treating Health Professional (THP) as a new
    medical report is required for the CTAT application

ask for paper forms to be posted to them

Do not issue the Review of care provided - Carer Payment and/or Carer
Allowance – Caring for a person 16 years or over (SA010) form as this is
only for carer adult medical reviews and new claim appeals when the
carer has requested an Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)
reassessment. If an SA010 has been issued in error, see Completing the
form - Review of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance when caring for a
person 16 years or over (SA010).

Supporting documents

Carers may need to provide the following documents before they can
submit their CTAT, or when lodging paper forms:

-   identity documents for the carer, Service Officers can code identity
    documents to confirm and record the identity of carers
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16
    years or over (SA332A)

Note: if the documents are uploaded to the carer’s record by the carer
or a Service Officer outside of the CTAT task, the CTAT activity must
have the forms marked as ‘provided’ and the status updated to
‘accepted’. If this is not done, the carer will not be able to submit
the CTAT.

CTAT exceptions for online submission

Carers who are unable to complete the Required tasks in their online
CTAT only, can submit an incomplete CTAT transfer request if they:

-   state they are in a crisis situation when starting their CTAT, or
-   are caring for someone with a terminal illness

Carers must:

-   meet the exception criteria above
-   have outstanding Required tasks, and
-   have answered all questions

Tell carers who meet the exception criteria to upload/provide all
Required tasks as soon as possible.

Backdating CTAT

A CTAT can only be backdated to the date of cancellation of the
child-level entitlement if the:

-   carer lodged their paper transfer forms before the due date
-   application was not processed by Services Australia until after the
    due date, and
-   carer is qualified

If the CTAT forms are lodged after CP/CA has cancelled and it appears
the carer was given incorrect or insufficient information, refer the
case to the Carer Helpdesk for advice on deemed date of lodgement.

Care receiver income and assets (CRIA) reviews

A CTAT does not require CRIA coding. The system will assess income and
assets for the care receiver for ‘CP reviews only’. If needed, the
system will set up a CRIA review on the care receiver’s record to issue
on 1 November each year.

Effect on payments

A CTAT decision will result in one of the following:

-   cancellation of CP (child) and/or CA (child)
-   payments continuing under CP (adult) and/or CA (adult) qualification
    rules. Carers eligible for CP are entitled to a Pensioner Concession
    Card (PCC), or
-   the carer being assessed with a future cancellation date after the
    child becomes subject to adult provisions

After the completed assessment, child provisions (such as
hospitalisation days) will cease. The date of effect of the payment
cancellation will be the:

-   date the care receiver turns 16 years of age and 3 months (18 years
    for terminal children), or
-   date of determination if assessment is completed before the child
    turns 16 years and 3 months (or 18 years for terminal children)

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (XWP)

CP (XWP) recipients will only be invited to apply for a transfer
assessment under adult provisions for Carer Allowance. They remain
qualified for CP (XWP) as long as payment level CA continues without a
break.

CP (XWP) will auto-cancel if a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment
level CA is suspended or cancelled.

This means CP (XWP) will stop if the transfer is not processed and
successful before CA (child) stops. If payment level CA is restored or
reinstated without a gap:

-   within 13 weeks, CP (XWP) will be auto-restored
-   more than 13 weeks later, CP (XWP) can be manually restored

Note: a carer will permanently lose qualification for CP (XWP) if they
have a break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020. A
break occurs if continuous entitlement stops and is not reinstated or is
reinstated with a gap in entitlement.

See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
external sites, forms and contact details for helpdesks.

Related links

Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Calculating the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score

Carer Payment (CP) (child) care receiver turning 16 years of age

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a carer is claiming or
receiving CA only

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (auto) when a carer is also
receiving Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years
or over

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Identity Confirmation

Alternative Identity

Coding identity documents

Transfer from Wife Pension to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
