
Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training activities 009-06030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine ongoing eligibility for CP and
CA when a carer participates in paid employment, self-employment,
voluntary work, education or training.

Carer activities

Carers can participate in one or more of the above activities and still
qualify for CP, provided the total time they are away from their care
receiver to participate in these activities (including travel time) does
not exceed 25 hours per week.

Carers who are paid CA and not CP:

-   can participate in these activities and still qualify for CA if they
    provide at least some additional care and attention to the care
    receiver every day
-   are not required to report their activity hours, but temporary
    cessation of care rules may still apply
-   are still required to report their and/or their partner’s employment
    income if they and/or their partner receive an income support
    payment

CA is not taxable or assets tested, but is subject to an adjusted
taxable income test. The income test applies to both levels of
entitlement, CA payment level and CA Health Care Card only for a child
care receiver.

See Carer Allowance (CA) income test.

Reporting options and self service

Carers can report employment income, volunteer work, training or study
activities and the number of hours they worked per week (including
travel time) [] online, using the Report employment income service.
Carers can also access respite days via the service if they temporarily
exceed the 25 hours per week rule.

Notification reporters can update their employment and caring activity
details using the Report employment income service. However, where
activity hours change from week to week or the carer exceeds the 25 hour
rule, they will be advised to contact Services Australia and will not be
able to finish their update.

[]Carers who have commenced work, returned to work or have ceased
employment are able to update their employment status through their
Centrelink Online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. This
service automatically places them onto, or turns off, their 2 weekly
reporting requirement.

Eligible customers can also update their partner's employment status
when the partner:

-   does not receive an income support payment
-   who receives an income support payment other than Disability Support
    Pension has given customer permission to enquire
-   receives Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension (Blind)
    with Rent Assistance

Carers can use the Manage income and assets online service to notify
their self-employment income and hours. However, they need to contact
directly to advise their hours for CP purposes.

Carers and their partners can also report using phone self-service.
However, if the carer’s activity hours exceed 25 hours per week, the
caller is:

-   transferred to the Carer line if during business hours, or
-   asked to contact Services Australia outside business hours

If carers use the Manage income and assets online service to notify
employment income paid in a foreign currency, they will be advised to
contact Services Australia.

Before assisted reporting is completed, genuine attempts must be made to
transition customers to report via self-service options, unless an
Exception applies.

25 hour rule

When applying the 25 hour rule, consider:

-   the total number of hours the carer participates in their activities
    each week, away from their care receiver, and
-   if they exceed 25 hours per week, whether this is temporary or
    ongoing

Consider both aspects to determine if the carer may use their available
Temporary Cessation of Care (TCC) days to remain qualified.

Note: the hours the carer spends away from their care receiver to
participate in these activities counts towards the 25 hours. These are
recorded as ‘Care Not Met’.

Cancel CP from the date they exceed 25 hours per week (as recorded on
the Carer Payment Activity Summary (CPAS)/ Carer Payment Activity
Details (CPAD) screen) if:

-   excluding paid employment hours, the carer’s other activity hours
    away from the care receiver exceed 25 hours per week, and
-   they will exceed 25 hours on an ongoing basis

See Working Credit for the effect of a Working Credit balance greater
than zero.

The 25 hour rule and:

CP new claims:

-   CP claims will be rejected if the carer is participating in any
    activity or combination of activities that exceeds 25 hours per week
    on their start date
-   TCC days can only apply once CP is granted
-   encourage carers to reclaim when they become qualified

CA carers:

-   if a carer receives CP and CA, use the code RCP to ensure each
    system maintains an accurate count of absence days used for CP and
    CA
-   the RCP code only counts against the balance of Temporary Cessation
    of Care (TCC) days for CP only

Carers who expect to exceed 25 hours per week on:

-   an ongoing basis must have their CP cancelled as they cannot utilise
    the TCC provision to remain qualified. See Working Credit for the
    effect of a Working Credit balance greater than zero
-   a temporary basis can choose to access their TCC days for
    participating in an activity or a combination of activities
-   an occasional basis are treated as ‘temporarily’ exceeding. If a
    carer is using their TCC entitlement, they may participate in
    activities in excess of 25 hours per week for the TCC period

See the Resources page for examples of applying the 25 hour rule.

Temporary Cessation of Care (TCC)

Carers who are temporarily exceeding the 25 hour rule can use their TCC
days to remain qualified where they have TCC days available. A carer
loses qualification when their TCC days have been exhausted.

To be able to use TCC days to remain qualified, TCC must be applied for
the entire week (7 days) the carer exceeded 25 hours, even if the
activity did not occur each day.

Carers must decide if they want to:

-   use their available TCC days now and remain qualified, or
-   cancel CP so their TCC days remaining for the calendar year are
    still available if they reclaim

If the carer decides to use their TCC days but CP is cancelled because
they exhaust their respite balance, they can still reclaim CP with no
remaining TCC days for the rest of the calendar year.

When coding TCC for previous calendar years, check the remaining TCC
days in the relevant calendar to identify if the allowable TCC period
will be exceeded. This will result in CP cancellation and an
overpayment.

Wife Pension transfer to CP (XWP)

Constant care and the 25 hour rule do not apply to CP (XWP):

-   CP (XWP) carers do not need to report their activity hours
-   staff do not need to assess CP (XWP) carers under the 25 hour rule
-   CP (XWP) cannot be cancelled for this reason

TCC (respite and hospitalisation) rules apply to payment level CA as
normal. CP (XWP) carers who are not providing additional care and
attention each day can continue to be paid CA by using their TCC
(respite and hospitalisation) days.

Do not record any respite codes that only relate to CP for any TCC days
for a carer receiving CP (XWP).

See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Carer requests to cancel CP when returning to work

If a carer has commenced working and states they wish to have their CP
cancelled, and do not want to give further details, the 25 hour rules do
not apply. Cancel CP due to voluntary withdrawal/surrender of payment
and tell the carer they will not be able to access:

-   Working Credit balance (if under Age Pension age)
-   Work Bonus (if over Age Pension age), or
-   employment nil rate period (when still eligible for CP but income,
    which includes some employment income, excludes payment)

Carer paid to provide care

If a carer is paid for the care they provide, this does not disqualify
them from CP. For example, if a carer is a paid nurse, their paid
employment hours spent with the care receiver would be recorded as ‘Care
Is Met’.

Income paid to the carer would be assessable under the pension income
and assets test, and may mean that CP is not payable. The carer must
continue to meet all CP qualification criteria including 'constant
care'.

If they receive payment for caring, as opposed to reimbursement of
costs, this is considered a 'commercial arrangement' whether or not the
caring occurs in a person's own home. If a partner or another person is
paid to provide the care, this is also considered a commercial
arrangement.

Income received by the carer as reimbursement of costs is exempt from
the pension income and assets test. The Resources page has paid care
scenarios showing how income is assessed.

CP ‘constant care’ criterion not met

The usual CP ‘constant care’ criterion does not have to be met when the
carer commences or increases their activity hours:

-   during the bereavement period, or
-   following the care receiver’s permanent admission to a care
    institution

Hours are recorded on the Carer Payment Activity Summary (CPAS)/ Carer
Payment Activity Details (CPAD) screen during this time but TCC is not
required to be recorded.

The normal income and assets rules still apply, which means the carer's
rate of payment may be affected by their income.

Employment income and Working Credit/Work Bonus

A carer’s employment income is coded and assessed under the pensions
income test. The carer may be entitled to:

-   access Working Credit if under Age Pension age, or
-   use the Work Bonus if over Age Pension age

Cancel CP from the date the carer’s Working Credit is depleted to nil if
all the following apply:

-   excluding paid employment hours, the carer’s other activity hours
    away from the care receiver are within the 25 hour limit
-   their activity hours including paid employment exceed 25 hours per
    week
-   they have a Working Credit balance greater than nil, and
-   they are not taking advantage of respite. For example, they will
    exceed 25 hours on an ongoing basis, they choose not to use respite
    or respite balance is exhausted

Note: this includes when Working Credit has not yet started to deplete
because they have not yet been paid employment income.

See Carer Payment (CP) processing in the Earnings and reporting tool.

Employment income nil rate period

Where the carer or their partner’s employment income reduces their
fortnightly rate to nil and they remain qualified for CP, the carer may
remain current at nil rate for up to 6 fortnights, retaining access to
extras such as the Pension Concession Card (PCC) and Family Tax Benefit
(FTB).

Carers remain qualified for CP if they:

-   do not exceed 25 hours per week in total hours for their activities
    away from their care receiver, or
-   exceed 25 hours per week temporarily and are using TCC days

Respite must be recorded during the nil rate period where the carer is
exceeding 25 hours per week temporarily.

Employment income for carers operating as a family day care provider

If a carer has income from the provision of child care services, whether
formally through a family day care scheme, or informally through
baby-sitting (in the carer's home or the child's home), the income must
be assessed as self-employment income.

Go to and follow the instructions in Income and expenses of a business
to make this assessment.

See the Resources page for care scenarios and assessing CP when a carer
operates as a family day provider from their home.

See the References page for links to the Social Security Guide on the
assessment of income from child care.

See Business deductions about allowable deductions for expenses.

Reporting changes

If the carer advises they or their partner have any employment income
(including ongoing or variable employment income), they will generally
be required to report their income details every 2 weeks. This includes
carers who are currently notification reporters. Carers can report:

-   [] online
-   [] via Express Plus applications
-   [] via phone self service
-   verbally, or
-   in writing

If the carer's partner is in receipt of an allowance and is on variable
lodgement of the Application for Payment (SU19), they will be returned
to 2 weekly lodgement.

Before assisted reporting is completed, genuine attempts must be made to
transition customers to report via self service options, unless an
Exception applies.

See Recording and correcting employment income details for when 2 weekly
reporting is required.

Notification reporters

Notification reporters who advise of employment income directly to
Services Australia should be manually placed on 2 weekly, regardless of
whether this is regular or variable. Some exceptions apply. See
Determining the Date of Event (DOV) for employment income.

Carer notification reporters who use the Reporting employment income
online service will be:

-   automatically be placed on 2 weekly reporting
-   asked to update their activity hours for paid work, voluntary work,
    study and training if they are not CP XWP carers. This will be
    applied to their record
-   advised to contact the agency if they report activity hours more
    than 14 days in the past as the update will be unsuccessful

As carer notification reporters with employment income will be placed on
2 weekly reporting, they will have the opportunity as stimulus reporters
to:

-   report activity hours that are different from week to week for their
    reporting period, and
-   choose to use respite when exceeding the 25 hour per week rule
    temporarily

Self-employment

Carers who want to notify of a start or change in their self-employment
income can use the Manage Income and Assets online service or can
contact Services Australia directly. They need to contact Services
Australia directly to advise their activity hours including travel time
away from their care receiver. Once self-employment activity hours have
been recorded, staff can update these using the Earnings and reporting
tool. Carers are unable to update their self-employment activity hours
via self-service.

Re-claims

If CP is cancelled because the hours exceed the limit and the hours
subsequently drop below the limit, the carer can re-claim using the
abridged process. Carers can claim [] online or with help from a Service
Officer using the Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) workflow.

CP care receivers who have recorded qualifying medical data, will be
considered to have satisfied the medical eligibility requirements if
claiming within 26 weeks of cancellation. First Contact Service Offer
(FCSO) will identify if medical reports are required to support the
claim for CP.

CA income test

If the carer’s CP is cancelled, they may no longer be exempt from the CA
income test. The carer will remain exempt if they or their partner
receive another qualifying payment or card.

If the carer is no longer exempt from the CA income test and Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) details were not provided in the same financial
year as they lost their exemption, a CA income review will be triggered.
See Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing.

Support services for carers

Carers are eligible for assistance from various government and
non-government organisations, including assistance relating to
employment and general support with their caring role. See Employment
assistance for carers in receipt of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
and Support services for carers.

The Resources page contains links to forms and scenarios.

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Carer Payment (CP) processing in the Earnings and reporting tool

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Commencing or returning to self-employment (CLK)

Employment assistance for carers in receipt of Carer Payment and/or
Carer Allowance

Support services for carers

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver commences
or returns to work

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Recording and correcting employment income details

Pensions income and assets tests

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of age pension age

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Reporting overview

Reporting employment income online

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Business deductions

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
