
Commencing or returning to work for Carer Allowance 009-03070010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist staff in determining the
continuing entitlement to Carer Allowance (CA) when a carer advises they
are commencing or returning to work.

Daily care and attention

If a carer advises they are commencing or returning to work, CA may
still be paid if they provide care and attention on a daily basis
because of the care receiver's disability or medical condition. This
care and attention must still be provided in a private home that is the
residence of the carer or the care receiver. The care and attention does
not have to be substantial, but it cannot be delegated to others.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Wife Pension (WP) customers who were receiving payment level Carer
Allowance (CA) on 19 March 2020 were automatically transferred to Carer
Payment (CP) (XWP). CP (XWP) customers will remain qualified as long as
payment level CA continues. However, if the carer's only or last payment
level CA is suspended or cancelled for any reason, (for example, when
the carer can no longer provide additional care and attention each day
as they have commenced or returned to work), CP will automatically be
cancelled. A carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if
they have a break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020.
For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Hours of personal care required for care receivers 16 years or over

For the purposes of CA (adult), if the carer and care receiver do not
reside in the same private home, the carer must be providing at least 20
hours of personal care per week, and this care must be provided on a
daily basis, that is, seven days per week.

The care and attention must be received in a private home that is the
residence of the care receiver or the carer but not a residence of both
the care receiver and carer. The care and attention provided must
address special care needs that the carer receiver is assessed as having
under the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) and the carer cannot
be receiving wages at or above the relevant minimum weekly wage to
provide the care.

Hours of personal care required for care receivers under 16 years

For the purposes of CA (child) Health Care Card only, the carer must
still be providing at least 14 hours per week of additional care and
attention to meet the definition of 'requiring substantially more care
and attention than a child of the same age without a disability'.

Note: the 14 hour rule is not prescribed by legislation.

CA income test

Carers are not subject to the income test while they are exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test. However, if the
carer or their partner are returning to work and their income is high
enough to lose their exemption from providing their income details, a CA
income review will be triggered. For more information, see Carer
Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components.

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Recording and correcting employment income details

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
