
Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP) 009-04150060

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines a list of the cancellation, suspension and
rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP). The list of codes is not
publicly available.

Coding for cancellation, suspension and rejection of CP

The Centrelink system uses codes when a decision to cancel or suspend a
payment, or to reject a claim, is recorded on the computer system. A
description of the code is used when communicating with carers.

Carer Payment may be cancelled, rejected or suspended due to the carer
not meeting specific eligibility requirements or for various other
reasons. The carer will receive a letter explaining the reason for
non-payment.

Where the cancellation of CP is due to the death of a customer, the
cancellation of the payment is automatic when the death has been
recorded.

A payment cannot be suspended pending investigation. Before a payment is
suspended or cancelled, the decision maker must be satisfied that there
is sufficient evidence that the carer is either not qualified for the
payment or the payment is not payable.

If the decision to suspend a payment is made, prompt action should be
taken to give the carer a notice of decision. This advice must clearly
outline to the carer the reason their payment was suspended, the date of
effect, the payment type and the relevant section of the legislation. It
must also include the carer's review and appeal rights. See Suspension
of payments.

The Process page contains a table of cancellation, suspension and
rejection reason codes for CP.

Some cancellation reason codes that can be used for Carer Payment do not
apply and cannot be used for Carer Payment (XWP). This includes 25H,
CAB, CAS, CDE, CIH, CNP, CNQ, HBE, MCQ, NMQ, NRQ or RBE.

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) inter-environment change of
address

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
