
Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer neglect tip-off reviews 009-08060120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess, check and determine the action for
a Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) carer neglect tip-off
review.

On this Page:

Tip-off referral process

All tip-offs are recorded on the Report a Suspected Fraud application
and sent to Tip-off Operations. Tip-off Operations then identifies the
alleged customers via this information and determines whether:

-   the tip-offs are to be deleted, verified or investigated
-   they should be transferred to a Compliance review or Taskforce
    Integrity and Fraud Investigations Branch
-   the tip-off should be referred to an internal specialist team or
    program, and/or external agencies such as the Australian Taxation
    Office (ATO)

When referred, the appropriate review teams then investigate and action
the reviews.

Allegations of carer neglect are referred to Smart Centre Critical
Response Team (SCCRT) for initial investigation. Carer neglect tip-off
reviews act as a 'trigger' that a payment may have been or is being
incorrectly received and are reviewed as such. It is important to
remember that the information provided in the tip-off is not necessarily
correct and it may have been provided out of context. The role of the
SCCRT Officer is to triage the carer neglect tip-off review to ensure
the information provided relates to a carer or care receiver and
determine if the tip-off will be referred to an appropriate Carer
Processing Team.

As a result of a carer neglect tip-off, carers receiving CP and/or CA
may be subject to a manual review of their circumstances or a manually
initiated medical review. The purpose of the review is to:

-   establish that the care receiver's care needs continue to qualify
    the carer for payment
-   establish that the carer continues to provide constant care for CP
    or additional care and attention for CA, and
-   determine if there are any changes in either the carer's or the care
    receiver's circumstances

Manual reviews

A manual review may be required when information contained within the
tip-off indicates entitlement to CP and/or CA may have been lost or
entitlement is in question. A manual review may be conducted at any time
when it is deemed appropriate. It may be initiated for the following
reasons:

-   Services Australia receives notification a care receiver has
    returned to full time work
-   a carer or care receiver advises the agency the care receiver's
    medical condition has improved significantly
-   the agency has been advised by a third party the carer is no longer
    providing care for the care receiver

Note: the above scenarios are only examples, a review should be
commenced in any situation when entitlement to CP and/ or CA may be
lost.

Ongoing entitlement

Carer Processing Team Service Officers must determine the continuing
entitlement to CP and/or CA when a carer, care receiver or third party
provides information that indicates a change in the carer's or care
receiver's circumstances or possible carer neglect. When information is
received via tip-off that indicates a change of circumstances or carer
neglect, Service Officers must take care to record only factual
information and not the details of the allegation on the carer's record.
Note: 'Care Receiver At Risk' referrals to social workers should be made
from the care receiver's record to protect the care receiver's privacy
and safety. The receipt of all correspondence and the details of all
phone conversations with the carer and/or care receiver must be recorded
on the carer’s or care receiver's record clearly. This is particularly
important as disputes can later arise about whether Services Australia
was advised of changes and in what detail.

Notification provisions for CP and/or CA

Recipients of CP and/or CA must observe the general 14 day notification
provisions. That is, all customers generally have 14 days to notify
Services Australia of a change in their circumstances. Exceptions apply
to International Services (CIS) customers, and customers notifying of
bereavement events. In both these cases, the notification period is 28
days.

Other exemptions to the 14 day rule (up to 28 days) may be granted only
by the Secretary - they may not be delegated and must be in writing.
Failure to notify of a change of circumstances may result in an
overpayment, cancellation or suspension of CP and/or CA.

CP and/or CA places an obligation to notify, equally on the carer and
care receiver (except where the care receiver is a child under the age
of 16 years).

Below are some examples of notification requirements for carers and/or
care receivers, this list is not exhaustive:

-   commencement, cessation or variation to employment
-   contact details for either the carer and/or care receiver, including
    changes to address and/or telephone number
-   residence status
-   absence from the caring situation for either the carer and/or the
    care receiver (carer and/or care receiver commencing education,
    employment or training, respite hospitalisation or imprisonment)
-   change to the level of care or medical condition

Commencement of investigation

Following a tip-off referral, if it is determined an investigation is
required, contact must be made with the carer to conduct a telephone
interview. It is important to remember the information received via the
tip-off is an allegation only and the details of the tip-off are not to
be shared with either the carer and/or care receiver. If telephone
contact is unable to be made with the carer, a letter must be sent
requesting the carer to contact Services Australia for a telephone
interview. See Process page for further details. The following are
examples of what may be discussed/checked with the carer and recorded on
the carer and/or care receiver's record:

-   contact details of the carer and care receiver
-   address of the carer and care receiver
-   any temporary absences or cessation of care (for example,
    hospitalisation, respite)
-   change in the care receiver's (child or adult) condition or amount
    of care provided
-   the carer or care receiver's involvement in paid or voluntary work,
    study or training (for CP customers only)

Where there is more than one care receiver, a discussion should take
place regarding all care receivers.

The Resources page contains links to Office Locator, forms, the Services
Australia website and other intranet sites for suspected fraud and
reporting fraud.

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

Social worker assessment of care situations for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA) claims

Support services for carers

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
