
Carer Supplement (CS) 009-07010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains Carer Supplement (CS).

CS payment

CS helps carers with the costs of caring for a person with a disability
or medical condition. CS is an annual payment made in July of up to
$600, to carers who are receiving:

-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Partner Service Pension with
    CA, or
-   DVA Carer Service Pension

Carers in receipt of a CA Health Care Card (HCC) only on 1 July are not
entitled to CS.

Eligibility

Payment is based on a carer having 'received' an instalment of an
identified 'qualifying' payment, such as CP or CA, for a period that
covers 1 July of that year. It cannot be paid until payment of the
qualifying payment is made. However, carers who receive a qualifying
payment component (such as CP)  and  the CA component will receive both
payments on the same day.

The amount of CS paid to customers receiving CA is up to $600 per care
receiver (or a percentage of $600 if there is a shared care
arrangement).

Carer Allowance (CA) Health Care Card (HCC)

Carers in receipt of a CA Health Care Card (HCC) only (for child care
receivers) on 1 July are not entitled to CS.

Note: Customers receiving CA HCC only still have a status of CDA/CUR.

Backdated new claims

If payment of CP or CA is granted after 1 January and backdated to a
date that includes 1 July, the CS will not be automatically generated.
It must be paid manually.

More than one payment of CS

A carer may receive more than one component of CS. For example, a carer
caring for:

-   one person and receives both CP and CA, qualifies for 2 payments of
    CS, or
-   2 people and receives CP and 2 CA payments, qualifies for 3 payments
    of CS

Shared care arrangements

CA customers who are in a shared care arrangement receive either the
full rate of CS or a proportion of the CS payment. Customers who receive
the full rate of CA will receive the full $600 of CS (even if their
share of care is below 100%).

CA customers who receive a part-rate are paid a similar proportion of
CS. For example, if Carer 1 receives 50% of CA (as they share the CA
payment with Carer 2), Carer 1 will receive 50% of CS. If Carer 2 is
granted CP for a date on or before 1 July but after Carer 1 receives
their CS, Carer 2 will still be entitled to receive CS. That is, Carer 2
will be entitled to receive CS, even if Carer 1 has already received it.

Income support customers in nil rate period

Carers in receipt of a qualifying income support payment who have their
payment reduced to a nil rate for a period that includes 1 July are
eligible to receive CS. See the Resources page for payments that attract
CS and when the payment will be made.

Death of care receiver

On the death of a care receiver, carers in receipt of:

-   CP will qualify for CS if they were in receipt of CP or a CP
    bereavement payment during the period that includes 1 July. In this
    situation, CS is paid after 1 July
-   CA (child) qualify for CS where CA (child) is paid as a lump sum
    under the 14 week bereavement provisions if the lump sum payment is
    paid for a period that includes 1 July. In this situation, CS is
    paid after 1 July
-   CA (adult) qualify for CS if they receive a CA Bereavement Payment
    during the bereavement period that includes 1 July. This initiative
    commenced on 1 July 2012, so payment of CS only applies if the care
    receiver's date of death is after 1 July 2012 and is not, therefore,
    payable for the 1 July 2012 year. In this situation CS is paid with
    the CA Bereavement Payment

If there was a shared care arrangement, the rate of payment of CS during
the bereavement period that includes 1 July will be in the same
proportion as for the rate of CA that was previously paid.

Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

CDAP is an annual payment of $1,000 for carers who receive CA (child)
for a period that includes 1 July. Customers can receive both CDAP and
CS. Eligibility for CDAP is separate to eligibility for CS.

The Resources page has a table that outlines the payments that attract
CS and when CS payment will be paid. It also contains information about
the CS review and appeal process and examples of how the codes should be
used.

Related links

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Annual Child Disability Assistance payment (CDAP)

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Assessing a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) using the combined assessment
scores of two children

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Steps in the review and appeals system (CLK)

Wife Pension (WP)

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances

Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP) for carers of young children

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
