
Review of a lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score care receiver and that adult’s dependent child 009-08060110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the review process when an adult qualifies their
carer for Carer Payment (CP) (adult) under the provisions of the lower
ADAT score and the dependent child of that adult.

Qualification provisions

To qualify for CP, an adult care receiver must attain a Treating Health
Professional (THP) score of at least 10 and a total score of at least
25.

Under the lower ADAT score provisions, a carer may qualify for CP when
the care receiver meets all of the following:

have a physical, intellectual or psychiatric condition

be likely to suffer from that disability permanently or for an extended
period of at least 6 months

require constant care

have a total ADAT score of at least 20 including a health professional
score of at least 8, and

-   have a dependent child who is under 6 years, or
-   a dependent child under 16 years and they receive Carer Allowance
    (CA) for that dependent child

There is no requirement for the care receiver’s child to attract CA if
that child is under 6 years. When the child turns 6, the care receiver
will need to claim CA for this dependent child for the CP to continue
for the carer. If the child does not qualify for CA, the care receiver
must have another child under 6, or a child between 6 and 16 who does
qualify for CA, for the carer to remain qualified for CP.

Reviews for carers qualifying under the lower ADAT score

Reviews are necessary to ensure that carers are being paid correctly and
that carers are given time to consider alternative payments if they are
no longer eligible for CP.

Child turning 5 years and 9 months of age

A lower ADAT review will mature when the care receiver’s child reaches 5
years and 9 months. The care receiver will be contacted as the care
receiver will need to receive CA for this dependent child, in order for
CP to continue. If the child does not qualify for CA, the care receiver
must have another child under 6, or a child between 6 and 16 who does
qualify for CA, for the carer to remain qualified for CP.

Child turning 15 years and 9 months of age

An automatic trigger will occur for a lower ADAT review when a dependent
CA child turns 15 years and 9 months of age. The care receiver should be
contacted as CP will automatically cancel when this child turns 16 years
of age. The care receiver must have another child under 6, or a child
between 6 and 16 who qualifies for CA, for the carer to remain qualified
for CP.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Related links

Claim for Carer Payment (CP) when care is provided for a disabled adult
and that adult's dependent child

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
