
Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16 years of age 009-03060000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines an overview of the Carers Child to Adult Transfer
(CTAT) process for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) (child)
care receivers who are turning 16 or 18 years of age.

Transitioning eligible carers

The Carers CTAT is the process of transitioning eligible carers from
child care receiver provisions to adult care receiver provisions when
the care receiver(s) turn 16. It is not a new claim process. It is a
quicker and easier process for the carer requiring less documentation
than a new claim.

Carers CTAT

The Carers CTAT process requires less documentation than a new claim and
the care receiver does not have to provide income or assets details for
the assessment.

Eligible carers are sent a CTAT invitation letter when their care
receiver turns 15 years and 9 months (or 17 years and 9 months if their
child care receiver has a terminal condition), advising they should
apply for a transfer by the due date if they want their entitlement to
continuation of payment to be assessed under adult provisions.

Carers who get their Centrelink letters in their myGov inbox receive the
invitation letter and a link in their myGov inbox that takes them
directly to the [] CTAT online service. [] Carers can also navigate to
the service via their Centrelink online account. Paper CTAT forms are
not included with the invitation letter, but are available on the
Services Australia website:

-   Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432)
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16
    years or over (SA332A)

For continuation of payment, the CTAT must be submitted online or lodged
via paper form before the child level of entitlement is cancelled. Paper
forms lodged after the cancellation date are treated as a claim from the
date of receipt.

Carers not eligible for CTAT

Where a carer contacts because they have not received the invitation
letter to complete a CTAT, determine if the carer is eligible for a
CTAT. Service Officers must advise the carer of the following:

Their future payment options:

-   Where the carer’s payments have been suspended or cancelled, the
    carer must re-establish their eligibility under their existing child
    CP and/or CA payment to be eligible for a CTAT. If the carer’s
    payment cannot be restored, the carer will need to complete a new
    claim
-   Where the carer already receives CA (adult) for 2 care receivers,
    they are not eligible for payment for a third CA (adult)
-   Where the carer is required to provide care for the child turning 16
    years and 1 or 2 other children with a disability or medical
    condition, the carer may be eligible for Carer Payment under
    Multiple care provisions
-   The care receiver may have a potential entitlement to Disability
    Support Pension (DSP), Youth Allowance (YA) or entitlement to an
    Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

The potential impacts of the CTAT:

-   CP (child) and/or CA (child) carers who are assessed and found not
    eligible for CP and/or CA (adult) will lose entitlement to their
    payment(s), unlimited hospitalisation provisions and any concession
    entitlements when the CTAT is processed or the care receiver turns
    16 years and 3 months of age, whichever occurs first
-   CP (child) and/or CA (child) carers who are assessed and found to be
    eligible for CP and/or CA (adult) will lose entitlement to their
    unlimited hospitalisation provisions. The 63 days hospitalisation
    provisions will now apply for an adult care receiver

The benefits of the CTAT:

-   The transfer is a quicker and easier process for the carer and
    requires less documentation than a new claim

Lodging paper forms

Carers who are eligible to complete a CTAT but did not receive an
invitation can download the forms from the Services Australia website.

The forms required for the CTAT include:

-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16
    years or over (SA332A) form to be completed by the care receiver's
    Treating Health Professional. It can be accepted if it was completed
    by the Treating Health Professional after the care receiver turned
    15 years and 9 months of age
-   The Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432) should be completed by the carer. It can be lodged after the
    care receiver has turned 15 years and 9 months of age

If the carer requests paper forms be posted to them and their child
level entitlement is current, Service Officers are to:

-   run the Mail Forms Guided Procedure (GP)
-   issue the SA432 and SA332A, and
-   remind carers to lodge them by the due date

Treat paper forms lodged after the due date as a claim from the date of
receipt. Backdating provisions to the date of cancellation do not apply.
[] If carers ask about lodging a CTAT after the end date of the child
level entitlement and have not yet done so, tell them to submit an
online claim.

Contents

Carer Payment (CP) (child) care receiver turning 16 years of age

Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

Related links

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and one or
two children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) turning 16 years of age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
