
Calculating the Treating Health Professional score for a child under 16 years on or after 1 July 2010 009-05010040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to help Service Officers calculate
the Treating Health Professional (THP) score as part of the Disability
Care Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) (2010).

DCLAD (2010)

The DCLAD is used to assess the care provided and care required for a
child care receiver (under 16 years). The DCLAD contains the List of
Recognised Disabilities (LoRD), a carer questionnaire and a THP
questionnaire. If a child’s medical condition or disability is not on
the LoRD, they will be assessed using the DCLAD.

These questionnaires consider the:

-   level of care required by the child and the level of care provided
    by the carer
-   total care load of the carer
-   child’s functional ability, language, self care, social and
    community skills
-   impact of behaviour and special care needs on the care load

The DCLAD is not aimed at specific disabilities, medical conditions or
age groups.

Qualification for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

All child care receivers must achieve a qualifying rating of ‘intense’
where both the carer and care receiver have a score of:

-   'greater than zero' on the medical report completed by the THP
-   '85 or greater' on the Care Needs Assessment (CNA) completed by the
    carer

Re-use and re-claim provisions

These provisions allow qualifying THP medical reports and CNAs
previously supplied to be used for a subsequent claim.

The system assesses these provisions when a carer claims online, when
using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or when running First Contact
Service Offer (FCSO).

Forms

The medical report is a questionnaire completed by the THP currently
involved in the treatment of the child. A combination of the following
forms is issued at Next Steps for online claims, Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) or First Contact Service Offer (FCSO):

-   SA422 - Carer Payment and Carer Allowance Medical Report (for a
    child under 16 years)
    This is a system generated form. The manual (printable PDF) version
    is the SA431. Used to assess eligibility for CP and CA if a
    functional assessment is required
-   SA397- Carer Payment Medical Report including functional assessment
    (for a child under 16 years)
    This is a system generated form. The manual (printable PDF) version
    is the SA427. Used to assess eligibility for CP (child) if a
    functional assessment or Special Disability Trust beneficiary status
    is required. It must be completed by the child’s THP
-   SA333TDR – Carer Allowance Medical Report (for a child under 16
    years)
    This is a system generated form. The manual (printable PDF) version
    is the SA426. Used to assess eligibility for a CA (child) and must
    be completed by the child’s THP

In conjunction with 1 of the following:

-   SA410 – Claim for Carer Payment, or
-   SA409 – Claim for Carer Allowance, or
-   SA411 – Claim for Carer Payment and Carer Allowance, and
-   SA414 – Income and Assets (for Carer Payment)
-   SA489 - Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489)

Or via the review process with:

-   SA421 - Review of Carer Payment – Care Needs Assessment, (for a
    child under 16 years)
    This is a system generated form. The manual (printable PDF) version
    is the SA424
-   SA416 – Review of Carer Payment and Carer Allowance – Care Needs
    Assessment for a child under 16 years
    This is a system generated form, The manual (printable PDF) version
    is the SA417

View forms generated by FCSO on the History Summary (HS) screen.

If the care receiver has a recognised disability, the THP does not have
to complete the THP functional assessment questions included on the
SA333TDR/SA426. This is because a care receiver with a recognised
disability will automatically medically qualify their carer for CA. It
also means that the Functional Assessment is not required. See Assessing
a Recognised Disability.

THP medical reports include the (LoRD) for CA (child) only claims, or CP
and CA child combined claims. The CP (child) only THP medical report
will contain the functional assessment questions but will not require
the LoRD questions to be included in the report.

Purpose of the THP medical report

The THP medical report:

-   forms part of the process of assessing a child care receiver's
    ability and objectively determining their level of disability
-   helps to measure the level of functional ability or disability of a
    young person against standards appropriate to their age in the areas
    of communication, feeding, self-care, social and community skills
    and mobility
-   takes into account the care receiver's specific needs. The carer and
    THP must complete separate questionnaires about the care receiver's
    functional ability, behaviour and special care needs
-   is designed to identify the level of disability regardless of the
    actual disability/condition, and
-   was developed in consultation with peak disability representatives,
    consumer groups and childhood disability specialists from many
    medical and allied health professional backgrounds

Calculating the THP score

The medical score is assessed by the DCLAD 2010 from the answers
provided by the one of the following forms, SA422/SA431, SA397/SA427,
SA333TDR/SA426. Once they are coded on the carer’s record the system
will calculate the THP score. The overall score, comprising of the THP
and CNA score, is used to determine if the care receiver qualifies a
carer for both CP and CA or CA only.

If the THP indicates the absence of a significant level of disability,
the child will not attract a fortnightly payment of CP and/or CA.
However, the child may qualify for a CA Health Care Card only.

The Receptive language skills to the Gross Mobility questions on the
medical report must all be answered, as it is possible to receive a
negative score from these questions.

Add a new THP with the same date of effect if the carer provides 2 THP
reports.

THPs include:

-   legally qualified Medical practitioners, including Specialists
-   registered nurses
-   occupational therapists
-   physiotherapists
-   registered psychologists
-   speech pathologists
-   Aboriginal health workers, in a geographically remote area

Diagnosis of a terminal condition is restricted to medical
practitioners.

The details of the medical practitioner who has diagnosed the recognised
disability must be provided in writing, if any of the following medical
reports, SA422, SA431, SA397, SA427, SA333TDR, SA426 has not been
completed by a medical practitioner.

Grandfathering provisions

Carers who are current or suspended on 30 June 2010 and who were granted
CP (child):

under the DCLAD (2009), or Carer Allowance (CA) (child) under the Child
Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) (2001) will maintain
qualification and payability under their existing provisions until they
are selected for review under DCLAD 2010 or lose qualification on or
after 1 July 2010:

-   this group of care receivers will not show on the Carer Payment
    Grandfathered (CRGF) screen

due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child (PDC), or for 2 children
who require the equivalent care of a PDC, will maintain qualification
and payability under PDC provisions until they are selected for review
under DCLAD 2010 or lose qualification on or after 1 July 2010:

-   carers in this group who re-claim CP (child) for the same care
    receiver must provide a DCLAD 2010 care load assessment and medical
    report from 1 July 2010
-   this group of care receivers will show on the CRGF screen

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
Carer Payment and Carer Allowance forms and a link to the Level 2 Policy
Helpdesk online referral form.

Related links

Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 disabled children

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Assessing a recognised disability

Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) 2010

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
