-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to code the paper Carer Payment and/or Carer
Allowance - Care Needs Assessment (for a child under 16 years) (SA394 or
the pre-populated SA408) ). These forms will be coded by Service
Officers who process Care Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
claims.

Purpose of Care Needs Assessment (CNA)

The CNA forms part of the Disability Care Load Assessment (child)
Determination (DCLAD) (2020) and identifies the amount of care required
by a child care receiver when assessing qualification for CP (child)
and/or CA (child).

For carers unable to claim online, the pre-populated SA408 (system
generated) form or the manual SA394 (fillable and printable PDF) form is
required for all carers claiming CP and/or CA for a child under the age
of 16 years. For customers deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an
online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), First Contact Service
Offer (FCSO) workflow may need to be used. See Claim lodgement of
Centrelink claims.

Note: the FCSO workflow is to be run only when a carer contacts to claim
and all other options for claim lodgement cannot be used. If used, FCSO
will determine if either the SA408 or SA394 is to be sent to the carer
for a new claim.

Carers must achieve a qualifying rating of intense to qualify for CP
and/or CA (child). A qualifying rating of intense will be achieved if
the carer and care receiver have achieved a score of at least '85 or
greater' on the CNA, as well as a qualifying Treating Health
Professional (THP) score of 'greater than zero' on the THP medical
report.

The carer must also meet all of the other requirements of the
professional questionnaire in the medical report for the carer to be
eligible for CP and/or CA (child).

Where a CP and/or CA (child) claim has been previously been rejected and
the carer submits a new medical report or CNA within 13 weeks of the
rejection and the claim can be reopened, the existing medical report or
CNA responses which resulted in the initial rejection of the claim must
not be amended or deleted. A new line must be created and the new
medical report and/or carer responses added. To do this select the + and
add a new medical report on the CDMD screens. This may occur in the
following circumstances where the original claim has been rejected with
a reason code of either:

-   Failed to Reply to Correspondence (FRC) and a new medical report has
    been provided
-   Insufficient Care Load (ICL) and a CNA has been provided

See Coding the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) or Calculating
the total Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2020)
score for further details.

Carer claiming CA only

If the carer is claiming CA only, the CNA will not be issued at FCSO
stage.

The CNA will be sent to the carer after the processing team has
completed the Treating Health Professional (THP) assessment.

The CNA will then be sent to the carer to complete and return so the CA
claim assessment can be finalised.

Carer claim CP and CA

If the carer is claiming CP (child) or CA (child) for more than 1 child,
a CNA (SA408 or SA394) must be completed for each child. Only 1 claim
form is to be completed for each child if both payments are being
claimed.

Note: if the child's Treating Health Professional (THP) has confirmed
the disability or severe medical condition is on the List of Recognised
Disabilities (LoRD), the carer will automatically qualify for CA and
will not need to complete the SA408 or SA394 unless they are also
claiming CP.

CP terminal illness

If a Treating Health Professional (THP) has certified the child care
receiver is terminally ill, the carer will qualify for CP (child)
without needing to complete a CNA if they meet all other eligibility
criteria.

Referral to a CSAT

In some circumstances, referral to a Carer Specialist Assessment Team
(CSAT) may be made if the carer is just under the qualifying score. This
may be done automatically by the system or manually by a Service
Officer.

If the claim for CP (child) is borderline, referral to the CSAT may
result in investigation of additional evidence of the carer's
qualification for payment. The CSAT may consider a range of evidence
provided to establish if any of the CNA responses should be changed. The
outcome will assist in determining eligibility for CP (child).

Grandfathering provisions

Carers who are current or suspended on 30 June 2010 and were:

-   granted CP (child) under the DCLAD (2009) or CA (child) under the
    Child Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) (2001) will
    maintain qualification and payability under their existing
    provisions. This remains until they are selected for review under
    DCLAD 2010 or lose qualification on or after 1 July 2010. This group
    of care receivers will not appear on the Carer Payment Grandfathered
    (CRGF) screen
-   granted CP (child) due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child
    (PDC), or two children who require the equivalent care of a PDC,
    will maintain qualification and payability under PDC provisions
    until they are selected for review under DCLAD 2020 or lose
    qualification on or after 1 July 2010. Carers in this group who
    reclaim CP (child) for the same care receiver from 1 July 2010 to 17
    August 2020 will be required to provide a DCLAD (2020) care load
    assessment and medical report. These groups of care receivers will
    appear on the CRGF screen

The Resources page contains links to the CNA forms and information about
their use.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) claims for care receivers aged under 16

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and 1 or 2
children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when 2 to 4 children each with a disability
or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Coding the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (auto) when a carer is also
receiving Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) referrals for Carer Payment (CP)
(child)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
