
Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of shared care for Carer Allowance
(CA).

Shared care for CA

Shared care for CA occurs when 2 carers (who are not members of the same
couple) regularly provide additional care and attention to the same care
receiver and both carers would be eligible to claim a share of CA each,
whether the second carer claims or not. Care must be shared regularly
for shared care provisions to apply.

Applying the different rules

Different rules apply for CA shared care depending on a number of issues
including whether the carers are members of a couple and whether 1 or
both of the carers live with the care receiver.

In the case of a child care receiver, the child must be a dependent
child of both carers. If the care is shared between a parent and a
grandparent it is highly unlikely the child will be a dependent of both
carers. CA can only be paid to the carer who has the dependent child.

If the shared care provisions do not apply and the arrangement is:

-   temporary, then the temporary cessation of care (TCC) provisions may
    apply while the child is in the care of the other carer
-   not temporary, then the carer may have lost entitlement to CA if
    daily care is not being provided. This needs to be investigated

While shared care provisions do not apply to Carer Payment (CP), the
shared care arrangement must be considered when determining eligibility
or continuing eligibility for CP. See Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)
when a care receiver is aged 16 years or over and Assessing Carer
Payment (CP) when the care is shared.

Declarations made under Section 981 of the Social Security Act 1991

One carer will receive 100% of CA until a second qualified carer has
claimed.

When a second carer claims CA and is qualified, a declaration is made
under section 981 of the Social Security Act 1991. The date this
decision is made is the date of effect or start date for the second
carer, overriding other date of effect provisions (for example, claim
lodgement date). The claim cannot be backdated beyond this declaration.
For this reason, the date of claim lodgement does not apply to the
payment.

Further, a debt cannot be raised against a carer due to a change in
percentage or days of shared care, because the carer/s remains eligible
for the current rate of payment until a new declaration is made. For the
same reason, arrears are not paid - the determination takes effect from
the date of the declaration.

Changes to shared care

If 2 carers who receive a shared care rate of CA for the same care
receiver advise that they have become partnered, CA can no longer be
paid to both partners. See Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance
(CA).

When shared care provisions do not apply

Shared care provisions do not apply if care is shared between 2 members
of a couple, or between 1 carer who lives with an adult care receiver
(section 954) and another carer who does not live with an adult care
receiver (section 954A), as both carers could not qualify for CA at the
same time.

For example, a co-resident carer provides care Monday to Friday and a
non co-resident carer provides care on Saturday and Sunday. Neither
qualifies for CA as the care is not provided by 2 co-resident or 2 non
co-resident carers.

Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation provisions

The application of respite and hospitalisation provisions to shared care
cases may be complicated and may need to be discussed with each carer.
When the care receiver is in the care of 1 of the 2 carers as part of a
regular shared care arrangement, absences should not be recorded against
either carer.

See Coding absences for Carer Allowance (CA) where care of the care
receiver is shared.

Portability

Under shared care provisions, each carer may access up to 6 weeks
portability. If the care receiver remains in the care of the other carer
qualified for CA (whether they have claimed or not), temporary cessation
of care has not occurred.

However, if the care receiver does not receive additional care and
attention from 1 of the 2 carers who would be qualified for CA,
temporary cessation of care has occurred and should be coded.

In cases of shared care, coding an absence on 1 carer's record will
automatically code it on the other carer's record. See Carer Payment
(CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) overseas absences.

If care ceases, CA may cancel if respite limits are reached before
portability limits expire.

Grandfathered cases

If 1 parent qualifies for CA (child) payment level under the CDAT 2001
and the other parent claims CA under the shared care provisions but only
qualifies for CA HCC only (under the DCLAD 2010) the first carer
continues to receive 100% of the CA payment under the CDAT 2001.

The CDAT carer is not reviewed until they have a change in circumstance
such as cancellation or they are selected for their milestone medical
review. The basis of this 'grandfathering' was to ensure carers would
not be adversely affected by the change in assessment tool until they
came up for review.

Related links

Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding absences for Carer Allowance (CA) where care of the care receiver
is shared

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
under 16

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
16 or over

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Carer Allowance income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
