-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines provisions and payments available to carers
receiving CA (adult) upon the death of the care receiver. The procedure
also explains the action required by Service Officers.

Bereavement provisions for CA (adult)

Bereavement provisions for CA are determined differently and separately
to bereavement provisions for Carer Payment (CP).

Eligibility for a bereavement payment for a carer receiving CA (adult)
depends on:

-   whether or not the carer receives both CA and an income support
    payment, and
-   if the income support payment received by the carer is a payment
    other than CP

If the carer is in receipt of:

-   CA only, the carer is not entitled to a Bereavement Payment
-   both CA and CP (for the same or another care receiver), the carer is
    not entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment, but may be entitled to a
    bereavement payment for CP (this will depend on which care receiver
    has passed away)
-   both CA and an income support payment (including Department of
    Veterans' Affairs (DVA)) that qualifies the carer for a bereavement
    payment, they are not entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment
-   both CA and an income support payment (other than CP) that does not
    qualify them for a bereavement payment, they are entitled to CA up
    to the end of the bereavement rate continuation period and also may
    be entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment

Bereavement Payment for CA

The CA Bereavement Payment is the equivalent of up to 7 fortnightly
instalments of CA. The payment is paid as a lump sum to the carer after
notification of the care receiver's death.

If CA is shared between 2 carers, each carer will receive a CA
Bereavement Payment based on the percentage of care they provided prior
to the care receiver's death. However, if the care provided for CA is
shared care but only one carer is receiving CA on the day of the care
receiver's death, and is receiving 100% of the CA payment, then that CA
carer will be paid the full rate (100%) of the CA Bereavement Payment.

The death is recorded by Services Australia to ensure the carer's
payment is correctly reassessed and that any bereavement payments
associated with other payments received by the care receiver are
processed, for example Disability Support Pension (DSP).

The notification period for the occurrence of a bereavement event is 28
days for carers in receipt of CP and/or CA. The References page contains
links to the policy.

Care receiver permanently enters an institution

Before recording a death, check whether the care receiver had
permanently entered an institution and that the care receiver had
permanently left the care of their carer before their death.

When there has been a permanent cessation of care prior to the death of
the care receiver, CA should be cancelled from the first date the carer
did not provide care and attention.

Overpayment

A debt being created depends on:

-   if the carer was eligible for a CA Bereavement payment
-   the date Services Australia was notified of the care receiver's
    death
-   date CA was paid to

Process contains information about whether there is a debt and the
period of the overpayment.

When a CA Bereavement Payment is made in error, (for example, care
receiver's death incorrectly recorded) the death action will be undone
by the Service Officer. An overpayment of the bereavement payment must
be raised manually by the Service Officer and arrears must be paid to
the carer if they have missed CA payments since the death action was
recorded.

Carer Supplement

Carers may be entitled to receive the annual Carer Supplement if the
bereavement period includes 1 July of any given year and the carer was
entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment. The Supplement of up to $600 is
issued as an immediate payment on the same day as the CA Bereavement
Payment.

CA bereavement Q079 letter

When a CA care receiver passes away, Service Officers must send a Q079
letter to the carer. If the carer is entitled to a CA Bereavement
Payment the letter will advise:

-   the amount of the CA Bereavement Payment, or
-   the amount of CA Bereavement Payment and Carer Supplement, and
-   the new CA rate if there are surviving care receivers, or
-   cancellation of CA if there are no surviving care receivers

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information on what to do when someone has died.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Carer Supplement (CS)

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Social work service referral

Undoing a death action

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
