-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess whether a claimant for Carer
Allowance (CA) satisfies the residence requirements necessary to qualify
for payment. The assessment includes whether the customer is
residentially qualified to lodge a legal claim for payment and if they
are required to serve the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period
(NARWP).

Residence requirements for CA

To satisfy the residence criteria for CA, both the customer and their
care receiver must:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged, and
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment

In addition to the above, the customer only (not the care receiver) must
satisfy a 1 year (52 week) Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period
(NARWP).

The NARWP was introduced for CA from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the visa subclass and grant date of the customer's first permanent
residence visa.

The customer will not have a NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 116, 117, 835, 836, 837
    or 852

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a NARWP of 1 year (52
weeks).

Customers claiming CA whose first permanent residence visa was granted
on or after 1 January 2019 are required to have been in Australia as an
Australian resident for the duration of the NARWP before CA is payable.
Alternatively, they may have an exemption from the NARWP in certain
circumstances.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming Carer Allowance are required to have been an Australian
resident and physically in Australia for the required duration of the
NARWP, either in 1 period, or in a number of periods before Carer
Allowance is payable. Note: the period of residence required for the
NARWP does not need to have occurred immediately before claiming.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming Carer
Allowance may have a 1 year NARWP. If they leave Australia temporarily
for 3 weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the absence
extends the NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

If the customer has not served the NARWP and one of the care receivers
is a child under 16, they may still be able to receive Health Care Card
(HCC) only CA.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Immigration Datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need
to be manually recorded. If Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with Centrelink, ongoing updates to movement information and
visa changes will be automatically recorded on the customer's record.

For current CA customers, it may be necessary to update country of
residence, visa information or Australian citizenship details. For help,
see Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Residence and Portability screens

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
