
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes to follow when a carer contacts
Services Australia seeking assistance because they are caring for
someone with a disability, medical condition, or an adult who is frail
aged. The agency will assess the carer's and their care receiver's
circumstances and a range of appropriate products and services will be
offered to each of them.

Government intent

Carers are an integral part of Australia's health system and are the
foundation of our aged, disability and community care systems. All
carers and care receivers, regardless of their cultural and linguistic
differences, age, disability, religion, socioeconomic status, gender
identification and geographical location should have the same rights,
choices and opportunities as other Australians. They should be able to
enjoy optimum health, social and economic wellbeing and participate in
family, social and community life, employment and education.

This file explores the assistance that is provided to carers and care
receivers when they first contact the agency seeking information on
carer related programs and services, including service offers that are
provided to meet carers individual needs.

Initial contact

Carers do not need to have an extensive knowledge of the agency’s
products and services in order to receive a service offer that best
meets their needs. It is sufficient for carers to explain their
circumstances to departmental staff who will provide them with a
'service offer' appropriate to their and their care receiver's
situation.

The initial contact can be made either [] online, by phone or in person.
Carers wanting to claim Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance should be
encouraged to claim online. If they decline the online claim, Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC) can be run. From 1 July 2018, claims will be
granted to eligible carers from the date they submit a complete claim
with all relevant supporting documentation.

Prior to 1 July 2018, carers had 14 days from the date of initial
contact to lodge their claim and could have be extended for up to 13
weeks where special circumstances existed, or where the care receiver’s
medical condition and care needs had significant adverse impact on the
carer’s ability to lodge the claim within 14 days.

Note: from 1 July 2018, intent to claim provisions only apply to
customers in vulnerable circumstances.

Carers may need assistance in completing their new claim online or
completing forms at the review stage. Carers may also contact in
relation to forms that may need to be completed by a third party such as
a Treating Health Professional (THP).

Information on payments and services

As part of our Business Partnership Agreement with the Department of
Social Services (DSS), the agency will answer questions from carers
about the payments and services provided. Carers will receive high
quality advice about income support, and those seeking assistance will
be encouraged to test their eligibility by submitting a claim. For
further information for carers and the Bilateral Management Arrangements
(BMA) see the References page.

Contents

Initial contact by a carer

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Employment assistance for carers in receipt of Carer Payment and/or
Carer Allowance

Support services for carers

Related Links

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
