
Carer Allowance (CA) (child) turning 16 years of age 009-08060030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the automated and manual
process for carers receiving Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when their
care receiver turns 16 years of age.

On this Page:

Entitlement and qualifying rating

A carer being paid CA for care provided to a child with a severe
disability or severe medical condition remains qualified until the care
receiver turns 16 years and 3 months of age (or 18 years if terminal),
or a determination has been made on a claim for CA (adult), whichever is
earlier.

Carers Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

The Carers CTAT process requires less documentation than a new claim and
does not require the care receiver to provide income or assets details
for the assessment.

Eligible carers are sent an invitation letter when their care receiver
turns 15 years and 9 months (or 17 years and 9 months for a CP child
with a terminal condition), advising they should apply to transfer by
the due date if they want their entitlement to be assessed under adult
provisions.

Carers can only apply to transfer to the payment they already receive.
For example, they cannot transfer to CP if they only receive CA. If they
receive a CA Health Care Card (HCC) only, they can request to transfer
to CA for an adult care receiver.

[] Carers subscribed to get their letters to their myGov inbox are
advised in their invitation letter to select the link in their myGov
inbox. The link takes them to the online CTAT.

If the carer has a correspondence nominee, the link is not sent to the
nominee's myGov inbox. The nominee must access their Centrelink online
account and:

-   select the customer they act for > Tasks > Child to Adult Transfer,
    or
-   use the menu to navigate to Child to Adult Transfer

[] Carers will also be able to navigate to the service via their
Centrelink online account. Paper forms are not included with the
invitation letter but CTAT forms are available on the Services Australia
website:

-   Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432)
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16
    years or over form (SA332A)

For continuation of payment the CTAT must be submitted online or lodged
using paper forms, before the child level entitlement is cancelled.
Paper (SA432 and SA332A) CTAT forms lodged after the cancellation date
will be treated as a new claim from the date the forms are lodged.
Service Officers can run Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for the CTAT.
However, Service Officers cannot submit the CTAT on behalf of the carer.

Carers who did not receive a CTAT invitation because they were suspended
and CA has been restored for the care receiver that is turning 16 (or
the child has turned 16 and CA can be restored), and where the carer:

-   has a registered myGov inbox subscription, the CTAT invitation
    letter along with a link to the CTAT online claim is automatically
    sent to their myGov inbox
-   does not have a myGov account, a paper invitation letter is sent
    explaining how to register online. If the carer does not wish to use
    the online service they will be advised to download and print the
    relevant forms from the Services Australia website and return by the
    due date
-   did not submit the transfer by the due date and the CTAT has
    expired, they will need to lodge a new claim. [] This can be
    completed online or Service Officers can run ACC. See Claiming Carer
    Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) for online claims

Paper CTAT forms are available for use in limited circumstances and the
forms (SA432 and SA332A) are available on the Services Australia
website. If the carer lodges the paper transfer forms after their CA has
been cancelled, the CTAT forms will be treated as a new claim from the
date they are lodged.

From 1 July 2018, intent to claim provisions only apply to carers in
vulnerable circumstances.

Note: CA (auto) continues beyond the child's 16th birthday to 16 years
and 3 months as long as the carer remains qualified and payable for CP
(child), pending assessment of eligibility for CP (Adult).

CA (child) invitation letter

Carers are issued with an invitation letter when their care receiver
reaches 15 years and 9 months advising they should apply for a transfer
by the due date if they want their entitlement to be assessed under
adult provisions.

The letter has a section that advises the carer of loss of entitlement
to CA payment and a Health Care Card (HCC) when the care receiver turns
16 years and 3 months of age.

Also included is an invitation to apply for Disability Support Pension
(DSP).

The letter also advises the carer that a care receiver aged 16 years or
over may also be entitled to an income support payment. Care receivers
can submit a claim for an income support payment or EHC online.

Health Care Card (HCC) only CA (child)

For HCC only CA (child) carers, when the care receiver reaches 15 years
and 9 months, an invitation letter is issued. This letter advises the
carer of loss of entitlement to a HCC when the care receiver turns 16
years. CA (adult) does not include a HCC for the care receiver.

If the carer is no longer entitled to CA (child), the care receiver may
be entitled to an ex-CA (child) HCC.

Medical report and assessment

It may help the carer to know that the assessment for CP (adult) is the
same as for CA (adult) - the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) -
so medical information will only have to be provided once.

The CP and/or CP Medical Report, for a person 16 years or over (SA332A)
asks for details from a Treating Health Professional (THP), and it can
be accepted if it was completed by the THP after the care receiver
turned 15 years and 9 months old.

If the carer or the THP has ticked more than 1 answer, the answer that
gives the highest ADAT score should be accepted. Where no answer has
been provided, the carer or THP should be contacted to find out why.
They should be given the opportunity to answer unanswered questions.

Note: if the ADAT produces a qualifying score and there are unanswered
questions which have no bearing on the carer's qualification for CP
and/or CA, staff are not required to contact the carer or THP but should
document this on the carer’s record.

Early claims

Carers may lodge completed claims up to 3 months before they become
qualified for payment.

Combined CDAT score of 2 children

Carers entitled to receive a single rate of CA because of the combined
Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) score of 2 children are advised
in the review that they will lose CA (child) entitlement when the eldest
child reaches 16 years and 3 months of age.

This is because no entitlement to CA exists on the basis of a
combination of ADAT and CDAT or DCLAD scores or multiple ADATs. The
carer should be advised they may still test eligibility for CA on the
basis of the ADAT score of the care receiver who is now assessed as an
adult.

Further information

See Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)
for information about:

-   eligible carers who will receive a CTAT invitation
-   carers who will not receive a CTAT invitation, and
-   when a new claim will be required

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Carer Payment (CP) (child) care receiver turning 16 years of age

Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
