
Reviews of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) 009-08060000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures to assist in identifying and actioning
a range of reviews for carers paid Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA).

On this Page:

Purpose of carer reviews

The purpose of carer reviews for CP and/or CA is to establish that the
care receiver’s care needs continue to qualify the carer for payment,
and that the carer continues to provide care and attention on a daily
basis to the person they provide care for. Carers selected for review
can be through Service Profiling, Age Milestones and by the Host system.
Depending upon a carer’s circumstances, carers may be required to
complete a medical, non-medical, CA taxable income or manual review.
Manual Reviews may be necessary to ensure carers continue to meet
qualifications for CP and/or CA.

CA adjustable taxable income reviews may be required to check that the
carer's and their partner's combined adjusted taxable income is under
the CA income limit.

Carer reviews include the following.

Adult Medical Review

Adult Medical Reviews apply to carers at risk of being paid CP and/or CA
when the adult care receiver's medical condition may have improved.
These reviews are risk based and are generated for High, Medium, Low
risk customer groups. See Medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA) (adult).

Non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets Test review

Where a care receiver does not qualify for an income support payment, a
non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) review may be
applied to determine a carer’s entitlement to CP. The review process
will only be applied to adult and child care receivers when the recorded
income is within $5,000 of the applicable income threshold and/or assets
are recorded in the medium or high assets value range on the CRIA
screen. The review activity matures on 1 November each year. See
Non-customer care receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test reviews for
Carer Payment (CP).

Adult Terminal Illness Review

For the purposes of CA and CP (adult) a terminal condition is where a
person aged 16 years or over is in the final phase of a terminal illness
and is not expected to live more than 3 months. Adult Terminal Illness
reviews are generated 24 months after the grant and every 12 months
thereafter for the date of event recorded on the Care Receiver’s Medical
Details (ADMD) screen. See Terminal Illness Reviews for Carer Payment
(CP) (adult).

Child Terminal Illness Review

For the purposes of CP (child), a terminal condition is where a child
under 16 years has a terminal condition and is not expected to live more
than 24 months. Child care receivers with a terminal illness will have a
review generated 24 months after grant, and every 12 months thereafter.
A Social Worker assesses initial reviews generated 24 months after
grant. The Carer Processing Team conducts all reviews thereafter. See
Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) child.

Child Medical Review – CA only

Child Medical Reviews apply to carers in receipt of CA child only. The
review process coincides with patterns of childhood development and
detects changes in care arrangements. Carers are exempt from the medical
review if CA was granted less than 12 months before the scheduled review
date, or if they have been medically reviewed in the last 12 months. A
Child Medical Review CA only will automatically commence when the child
reaches the following development milestones:

-   4 years and 8 months
-   10 years, and
-   13 years

If the carer is also paid CP (child) for the care receiver, separate
reviews for both payments will be undertaken through Care Load Reviews.
See Child Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child).

Severe Multiple and Physical Disability Review

Child care receivers under 6 months of age with recognised disability of
Severe Multiple Disabilities – Seizures require a care load review when
the child reaches 6 months of age. The review is required as some
conditions are considered to be a recognised disability for certain
periods of time, as the condition can be of a temporary nature. See
Recognised disability medical reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) child.

Care Load Review

Carers paid CP for a child care receiver under 14 years and 9 months may
be selected for a Care Load review. Carers are selected through Service
Profiling and if they meet certain conditions and predictors they are
profiled into either Medium or High Risk. If the care is also paid CA
for the child, this will be reviewed at the same time. See Care Load
reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child) .

Age Milestone Mandatory review

Development milestones are the ages at which a child should display the
functional abilities listed for the age range (in addition to all of the
functional abilities in lower age ranges). Similar to the CA only Child
Medical Reviews, the review process coincides with patterns of childhood
development and detects changes in care arrangements. To be selected for
the Age Milestone Mandatory Review, carers must be paid CP for a child
care receiver under 14 years and 9 months of age. The review commences
automatically once the child reaches the age of

-   4 years and 8 months or
-   13 years

If the carer is also paid CA for the child, this will be reviewed at the
same time. See Age Milestone Mandatory reviews for Carer Payment (CP)
(child) and Carer Allowance (CA) (child).

CA Health Care Card (HCC) only Review

CA HCC only reviews are to determine a carer’s ongoing entitlement to CA
HCC only or whether a carer has become eligible for CA at payment level.
Carers who are CA HCC only will be reviewed in line with the age
milestones for Child Medical Reviews CA only. The Adjustable Income Test
for CA will also apply to CA HCC only, see Carer Allowance Income
Review.

See Child Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Hospitalisation Reviews for CP and CA Child

Carers may have access to an unlimited number of hospital admission days
for a child care receiver and remain qualified for CP (child) under the
hospitalisation provision for CP (child). Carers paid CA for a child who
is hospitalised are reviewed every 12 weeks (84 days) of continuous
hospitalisation. After 24 months of continuous hospitalisation a Care
Load review is undertaken. The Care Load review is then repeated for
each subsequent 12 months of continuous hospitalisation (for example,
the child has been in hospital continuously for 36 months). See
Hospitalisation reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
for a child under 16 years.

Carer Allowance Income Review

From 20 September 2018, a $250,000 a year adjusted taxable income test
applies to CA and CA Health Care Card Only recipients.

Carers are not subject to a CA income review while they are exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test. An exception
applies if the carer is only exempt because they or their partner
receive Family Tax Benefit - in this case they may be required to
complete a CA income review triggered from the data matching process
with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

Following the initial mailout, subsequent CA income reviews may be
triggered. These will generally be triggered automatically but may also
be manually triggered, see Manual reviews. [] Carers should complete
their income review online.

Automatic CA income reviews may be triggered in the following
situations:

ATO data matching will automatically trigger a review where the Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) for the carer (and their partner if they have one)
is $250,000 or more for the previous financial year. The rules to
trigger a review take into account deemed income and expected ATI if one
partner has not been matched with the ATO

The carer was not exempt from proving their income details for the CA
income test as at 20 September 2018 (initial mailout)

The CA new claim was lodged before 20 September 2018 and the carer was
not exempt from providing their income details when the claim was
processed after that date

Changes of circumstances will trigger a CA income review in the
following situations if the carer is not exempt from providing their
income details for the CA income test and ATI details for the carer and
their current partner were not provided in the same financial year:

-   the carer is linked to a new partner
-   the carer is no longer exempt from providing their income details
    for the CA income test
-   a new account-based income stream has been added for the carer or
    their partner and the account holder is aged 60 or older
-   the CA new claim was submitted before 20 September 2018 and
    processed after this date

Manual reviews

A manual review may be required when information is received that
indicates entitlement to CP and/or CA has been lost. There are no time
restrictions on when a manual review may be conducted, a manual review
can be started whenever it is deemed appropriate. A Manual Review would
be initiated for the following:

Services Australia receives notification a care receiver has returned to
full time work

a carer or care receiver advises the agency the care receiver's medical
condition has improved significantly

the agency has been advised by a third party the carer is no longer
providing care for the care receiver

the Service Officer initiates a CA income review manually because the
carer notifies one of the following and is not exempt from providing
their income details for the CA income test:

-   their and their partner’s combined adjusted taxable income for the
    previous financial year was over the limit and they are not already
    assessed on a current year estimate
-   they or their partner receive an account based income stream and
    current Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) information is not held

Note: the above scenarios are only examples. Commence a review in any
situation when entitlement to CP and or CA may be lost. See Carer
Allowance (CA) income review processing.

Residential care review

A review activity may be created when the care receiver enters a
residential care facility. When a care receiver permanently enters an
institution, they permanently leave the care of their carer. Carers in
receipt of CP continue to receive payment for 14 weeks from the first
date the carer did not provide constant care. In most cases, it will be
the day after the person enters the institution.

There is no equivalent provision for CA. When a permanent cessation of
care occurs, cancel CA from the first date the carer did not provide
care and attention. See Care receiver permanently enters or
temporarily/permanently leaves an institution.

Contents

Care Load reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Age Milestone Mandatory reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child) and Carer
Allowance (CA) (child)

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) turning 16 years of age

Medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) (adult)

Non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test reviews for
Carer Payment (CP)

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (adult)

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) adult

Review of lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score adult
where dependent child turns 5 years and 9 months

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) child

Child Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Review of a lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score care
receiver and that adult's dependent child

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer neglect tip-off
reviews

Continuous Constant Care Review

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) care receiver turning 16 years of age

Hospitalisation reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
for a child under 16 years

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews

Recognised disability medical reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) child

Avoiding debts for Carers interventions

Debts for Carer Payment (CP)

Avoiding Debts for Carers (ADFC) Interventions

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
