
Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010 009-05010000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for historical assessments/information only

This document outlines procedures about the function and use of the
Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) when assessing eligibility for
Carer Allowance (CA) up until 30 June 2010.

On this Page:

From 1 July 2010

From 1 July 2010, the Disability Care Load Assessment (child)
Determination (DCLAD) (2010) will be used to assess eligibility for all
new claims for Carer Payment (CP) (child) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
(child).

When is the CDAT used

The CDAT is not to be used for any claims or reviews after 1 July 2010.

The overall CDAT score is calculated to determine if the care receiver
qualifies a carer for CA (child).

The Treating Health Professional (THP) score is used as part of the
qualification for Carer Payment (CP) (child). For more information, see
Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under
16.

CA (auto) is automatically available to all recipients of Carer Payment
(CP) (child). The THP score is required, and this is taken from the
Carer Payment Medical Report including functional assessment for a child
under 16 years (SA397) or the Carer Allowance Medical Report for a child
under 16 years (SA333TDR). For customers not eligible for Carer Payment
(child), the CDAT will continue to apply from 1 July 2009 until the care
receiver is first reviewed after 1 July 2010.

Recognised disability

If the carer is only claiming CA (child) and the child has a recognised
disability, the Treating Health Professional does not have to complete
the CDAT questions included on the TDR. However, there needs to be
written evidence of diagnosis of a Recognised Disability by a medical
practitioner because a child with a recognised disability does not have
to be assessed under the CDAT. This also means that the functional
assessment is not required.

If the carer claims CP (child) and the care receiver has a Recognised
Disability the SA397 must be completed by the Treating Health
Professional, as the THP score is used as part of the qualification for
CP (child). If the care receiver already has a current THP score and
this is above 0 only the Carer Payment Medical Report (for a child under
16 years) (SA398) is required as the current THP score would be used as
part of the qualifications for CP (child).

Note: when a record is being updated and it is the case that the carer
of a child with a recognised disability is receiving CA (child) Health
Care Card only, it is essential that the Service Officer check whether
the customer should also be receiving CA payment.

What does the CDAT assess?

The CDAT is a process through which a young person's ability can be
assessed and the level of disability objectively determined. It assists
staff in Service Centres to measure the level of functional ability or
disability of a young person against standards appropriate to their age
in the areas of:

-   communication
-   feeding
-   self-care
-   social and community skills and
-   mobility

The CDAT also takes into account the young person's behaviour and
special care needs. It is designed to identify a significant level of
disability regardless of the type of disability or condition.

It does not measure the care and attention required by the child and
because of its specific purpose, does not attempt to measure all
possible functional abilities.

The CDAT consists of:

-   The SA333TDR, which must be certified by a Treating Health
    Professional.
-   The SA397 which must be certified by a Treating Health Professional.
    This is only used for CP and is not used for CA.
-   the Carer Allowance Functional Assessment for a child under 16 years
    (SA394 v0907) is to be completed by the carer of the child and
    provides details of care provided (issued only if score based on
    Treating Health Professional responses is greater than zero).

If there are inconsistencies between the carer's responses and those of
the Treating Health Professional, or if verification is required, a
process called 'validation' is applied as part of the CDAT process.
Information regarding validation can be found in Policy on the
References page.

Calculation

The CDAT is a system based tool, i.e. the answers to questions are coded
on a screen in the Centrelink system. The system then calculates the
results. While the system calculates the scores in the CDAT, the scores
are actually derived from information provided by the carer and the
Treating Health Professional. To qualify a carer for payment, the child
must have a score of +1 or higher under the CDAT, including a THP score
above zero.

Qualification and payability under Grandfathering provisions

The following carers will maintain qualification and payability under
Grandfathering provisions from 01 July 2010:

Carers who are current or suspended on 30 June 2010 and who were granted
Carer Payment (child) under the Disability Care Load Assessment
Determination (DCLAD) (2009) or Carer Allowance (child) under the (Child
Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) (2001), will maintain
qualification and payability under their existing provisions until they
are selected for review under DCLAD 2010 or lose qualification on or
after 1 July 2010. This group of care receivers will not appear on the
Carer Payment Grandfathered (CRGF) screen.

Carers who are current or suspended on 30 June 2010 and who were granted
Carer Payment (child) due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child
(PDC) or two children who require the equivalent care of a PDC, will
maintain qualification and payability under PDC provisions until they
are selected for review under DCLAD 2010 or lose qualification on or
after 1 July 2010. Carers in this group who reclaim Carer Payment
(child) for the same care receiver will be required to provide a DCLAD
2010 care load assessment and medical report from 1 July 2010. This
group of care receivers will appear on the Carer Payment Grandfathered
(CRGF) screen.

Re-use and reclaim provisions

From 1 July 2010 a Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD)
(2010) must be completed for each care receiver as part of the claim for
CA and/or Carer Payment (CP).

Contents

Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA) for two disabled children

Calculating the treating health professional score for a child under 16
years on or after 1 July 2010

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
