
Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS) quality checking 009-09030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking procedure for the (CAPS).

On this Page:

Objectives

The objective of the quality checking process and procedure is to:

-   give managers and checkers the tools to be able to identify
    strengths and weaknesses in the CAPS business process, highlighting
    opportunities for continuous business improvement, using effective
    quality checking processes
-   make sure quality checkers have the same understanding and are
    completing the checks in a consistent manner by documenting the
    quality checking process

Roles and Responsibilities

Managers are responsible for making sure quality checking is:

-   done as specified in the sample size
-   done by quality checkers who have successfully completed the
    appropriate training
-   completed on (or close to) the next business day to ensure feedback
    is given in a timely manner, issues are addressed, and corrections
    are made immediately (refer to Feedback)

If source documents are hard copies, managers must make sure that the
documents are:

-   held in the section until the quality check is finalised
-   recalled if they are archived before the quality check is finalised

Quality checkers are responsible for:

-   performing the quality checks
-   understanding the quality checking process
-   accessing reference material and determining the correct outcome
-   recording the results of the quality checks
-   providing feedback to the originating staff member regarding the
    outcome of quality checks
-   participating in identifying underlying factors for errors and
    contributing towards continuous improvement

Note: Complete quality checks must be completed by close of business on
the first working day of the new month.

Quality check of own work

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If a quality checker's
own work is selected, it must be passed to another trained staff member
to do the check.

See also: Quality Checking Own Work Policy

Accreditation of Quality checkers

Before undertaking quality checking, selected staff must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   review quality checking procedure and email the manager advising
    they have been reviewed and understood
-   undergo refresher training (of the quality checking process) if
    applicable

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New starters/New Process

Pre-checks will be applied to new starters or where there are new
processes introduced into the programme. Staff will have their work
reviewed and corrected until deemed proficient. The results are not
included in accuracy of processing results.

See also: Quality Checking New Starters Policy

Post-checks

Post-checking will check a statistically valid, randomised selection of
work processed the previous day. The results will be provided to
management and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted Checks

In addition to the pre and post-checks outlined above, targeted checks
provide an opportunity to check other areas of the process independent
of pre and post-checking. Targeted checks for CAPS are:

-   staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy

An Aim for Accuracy for CAPS is undertaken annually.

See Resources for a link to several Aim for Accuracy policies.

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

New starter/new process proficiency standards:

-   Level of pre-check: Time Period - Condition
-   100%:4 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   50%: 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   25%: 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days

Post-checks

Quality checkers are required to perform daily quality checks on a
random sample of CAPS applications entered into both the Customer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) and the CAPS system.

The recommended sample size is 3 applications per day for the team. The
sample size is irrespective of the total amount of applications
processed and is based on:

-   an error rate of 3.5% (±1.3%)
-   a confidence level of 95%

The quality checker is required to randomly select the minimum sample of
applications (three) from the previous day’s work and must ensure
equitable checking across the team.

Amendments to the quality checking sample must adhere to the Changes to
Quality Checking Controls Policy.

See Resources for a link to the 'Security Roles for Authorising Changes
to Quality Checking Controls' Policy

Source documentation

CAPS transactions selected for quality checking can be located from
several different types of source documentation. This includes, but is
not limited to:

-   CAPS Application Forms
-   CAPS letters
-   Debt recovery letters and invoices
-   Cessations
-   Change of circumstance

Errors

Critical Errors

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to the:

-   process affecting the accuracy of payments, registrations and/or
    information to Services Australia and its customers
-   Agency's reputation

Non Critical Errors

An error is defined as non-critical when there is no identifiable risk
to the business process (accuracy of payment and/or registration) and
does not impact on the Agency's reputation.

All errors must be recorded but only critical errors are used to
determine accuracy of processing results.

Medicare errors identified in CAPS quality checks

It is important that all areas of CDMS are checked to make sure the
transaction has been completed in accordance with processing business
rules.

CAPS transactions selected by the Medicare Quality Control System (QCS),
must be checked following the daily procedures for checking public
eligibility transactions.

Feedback

After checking the selected transactions, and before entering results in
the Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS) reporting form, feedback must
be given to the Service Officer. This includes positive feedback for
transactions identified as error free.

Feedback is given the same day the quality check is done or as soon as
possible after the check has been completed. If an error has been
identified, determine the reasons for the error (underlying factors)
with the Service Officer.

Error documentation

Error documents are to be kept on site for analysis when needed. Error
documents and any associated documentation are to be filed in the CAPS
quality result folder.

Method for managing and storing feedback

Information received from feedback is to be stored in the CAPS quality
result folder. (This information can be used to do root cause analysis
on the underlying factors if required.)

Recording Results

Quality checkers need to complete and submit the Continence Aids Payment
Scheme (CAPS) reporting form with all quality checked transactions -
error and error free.

Note: All quality checking results must be submitted by close of
business of the first working day of the new month. Any results recorded
outside this timeframe will not be included in the results for the
month.

Analysing Errors

Daily analysis of errors is undertaken by staff completing quality
checks. This analysis is recorded on the quality checking results
spreadsheet.

Ad hoc analysis may be undertaken by the Team Leader or Technical
Support Officer if there are specific concerns that arise. The results
of any analysis completed may be escalated to the Programme Management
team if required.

The Programme Management team is responsible for the ongoing analysis on
systemic errors.

Correcting errors

If errors have been identified, action must be taken to correct the
error.

The manager and the staff member concerned must be told if errors are
repeated. Together, they can work out a plan of action to make sure this
does not happen again. Action can be in the form of training and must be
made a priority.

Change Management

The Quality Checking Procedure is reviewed and updated by the CAPS
programme and the Quality Framework Section. This includes approved
changes to programme business policies and procedures; and makes sure
that error codes are updated and applicable.

Issues with the Quality Checking Procedure or online recording tool is
recorded and escalated to the Quality Management Section using the
applicable Quality checking Contacts on the Quality processes page. See
Resources for a link.

Changes needing immediate action will be updated accordingly. Changes
that are not critical to quality will be included in the review of the
procedure.

Any identified issues are recorded on the change management spreadsheet.

Quality Checks Enquiries

Enquiries relating to quality checking must be directed to the CAPS team
leader. Enquiries that cannot be resolved on site are directed to the:

-   Helpdesk for procedural enquiries
-   Quality Management Section using the applicable Quality checking
    Contacts on the Quality processes page. See Resources for a link

Resources contains a checklist to identify which items are subject to
Continence Aids Payments Scheme (CAPS) quality checks and which are
subject to Medicare eligibility checks, lists of error status codes and
the error-free code and links to the intranet.

Related links

Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
