-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a carer or care receiver may be absent
overseas but remain qualified for a payment due to the portability of
payment rules.

On this Page:

Portability coding

When a carer and/or care receiver advises of an overseas absence, it may
be necessary to code portability details as well as coding the respite
absence.

Whether portability and/or respite should be coded depends on many
factors. These include:

-   whether the carer is overseas with one or more of the care receivers
-   whether just the carer or just the care receiver go overseas
-   the age of the care receiver
-   whether the care receiver is in receipt of an income support payment

Respite absences

There are separate procedures concerning respite absences, and on
portability for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) depending
on the payment the carer receives.

For detailed assistance for Centrelink staff in determining when to code
portability and/or absence details, see Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer
Payment (CP) interaction of portability and temporary cessation of care
(respite) rules.

Portability Interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns is to be used to assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while overseas. The script can
also be used to assess the customer's entitlement where they are only
thinking about going overseas and want to know about their payment
before making a final decision.

A letter can be sent to the customer confirming the advice given and
providing contact details for Services Australia while overseas.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer contacted or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In most cases, customers do not need to advise the department if they
are leaving Australia temporarily for less than 6 weeks, or when they
have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular circumstances where customers should
advise of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the department.

The Services Australia Website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website for
information on payment while outside Australia.

Contents

Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional rate

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Carer Allowance (CA) customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Related links

Absences for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Portability of Add-ons

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Actioning immigration datalink activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
