
Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS) – Errors and reports 009-09020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information to assist with processing errors and
reports matters regarding the Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS).

Payment errors

CAPS system payment errors

Payments that do not meet CAPS system verifications are listed in the
CAPS Unpaid Report. These payments appear in the CAPS Payment Enquiry
screen with one of the following error codes:

ECRN – no CRN

EPCC – no PCC entitlement

EEXPCC – no valid/current PCC entitlement

EBANK – bank details missing or invalid

EADDR – address details missing or invalid (including RTS flag in place)

EBBRA - bank details are invalid

Common Payment System (CPS) Master data payment errors

Payments that do not meet CPS verifications are listed in the Master
data error report. Errors can occur due to invalid/missing address
details, incorrect bank details or locks on bank accounts.

The payment error will appear in the CAPS Payment Enquiry screen with a
status of SENT and will remain open in the CPS until written back or
successfully banked into the nominated account.

CPS can also have IDOCs in error where payments have partially proceeded
through the CPS process however there is insufficient information for
the payment to proceed to the Open Item stage. IDOCs in error can be
caused by master data problems or systems issues.

Open items and IDOCs in error are extracted from the CPS via the
Software Application Program.

Where a CPS payment error is rectified and then errors again (For
example, bank details incorrectly updated), the payment error will
appear as an open item again. This will create a new date of payment in
the system.

RBA Returns

Payments that cannot be deposited into the nominated account by the RBA
are returned to the CPS. The payment error will appear in the CAPS
Payment Enquiry screen with a status of ERRRBA and will remain open in
the CPS until written back or successfully banked into the nominated
account.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for CAPS and
Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) Helpdesk.

Contents

Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS)

Continence Aids Payment Scheme – Customer contact, application, ceasing
entitlement and review

Continence Aids Payment Scheme – Quality check

Continence Aids Payment Scheme – Other requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
