-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process for Service Officers when they are
referring a Carer Payment (CP) child claim to the Carer Specialist
Assessment Team (CSAT). The CSAT is a team of Centrelink Social Workers
who help determine eligibility for CP claims that do not meet the
qualifying threshold, or when the interpretation of the Care Needs
Assessment (CNA) is unclear or is deemed too complex.

CSAT referrals

In some cases it may be necessary to refer a CP (child) claim to CSAT
social workers for further assessment and a recommendation. Specific
triggers will be identified by Service Officer's indicating the need to
refer the claim to CSAT social workers, the CSAT social worker will
investigate any additional evidence relating to the assessment of care
load requirements.

Referral Triggers

-   Trigger 1: The qualifying Care needs Assessment (CNA) score is a
    'near miss'. Where the Treating Health Professional (THP) score
    meets the required score, but the CNA score falls within an agreed
    'near miss' threshold and the overall result is the claimant just
    misses out on a qualifying rating
-   Trigger 2: the system is unable to deliver a determination (for
    example in exchanged care cases with more than one former spouse) as
    the case may be of a complexity that requires specialist assessment
    by the CSAT social workers to clarify the care arrangements and to
    confirm that the arrangements are consistent with the constant care
    criteria
-   Trigger 3: the CNA validation process or the Service Officer has
    identified a need for the CSAT referral in circumstances that are
    unusual, unique or extreme, and where the consequence of not
    referring could lead to an inappropriate outcome

Referral prior to claim rejection

Referrals to the CSAT social workers meeting the above triggers must be
made prior to the decision to reject CP (child) and should only be
referred by the Service Officer who is processing the claim. If the
carer is to be rejected due to other reasons, such as income or assets,
the claim is not to be referred to the CSAT. The normal rejection
processing protocols would occur.

CSAT assessment

When a trigger is identified as part of the CP (child) claim, the claim
must be referred to the CSAT by the Service Officer. The CSAT social
workers will undertake an assessment and provide a recommendation in a
CSAT report. Delegation for decision making will reside with the Service
Officer.

If the carer is claiming for both CP (child) and Carer Allowance (CA)
(child) and the CSAT amended the qualifying rating, this will apply to
both the CP (child) and the CA (child) assessment.

If the CSAT social worker is unable to contact the customer after 2
attempts, send a Q164 letter to the carer and request contact within 21
days of the date of issue. If no response, refer the claim back to the
processing Service Officer for assessment based on the information
already provided.

Service Officers document the record to note that the claim is not to be
reassessed until the CSAT social work assessment has been completed.

The Resources page contains a list of referral reason codes, links to
carer forms, and a link to the CSAT Office Locator page.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
