
Rejecting a Carer Payment (CP) claim 009-04050120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reasons a paper claim for Carer Payment (CP)
may be rejected and the actions required to process the claim.

Reasons for rejecting a CP claim

Carers who lodge claims for CP may not be eligible because:

-   they do not meet the basic qualification or payability for the
    payment
-   they have lodged an inappropriate or incorrect claim

In most of these circumstances, the claim is rejected.

An exception applies when employment income precludes payability and it
is clear that the customer will become payable within 13 weeks of the
date they lodged the claim. See Processing a claim for Carer Payment
(CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

Note: if the CP claim is rejecting due to income or assets and the carer
has claimed the Home Equity Access Scheme, contact the Home Equity
Access Scheme National team via Fast Note before rejecting the CP claim.
They will determine whether carer assessment details are required for
the Home Equity Access Scheme. To code income and assets, see Coding
income and assets for Centrelink payments and services.

Voluntary withdrawal of a CP claim

Sometimes a carer may withdraw their claim voluntarily. Withdrawn claims
are not rejected as they are deemed to never have been made. If the
carer withdraws their claim, cancel the new claim activity, see
Withdrawal of claims.

Automatic and manual coding when rejecting a CP claim

When making a decision to reject a claim, the system uses information
provided by the carer. While many rejections are automatic based on
claim details on the record, other rejections need to be coded manually.
For example, the carer may be working more than 25 hours per week, or
the care receiver's assets may be too high. Code all information
provided by the carer for their claim to allow the system to use the
most appropriate rejection reason. This will avoid the need to manually
reject the claim failed to reply to correspondence (FRC).

If the carer has lodged a carer questionnaire but not a medical report,
record the carer questionnaire rather than reject the claim FRC due to
the non-return of the medical report. If the carer is already receiving
CA, delete the new Medical report or the Care Assessment Questionnaire
coding and reject the claim FRC. Otherwise, CA will cancel from the date
the claim is submitted and a debt incorrectly raised.

When manually rejecting a claim, send an advice to the carer giving
reasons for the rejection, and detailing the steps in the review of
decision process.

Relevant date

From 1 July 2018, eligible carers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they submit a complete claim with all relevant
supporting documentation.

When rejecting a claim, the relevant date will be the date the claim was
lodged.

Note: different processes apply for carers in vulnerable circumstances,
see

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Rejecting a CP claim for a residence related reason

A carer whose claim is rejected for a residence related reason may have
the claim rejected based on information the carer has provided on their
claim.

However, in some cases visa, citizenship and movement information
provided directly from the Department of Home Affairs datalink may cause
the claim to be rejected. If the datalink has provided the information,
this will take precedence over any conflicting information provided by
the carer.

Rejecting a CP claim FRC – failed to reply to correspondence

If a claim is submitted under an exception category, the claim cannot be
rejected until 22 days has been reached. If the claim is presented via
WLM and 22 days has not been reached, hold the claim until day 22 before
rejecting.

The claim can be rejected at any time when:

-   a claim has been submitted
-   documents lodged are not relevant or inappropriate to the claim
-   the claim has not been lodged under an exception category, and
-   the carer has failed to respond to a request for information

Where the request is to be delivered by Australia Post, a reasonable
timeframe to comply would be 22 days (14 days plus the additional 8
days) from the date of the original notice.

The original documents can be requested again with the claim placed on
hold for 14 days when:

-   a claim has been submitted, and
-   documents lodged are not relevant to the claim, however
-   the carer believed they were lodging the correct information

POI for care receiver: if a CP and/or CA claim has been submitted and
the care receiver's POI is displayed as a supplementary task and POI is
not provided, request the care receiver's POI and place the claim on
hold. Do not reject the claim ‘Failed to Reply to Correspondence’ (FRC)
unless the carer has failed to reply to the request for further
information. When a care receiver's POI has been uploaded by the carer,
this can display on the carer receiver's record instead of the carers.
Service Officers must check the carer receiver's record prior to
rejecting the claim.

List of rejection codes for CP

See Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP).

CP claims submitted prior to the death of a carer

From 1 July 2018, eligible carers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they submit a complete claim with all relevant
supporting documentation.

Note: different processes apply for carers in vulnerable circumstances,
see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Before 1 July 2018, the Contact Claim Details (CCD) screen will be
displayed as part of the indexing process. This screen is 'read only'.
Ensure that when updates are made on the Customer Details Task (CDTS)
screen, they show the same date as on the CCD, unless this date is
incorrect.

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP).

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Processing claims for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Requesting information (CLK)

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
