
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the effect on Carer Payment
(CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) when the child or adult care receiver is
absent from the caring situation.

CA children absent from home

CA (child) carers whose children are absent from home for education,
training or treatment (ETT) and who have utilised their 63 respite days
per calendar year do not lose qualification for CA payment, but are only
payable for the period that the child is in their care. Provided the
child is expected to return to the care situation and an end date has
been coded the customer remains qualified on 'nil rate', and retains
eligibility for the CA Health Care Card (HCC) during the ETT period for
13 weeks after their 63 days of respite have been used.

For an adult CA care receiver, ETT does not apply. The carer loses
qualification when their allocated 63 respite days per calendar year are
exhausted. For more information see Carer Allowance (CA) child care
receiver undertakes education, training or treatment.

Note: ETT does not apply to CP.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not
apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering
provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. However, Temporary Cessation
of Care (TCC) (respite and hospitalisation) rules continue to apply to
CA as normal.

When a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason or changed to CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will be
automatically cancelled. A carer loses their qualification for CP (XWP)
permanently if payment level CA is not reinstated without a gap in
entitlement.

Constant care, education, training or employment and the 25 hour rule do
not apply to CP (XWP). Respite codes that only relate to CP should not
be recorded for any TCC days for a carer receiving CP (XWP).

For more information see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Care receiver participates in work or study activities

A care receiver's participation in paid employment, self-employment,
voluntary work, education or training activities does not impact on the
carer's qualification for CP, if constant care is still being provided.

If there is an absence for a significant part of each day, and it has
been determined that constant care is not being provided every day, the
carer's qualification for CP should be checked. The care receiver's
absence for participation in the above activities may not affect the
carer's ability to provide constant care but each case should be
evaluated on its merits to determine the carers continued qualification
for CP and to ensure that 'constant care' is still being provided every
day.

See Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver
commences or returns to work for further information.

Respite, hospitalisation or imprisonment

If the care receiver's absence is to provide the carer with a break from
the care situation, respite care provisions may apply, or, if the care
receiver is in hospital, hospitalisation care provisions may apply.

If the care receiver is imprisoned, this is also considered an absence
and the carer's qualification for payment may continue. CP and/or CA
will automatically cancel once the 63 respite days per calendar year
limit is reached, if a care receiver exceeds 63 days in imprisonment.

If the carer is in prison, or in psychiatric confinement because they
have been charged with an offence, payment of CP and/or CA will not
continue. CP and/or CA is suspended when the absence is for 13 weeks or
less, and cancelled when the absence is for more than 13 weeks. Respite
days cannot be used.

Contents

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)
when the care receiver is absent

Coding a regular absence for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA) when care receiver is absent

Carer Allowance (CA) child care receiver undertakes education, training
or treatment

Lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score Carer Payment (CP)
where there is an absence of the adult care receiver or their dependent
child

Coding absences for Carer Allowance (CA) where care of the care receiver
is shared

Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP) absences where qualification is
from the combined disabilities of more than one care receiver

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver commences
or returns to work

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
