
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Carer Allowance (CA) income
test and the requirements for carers and their partners to provide their
Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for the purposes of being assessed for
Carer Allowance (CA).

CA income test

From 20 September 2018, to be eligible for Carer Allowance (CA) and CA
Health Care Card (HCC only), the carer's and their partner's combined
Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) must be under $250,000 a year. The same
income limit applies if the carer does not have a partner.

Carers who are exempt from providing their income details for the CA
income test are generally not subject to a CA income review. However,
carers who are only exempt because they or their partner currently
receives Family Tax Benefit, are subject to Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) triggered CA income reviews.

The CA income test is based on the annual ATI of the carer (and their
current partner if they have one). The ATI is the income for a financial
year nominated by the carers. The income details the carer provides can
be for either of the 2 financial years preceding the current financial
year. If the carer is required to lodge a tax return the ATI provided
should be the most recent details verified by the ATO.

Where a carer has a partner, they must both provide income details for
the same financial year. Where the carer or their partner is 60 years of
age or older and they have an account-based income stream, the income
stream is deemed to earn income which is added to the ATI. Deemed income
from account-based income streams is calculated using the current
account balance.

The income test does not affect the rate of CA. The income limit is a
fixed amount and is not indexed.

ATI is the sum of:

-   Taxable income - even if the person is not required to lodge a tax
    return. Where the allowable deductions are greater than the gross
    income, zero taxable income is recorded
-   Target foreign income - foreign income on which Australian income
    tax is not paid
-   Total net investment losses - the sum of net financial investment
    losses and net rental property losses
-   Employer provided fringe benefits in excess of $1,000
-   Reportable superannuation contributions - these include salary
    sacrifice amounts plus personal superannuation contributions for
    which a person has claimed a deduction in their tax return
-   Tax-free pensions or benefits
-   Less child support paid - also known as deductible child maintenance
    expenditure
-   Deemed income from an account-based income stream is added to the
    carer's or their partner's ATI where the account holder is 60 years
    of age or older

For further information, examples of income and how to calculate profit
and losses, see Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference
tax year and assessable income components.

From 1 July 2019, a CA income review may be issued where a carer who is
not exempt from providing their income details for the CA income test,
experiences a change in circumstances or is identified by an ATO
data-match, see Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing.

Exempt from providing income details for the CA income test

CA claimants and recipients are exempt from providing their income
details for the CA income test if they or their partner receive a
qualifying payment or card.

Qualifying payments and cards are limited to the following:

-   an income-tested Centrelink or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
    Income Support Payment (ISP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) paid in fortnightly instalments, or
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Carers and/or partners are considered to receive a payment or card if
the benefit status is current (CUR), current at zero rate (CZR) or
suspended (SUS) for less than 13 weeks.

The system will automatically apply the exemption in most cases. A CA
income review will be triggered by the system if the carer loses their
exemption. A loss of exemption occurs when neither the carer nor their
partner receive a qualifying payment or card. A review will not be
triggered if adjusted taxable income details were previously provided in
the same financial year. A review may also be triggered when a carer's
record (or their partner's record) does not contain the details required
to determine an exemption. For example, DVA customers who have not
previously had a DVA clearance completed or who have no DVA details
recorded.

When a carer has been sent a CA income test review, they must be
encouraged to complete the review to avoid the cancellation of CA, even
when they may be considered exempt from providing their income details.

Centrelink income-tested Income Support Payments (ISPs)

Carers and/or partners are considered to receive a payment if the
benefit status is:

-   current (CUR)
-   current at zero rate (CZR), or
-   suspended (SUS) for less than 13 weeks

The following Centrelink ISPs exempt the carer from providing their
income details for the CA income test:

-   Age Pension (see note)
-   Austudy
-   Carer Payment
-   Disability Support Pension (see note)
-   Farm Household Allowance
-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Parenting Payment Partnered
-   Parenting Payment Single
-   Youth Allowance
-   Special Benefit

Note: Disability Support Blind (DSB) pension and Age Pension Blind (AGB)
pension are not treated as income-tested ISPs for the purpose of the CA
income test unless Rent Assistance (RA) is currently paid with the
pension.

Department of Veterans' Affairs ISPs

The following DVA ISPs exempt the carer from providing their income
details for the CA income test:

-   Age service pension
-   Invalidity service pension
-   Partner service pension
-   Carer service pension
-   Social security age pension (paid by DVA)
-   Income support supplement
-   Veteran Payment

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

A person is only to be considered to receive FTB if they receive any
rate of FTB (either Part A or Part B or both) by fortnightly instalment
or their FTB status is current zero rate (CZR).

An exception applies where a carer is only exempt because they or their
partner receive FTB and are subject to CA income reviews as a result of
Australian Taxation Office data-matching. If CA is cancelled as a result
of this review, the carer is not exempt from providing their income
details for the income test for a subsequent CA claim in the same
financial year if there is no other reason for an exemption.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

A person will be considered to receive a CSHC if their status is SHC/CUR
or SHC/CUR-NOI.

Capturing income details for the CA income test

From 20 September 2018, CA and combined Carer Payment (CP) and CA
claimants who are not exempt from providing their income details for the
Carer Allowance (CA) income test at the time of claim are asked to
provide their Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) details for CA as part of
their claim.

Also from this date, income reviews were introduced for existing CA
recipients (including Carer Allowance Health Care Card (CA HCC only)
recipients) who are not exempt from providing their income details for
the Carer Allowance (CA) income test. Carers can return their income
details using the Carer Allowance Income Review online service. For
information processing these reviews, see Carer Allowance (CA) income
review processing.

Deemed income from account-based income streams is calculated using the
current account balance and added to the ATI details for the person. The
carer must provide a Details of income stream product (SA330) form or
similar schedule from their or their partner's income stream provider
before the new account-based income stream can be added.

Carers will only need to provide income stream details for CA if:

-   the account holder (the carer or their partner) is 60 years of age
    or older
-   the details are not already held on the person's Centrelink record,
    and
-   the carer is not exempt from providing their income details for the
    CA income test

For more information, see:

-   Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year
    and assessable income components
-   Carer Allowance (CA) income test - acceptable evidence of income

Changes to relationship status

Prior to 20 September 2018, there was no requirement for CA claims to
capture partner details. From this date CA claims have captured the
details of the carer's partner and reviews were issued to those carer's
who were required to provide their ATI. The reviews also captured
partner details.

Carer Allowance remains a 'supplementary payment' it's not an income
support payment (ISP).

When a carer and their partner's ATI is recorded in Process Direct (PD)
the income details for each member of the couple are separately recorded
on their own records. When a couple's records are unlinked, due to
separation, assessment of the carer's own income will continue and the
former partner's income will no longer be assessed automatically.
Because the income is recorded on each individuals record there is no
requirement to ask the carer to provide their ATI again when they are
separated.

A Separation details (MOD S) form is not required before unlinking CA
only carers who have separated from their partner. However CA only
carers who advise they are separated under one roof (SUOR) will be
required to complete a Relationship details – Separated under one roof
(SS293) form. See Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof
(SUOR) assessments for more information.

Where a Carer Allowance (CA) only carer who is not exempt from the CA
income test advises they have become partnered, a Partner details (MOD
P) form should be completed jointly by the customer and partner. See
Change in relationship status from single to partnered.

No grandfathering provisions for CA

The CA income test does not have any grandfathering arrangements for
deeming of account-based income streams unlike other payments or
entitlements. Deeming will apply if the carer is not exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test and the account
holder is 60 years of age or older, regardless of when the person
purchased the account-based income stream product or the way the
account-based income stream was acquired.

This means account-based income streams that may be grandfathered (not
subject to deeming) for Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card (CSHC) or
income support payment purposes are still deemed for CA purposes if the
account-holder is 60 years of age or older and the carer is not exempt
from providing their income details for the CA income test.

Account-based income streams that may be grandfathered for CSHC or
income support purposes but included for CA purposes include:

-   account-based income streams purchased before 1 January 2015
-   new account-based income streams created due to a family law split
-   account-based income streams that transfer to a reversionary
    beneficiary

Contents

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - acceptable evidence of income

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) Income Review online service

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
