
Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP) 009-07030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the annual Child Disability
Assistance Payment (CDAP) available for carers of children with a
disability, which is payable in addition to the payment of Carer
Allowance (CA) for the child.

Annual payment

Families caring for a child with a disability may receive an annual
payment of $1,000 to help them purchase assistance for their child, for
example, to purchase a wheelchair, install a hoist in the family home,
modify the family car, or for respite care or therapy. The payment will
be made for each child who qualifies their parent/carer for payment of
Carer Allowance (CA). This money can be spent however the family
chooses.

Eligible customers

Families with children who qualify their parent/carer for payment of CA
on 1 July of the current year will receive the payment.

The following carers will be eligible for Child Disability Assistance
Payment (CDAP):

-   Carers receiving CA (child) for a period which includes 1 July will
    be eligible for the annual payment including carers retrospectively
    granted for a date on or before 1 July, and carers retrospectively
    cancelled with a date of effect after 1 July
-   Carers who receive a CA lump sum bereavement payment for a period
    that covers 1 July
-   Carers with at least one child qualifying for CA (auto) on 1 July

Note: Health Care Card only CA recipients are not eligible for the
annual payment for carers.

An individual can receive more than one CDAP annual payment for children
in their care. It is paid per CA payment for each child, such as, a
carer providing care for two children and receiving two payments of CA
will receive two annual CDAP payments.

Note: if payment of CA is granted after January and backdated to a date
that includes July 1. The CDAP will not be automatically generated and
must be paid manually.

Carer contact

If a carer has not already contacted Centrelink, they are to contact the
Disability Sickness and Carers line.

The Resources page contains contact details for Carer Gateway, examples
of calculations of the Child Disability Assistance Payment and a table
containing Frequently Asked Questions about the payment.

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a carer is claiming or
receiving CA only

Assessing a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) using the combined assessment
scores of two children

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) child care receiver undertakes education, training
or treatment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
