-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to code a paper claim for Carer Allowance
(CA) where the child care receiver is aged under 16 years.

CA (child)

A carer may be entitled to receive CA (child) if they provide care for a
child under 16 years of age. CA provides 2 levels of assistance
depending on the level of disability of the child care receiver:

-   The first level of assistance provides for a Health Care Card (HCC)
    only for the CA child, no fortnightly payment
-   The second level provides payment and HCC for a care receiver with a
    disability or medical condition

From 1 July 2010, a Disability Care Load Assessment Determination
(DCLAD) 2020 must be completed for each care receiver as part of the
claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or CA.

There are specific provisions for re-use of Treating Health Professional
(THP) medical reports and Care Needs Assessments (CNA) for claims lodged
on or after 1 July 2010.

Carer also claims Carer Payment (CP) for child

If the carer has claimed both CA (child) and CP (child), the claim for
CA (child) should be determined before CP (child). If the carer is not
eligible for CA (child) payments, they may be eligible for CA (auto)
payments if CP (child) is granted. Coding a claim for CP may
automatically assess eligibility for CA (auto).

If CA HCC only has been granted and during the CP claim the DCLAD score
has increased (such as via the Care Load Validation process), a manual
assessment of eligibility for CA auto or CA manual may be required.

CA (auto) child care receivers are eligible for a HCC in their name in
addition to any Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) or HCC held by the
carer. Normal concession card hierarchy rules apply.

Carer is not claiming CP for child

Carers may claim CA at payment level and if they do not qualify for
payment their entitlement for a HCC, only CA will be assessed. No
additional claim is required from the carer.

A THP completes a Medical Report - Carer Allowance for a child under 16
years (SA333TDR/SA426). If the THP indicates the child requires at least
14 or more hours of extra care each week, and other eligibility
requirements such as Period of Condition (POC) are met, but the carer
does not qualify for CA at payment level, CA HCC only will be granted.

Both the payment of CA (child) and the HCC-only entitlement require the
carer to submit an online claim or lodge a paper claim.

See Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a customer is
claiming or receiving CA only.

Carer or care receiver is deceased

If a carer or care receiver passes away before the claim is finalised,
additional coding is required within the claim to end-date any
Electronic Messaging (EM) subscriptions.

See Initial contact after someone has died.

Two children in care

A carer may qualify for CA if they have 2 children in their care who do
not individually reach the necessary rating on the DCLAD 2020. However,
the carer can be qualified for CA if the disabilities of these children
when combined have a significant impact (when assessed against the DCLAD
2020, both children's scores on the SA333TDR/SA426 are greater than zero
and they have a combined Care Needs Assessment (CNA) score of 85 or
greater).

Note: a CNA questionnaire is only a contributing CNA if the total score
for that CNA questionnaire is 20 or more.

More than one carer

In some cases 2 carers may receive CA for the one care receiver.

CA can be shared by 2 carers who are not members of the same couple if
they share the care of the same care receiver/s on a regular basis and
the care receiver qualifies for CA including receiving care and
attention on a daily basis from 1 or both carers.

If CA is to be shared, a declaration under section 981 of the Social
Security Act 1991 is to be made before CA is payable to both carers. If
1 carer is already in receipt of CA, the new carer only has to complete
a claim for CA. The child care receiver does not have to be tested a
second time against the List of Recognised Disabilities (LoRD) or the
DCLAD 2020 or previous determination.

If the carer indicates on their claim they share care, the Service
Officer must assess if each carer would qualify for CA under shared care
provisions (whether the other carer has claimed or not). Shared care
provisions do not apply if, for example, the care receiver does not
receive daily care and attention from either of the 2 carers (or their
partner). If shared care provisions do not apply, the Other Carer's
Details field should not be coded.

Note: while shared care provisions do not apply to Carer Payment (CP),
the shared care arrangement must be considered when determining
eligibility or continuing eligibility for CP.

Grandfathering provisions

The following carers will maintain qualification and payability under
grandfathering provisions from 1 July 2010:

-   granted CP (child) under the DCLAD (2009) or CA (child) under the
    Child Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) (2001) will
    maintain qualification and payability under their existing
    provisions. This remains until selected for review under DCLAD 2020
    or losing qualification on or after 1 July 2010. This group of care
    receivers will not appear on the Carer Payment Grandfathered (CRGF)
    screen
-   granted CP (child) due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child
    (PDC), or two children who require the equivalent care of a PDC,
    will maintain qualification and payability under PDC provisions.
    This remains until selected for review under DCLAD 2020 or losing
    qualification on or after 1 July 2010. Carers in this group who
    reclaim CP (child) for the same care receiver from 1 July 2010 to 17
    August 2020 are required to provide a DCLAD (2020) care load
    assessment and medical report. These groups of care receivers will
    appear on the CRGF screen

See Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA) for further information.

Assessing CA Health Care Card (HCC) only

All CA (child) claims must be assessed for eligibility at payment level
before being assessed for HCC only.

This requires the completion of a DCLAD. The DCLAD requires the
completion of a medical report and a CNA.

The CNA is required to support the Care Load Validation process.
Validation is required where there are discrepancies between the
responses provided in the THP medical report and the CNA. Validation may
result in changes to either the CNA or the THP which may change the
carer's entitlement to payment level CA (child).

An assessment for CA HCC (only) should not be completed until:

-   a CNA has been recorded, and
-   any validation triggers on the carer's record have been
    investigated, and
-   the carer has been assessed for CA at payment level

Where a carer fails to return the CNA the claim should be rejected
'failed to reply to correspondence' (FRC).

Note: to qualify for CA HCC only, the condition must be either permanent
or expected to last 12 months or more.

Carer Allowance income test

To be eligible for CA, the carer’s and their partner’s combined adjusted
taxable income must be under $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
amount from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or older. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner. The income test does not affect the rate of CA.

CA claimants and recipients are exempt from providing their income
details for the CA income test if they or their partner receives a
qualifying payment or card that allows an exemption.

Qualifying payments and cards are limited to the following:

-   an income-tested Centrelink or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
    Income Support Payment (ISP)
-   Family Tax Benefit paid in fortnightly instalments, or
-   a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

CA adjusted taxable income details are collected in a CA claim or
combined CP and CA claim unless the claimant is already exempt from
providing their income detail for the CA income test at the time they
complete their claim.

A CA claimant can become exempt from proving their income details or
lose their exemption if:

-   They are not already exempt at the time they complete their claim,
    they may become exempt due to being granted CP or when they or their
    partner are granted a payment or card that qualifies for an
    exemption
-   Alternatively a CA claimant may be exempt at the time they complete
    their claim but when it is processed they have lost their
    exemption - in this case the Service Officer will manually issue a
    Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489) form through
    Process Direct. The Resources page also contains a link to this form

Income details are requested in a paper claim without checking if the
claimant is exempt from providing their income detail for the CA income
test. Income details that are provided should be recorded. The system
will not reject the claim due to the income test if the claimant is
exempt.

See Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year
and assessable income components for more information.

Eligibility for Carer Supplement

See Carer Supplement (CS) for detailed information relating to
eligibility for CS in respect of CA.

The Resources page contains links to forms.

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a customer is claiming
or receiving CA only

Assessing a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) using the combined assessment
scores of two children

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 carers in respect of the same
care receiver

Assessing Carer Payment (CP) when the care is shared

Initial contact after someone has died

Carer Supplement (CS)

Proof of Australian citizenship

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Processing claims for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
