
Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP) 009-04150050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines when and how CP can be cancelled when a carer no
longer qualifies for CP.

Cancellation of CP

Cancellation or suspension of CP can only occur under the following
reasons in the Social Security Administration Act 1999 (SSAA):

-   section 80 - loss of qualification
-   section 81 - failure to comply with certain notices, or
-   section 82 - failure to take action to obtain a foreign payment

The decision to cancel CP depends on whether the loss of payment will be
temporary or not. Document all cancellation decisions with the reason
and the section of the Act.

If a care receiver, nominee or third party notifies a change in
circumstances that may result in the cancellation of CA, follow the
Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) rules when discussing the information
provided. Only release information to a PPE. Do not cancel CA unless it
is clear that the carer no longer qualifies for CA. The Process page
contains more information.

Auto-cancellation of CP

CP can be automatically or manually cancelled when a carer is no longer
entitled as a result of:

-   changed circumstances
-   changed circumstances of the caring relationship, or
-   failing to comply with the requirements for payment

If the loss of entitlement to CP is established, code the change in the
carer's circumstances on their record to reflect the current
circumstances of the carer and the care receiver. This will allow the
system to auto-cancel CP when there is no continuing entitlement.
Consider whether this is the correct decision and advise the carer
whether they qualify for another income support payment.

For example, when a care receiver permanently enters an institution,
they leave the care of their carer. Carers continue to receive CP
payment for 14 weeks from the first date the carer did not provide
constant care. In most cases, it will be the day after the person enters
the institution. CP will auto-cancel after the 14-weeks. This does not
apply to Carer Payment (XWP).

Circumstances where the system will auto-cancel CP include:

death of the carer or death of the care receiver

care receiver permanently entering an institution

change in medical qualification

change in income/assets of the care receiver

change in income/assets of the carer

change in care or no longer caring

care receiver turning 16 years and 3 months of age. CP child will
auto-cancel at 16 years 3 months, if the customer fails to submit the
CTAT on or before the child turns 16 years, or if an adult assessment
has already been finalised and they do not qualify under CP adult
provisions

care receiver with a terminal illness turning 18 years of age. CP child
will auto-cancel at 18 years, if the customer fails to submit the CTAT
on or before the child turns 18 years or if an adult assessment has
already been finalised and they do not qualify under CP adult provisions

failure by carer to report employment income, if required

imprisonment or psychiatric confinement of the carer. Note: respite may
apply when a care receiver is imprisoned but not when a carer is
imprisoned. If the carer is in gaol or psychiatric confinement for:

-   more than 13 weeks due to being charged with an offence, cancel CP
-   13 weeks or less, suspend CP from the date of confinement. If the
    carer is still in gaol or psychiatric confinement after 13 weeks,
    the suspended CP will auto-cancel from the date of confinement

Manual cancellation of CP

Cancel CP if a Service Officer updates a carer and/or care receiver’s
record and the carer no longer qualifies for CP. If CP does not
auto-cancel, manually cancel the CP

If the decision to cancel CP is made by the agency, the Service Officer
must send a letter to the carer with the cancellation reasons and their
review and appeal rights.

If a vulnerable and at risk carer remains without income support payment
for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or cancellation,
the carer may be eligible for manual intervention.

Note: carers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative. Cancel any Manual Follow-ups generated for carers in this
situation.

CA auto

When a carer's CP (child) is cancelled, the related CA (auto) payment
also cancels.

Check if the carer:

is still eligible for CA (child). For example, the carer is still
caring:

-   but the CP (child) is cancelled due to income, or
-   for the child care receiver, but is working above 25 hours
    permanently

wants to test their eligibility for CA once their CP (child) and CA
(auto) has cancelled. Tell the carer they:

-   need to re-claim CA, and
-   if they apply for CA within 28 days of cancellation, their payment
    may be backdated to the date CP was cancelled

is entitled to any other financial assistance

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (XWP)

CP (XWP) is not subject to Temporary Cessation of Care (TCC) for Carer
Payment, constant care, the 25 hour rule or care receiver assessments.
Therefore, some cancellation reason codes cannot be used to cancel CP
(XWP). These include 25H, CAB, CAS, CDE, CIH, CNP, CNQ, HBE, MCQ, NMQ,
NRQ or RBE.

CP (XWP) is still subject to carer payability rules such as the
pension's income and asset tests and portability. CA continues to be
subject to all the normal rules. See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to
Carer Payment.

Effect of other payments on CP

For children born or entering care:

-   on or after 1 October 2016, Paid Parental Leave (PPL) and Dad and
    Partner Pay (DAP) granted to the carer (and/or their partner) are
    treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment for
    CP
-   before 1 October 2016, PPL and DAP are not treated as assessable
    income for CP

PPL or DAP alone is not enough income to reduce CP to nil rate. The
carer would need to have other forms of income for their rate to be
reduced to nil (and therefore cancelled). If CP cancels, it can be
reinstated after the PPL or DAP period ends.

For Carer Payment (XWP) customers, CP will auto-cancel if their only or
last payment level CA is suspended or cancelled for any reason, or
changed to CA HCC only or nil rate due to Education, Training and
Treatment (ETT). However, CP (XWP) will be auto-restored if payment
level CA is restored or reinstated without a gap within 13 weeks. A
Manual Follow-up (MFU) and work item will be produced to assess
eligibility for CP (XWP) restoration manually, where payment level CA is
restored or reinstated without a gap more than 13 weeks later. See
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment.

Home Equity Access Scheme customers

CP customers who receive loan payments under the Home Equity Access
Scheme are eligible to continue receiving their loan payments if CP
suspends for certain reasons. In these circumstances, the CP status is
set to Current Zero Rate (CZR) for reason PLS to enable the loan
payments to continue being paid. During periods of CZR-PLS, the customer
is not eligible to receive any other rate components until the CP
suspension is lifted.

See Home Equity Access Scheme cancellations and rejections.

Suspension of CP

Before suspending CP, the Service Officer must be certain that the
information and/or evidence is sufficient to prove the carer is
temporarily not eligible for CP and that there is a legislative basis to
suspend the payment, and all appropriate action has been taken.

Generally, only suspend payments if:

-   a determination has been made that the carer is not qualified, or
    the payment is not payable, temporarily or for a specific period as
    a result of changes in their circumstances, or
-   the carer has not complied with a request that was reasonable. The
    request may be to provide information held by the carer, to attend
    an interview, or to take action (for example, to obtain a foreign
    payment)

If a decision to suspend CP is determined, the Service Officer must
advise the carer of the suspension reason and their review and appeal
rights, to avoid placing them in financial hardship.

Related links

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Coding a cancellation

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver commences
or returns to work

Death of a carer

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of age pension age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
