
Progress of claim - Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) 009-01010030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document has information to help Service Officers answer enquiries
from carers about the progress of their claim for CP and/or CA.

Progress of carer claims

Carers may regularly contact to enquire about the progress of their CP
and/or CA claim. Advice given to carers may vary depending on which
stage the new claim is at, such as:

-   claim lodgement
-   advise of further information required for a claim
-   internal referrals - Complex Assessment Officer (CAO), Member of a
    Couple (MOC), Financial Information Service (FIS), International
    Services Social Worker (SWO), etc.
-   financial hardship
-   finalisation rejection/grant
-   reassessment following rejection
-   reviews and appeals
-   complaints

Online claims

When a carer submits their CP and/or CA claim online:

-   the Next Steps page advises the carer of any further information or
    documents required for their claim to be submitted
-   carers must provide all the required documents and verify their or
    the care receiver's identity (when there is no Identity Status
    recorded) to be able to submit their claim. Exceptions will be made
    for some vulnerable carers
-   a Progress of Claim DOC may be recorded on the carer's record
-   a claim (Social Application) with full claim details is recorded on
    the carer's record in Process Direct

When an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is used to submit a claim on
behalf of a carer, a Service Officer must ask the carer to accept a
verbal declaration. If a verbal declaration is not accepted by the
carer, the Service Officer will invite the customer to log into their
Centrelink online account, accept the declaration and submit their claim
or send the carer a Customer Declaration Form (CDF) for their signature.
On its return, the CDF will be scanned to the carer’s record.

Lodgement of claim or documentation

CP and/or CA are claimed [] online or via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).
See Claiming CP and/or CA.

Identity documents must be coded at lodgement by Front of House staff
using the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct (PD). For
any documented determinations where carers are unable to confirm their
Identity see Alternative Identity.

Social worker assessments

A processing Service Officer may refer the carer and/or care receiver
for a social worker assessment. The carer and carer receiver's
circumstances, care receiver medical information and claim information
will determine if a social worker assessment is required.

Social workers provide information and make recommendations which
contribute to decisions about qualification. They are not the delegate
and do not make the final decision regarding qualification. Social
workers can help in determining CP and/or CA claims in the following
scenarios:

-   more than 1 carer is caring for a child with severe disability or
    medical condition, or for 2 or more children with a disability
-   carer specialist assessments completed by the Carer Specialist
    Assessment Team (CSAT) for child care receivers
-   carers under the age of 18 or 80 years of age and older
-   child terminal reviews
-   carer adjustment payments
-   under 18 years of age claims which need a face-to-face assessment

Reassessment following rejection

A new claim may not be required if a carer contacts about the rejection
of their CP and/or CA claim and additional information can be used to
reassess the decision.

Reviews and appeals

If the carer does not understand or does not agree with the decision,
they can request an explanation or apply for a formal review of the
decision. See Initial contact about a decision and the review of
decision process.

Complaints

If a complaint is received from a carer, record the details in the
customer feedback tool.

If the complaint cannot be resolved or meets a Complaint Escalation
Reason, escalate the matter to a Level 2 complaint.

Complaints can be escalated via a warm transfer to the Escalated
Complaints and Feedback team or via the Customer Feedback Tool if they
do not want to be transferred at the time.

When not to create a Fast Note work item for urgent claim processing

Do not create a work item for urgent claim processing in the following
scenarios:

-   claim has already been actioned
-   carer is current on another income support payment. These carers are
    not considered to be in hardship or urgent as they are in receipt of
    another income support payment
-   carer is not current on another income support payment and the claim
    is within KPI and has no hardship indicator
-   Carer Allowance only claims

Note: financial hardship provisions do not apply to carer’s transferring
between income support payments, unless their previous payment was
cancelled more than 14 days ago.

A closed DOC can be created to document the discussion, but it should
not remain open. An existing Progress of Claim Note can be annotated in
Process Direct.

The Resources page has contact details for complaints and an example of
a Progress of Claim DOC.

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA)

Social worker assessment of care situations for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA) claims

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Coding identity documents

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Referral to external support services

Alternative Identity

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
