
Carer Payment (CP) (child) care receiver turning 16 years of age 009-03060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the automated and manual process for carers
receiving Carer Payment (CP) (child) when the care receiver turns 16
years of age.

Child with a severe disability or severe medical condition

A carer paid CP (child) under the pre 1 July 2009 profoundly disabled
child provisions, or with a qualifying rating of 'intense' under the
Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) remains
qualified until the earlier of when:

the care receiver turns 16 years and 3 months, or

a determination has been made on a claim:

-   for CP (adult), or
-   another Income Support Payment (ISP)

Carers Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

The Carers CTAT process requires less documentation than a new claim and
the care receiver does not need to provide income or asset details for
the assessment.

Eligible carers are sent an invitation letter when their care receiver
turns 15 years and 9 months (or 17 years and 9 months for a CP child
with a terminal condition), advising they should apply for a transfer by
the due date if they want their entitlement to be assessed under adult
provisions.

Note: CA (auto) continues beyond the child's 16th birthday to 16 years
and 3 months (or 18 years for a CP child with a terminal condition) as
long as the carer remains qualified and payable for CP (child), pending
assessment of eligibility for CP (adult).

Carers can only apply to transfer to the payment they already receive.
For example, they cannot transfer to CP if they only receive Carers
Allowance (CA). If they receive a CA HCC only, they can apply to
transfer to CA for an adult care receiver.

[] Carers subscribed to receive letters to their myGov inbox are advised
in their invitation letter to select the link in their myGov inbox. The
link takes them to the CTAT online service.

If they have an individual nominee, the nominee is also advised about
selecting the ‘Child to Adult Transfer’ from the ‘Tasks’ section in
their Centrelink online account or by going to the menu in their online
account. This is because the link is not sent to the nominee’s myGov
inbox.

Carers can also navigate to the service via their [] Centrelink online
account.

Paper CTAT forms can be downloaded from the Services Australia website
if required and are not included with the invitation letter.

The forms required for the CTAT include:

-   CP and/or CA - Medical Report (for a person 16 years or over)
    (SA332A) to be completed by the care receiver's Treating Health
    Professional. It can be accepted if it was completed by the Treating
    Health Professional after the care receiver turned 15 years and 9
    months of age
-   Child to Adult Transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432) to be completed by the carer. It can be lodged after the
    care receiver has turned 15 years and 9 months of age

The CTAT can only be submitted online before the child level of
entitlement is cancelled. Paper CTAT forms that are lodged up to 13
weeks after the cancellation date are treated as a claim from the date
the forms are lodged.

The invitation letter also provides options for claiming Disability
Support Pension (DSP) and the Ex-Carer Allowance Health Care Card.

Carers who do not receive a CTAT invitation

If the carer’s CP is suspended or cancelled at the time their child care
receiver reaches 15 years and 9 months (or 17 years and 9 months for
terminal conditions), the carer will not be eligible to receive the CTAT
invitation letter.

Carers who contact the agency about the CTAT should be advised that the
suspension/cancellation must be resolved before determining their
eligibility to transfer.

Carers whose CP (child) is restored before the child has turned 16 years
and 3 months (or 18 years if terminal) can apply for a CTAT using any of
the above processes.

If payment is restored before the child turns 16 years and 3 months (or
18 years if terminal) a CTAT invitation letter will issue and a CTAT
task will be available in the carer’s Centrelink online account.

Terminal illness criteria

Carers currently getting CP (child) under the terminal illness criteria
can remain on CP and CA (auto) up until the day before the care receiver
turns 18 years of age. These carers receive an automatic Carers CTAT
when the care receiver with a terminal condition turns 17 years and 9
months.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (XWP)

CP (XWP) recipients are only invited to request a transfer assessment
under adult provisions in respect of Carer Allowance. They remain
qualified for CP (XWP) as long as payment level CA continues without a
break.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason, CP (XWP) is auto-cancelled. This means CP
(XWP) will stop if the transfer is not processed and successful before
CA (child) stops. However, CP (XWP) will auto-restore if payment level
CA is restored or reinstated without a gap within 13 weeks. CP (XWP) can
also be manually restored where payment level CA is restored or
reinstated without a gap more than 13 weeks later.

Note: a carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they
have a break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020. A
break occurs where continuous entitlement stops and is not reinstated or
where it is reinstated with a gap in entitlement.

See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Further information

See Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)
for:

-   eligible carers who will receive a CTAT invitation
-   carers that will not receive a CTAT invitation, and
-   when a new claim will be required

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a carer is claiming or
receiving CA only

Coding a paper claim for Carer Payment (CP) where the care receiver is
16 years of age or over

Transfers to Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer
(CTAT)

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) turning 16 years of age

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
