
Carer Payment (CP) 009-04000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines CP eligibility, claiming and changes of
circumstances.

Government intent

Carers are an integral part of Australia’s health system and are the
foundation of our aged, disability and community care systems. All
carers and care receivers, regardless of their cultural and linguistic
differences, age, disability, religion, socioeconomic status, gender
identification and geographical location should have the same rights,
choices and opportunities as other Australians. They should be able to
enjoy optimum health, social and economic wellbeing and participate in
family, social and community life, employment and education.

CP is an income support payment paid to carers who, because of the
demands of their caring role, are unable to support themselves through
substantial paid employment.

It is a fortnightly payment that includes entitlement to a Pensioner
Concession Card (PCC) or Health Care Card (HCC). To be eligible for CP a
carer must be providing constant care for an adult or child and meet the
pension income and assets tests.

Transfers to CP

Before a carer transfers from another payment to CP, the carer must meet
eligibility and payability criteria for CP, either for a:

-   care receiver aged under 16, or
-   care receiver aged 16 or over

This includes the limitations on absences from care.

Carers wanting to transfer from another payment to CP need to lodge a
claim to ensure eligibility for CP is met.

If the carer loses eligibility for the original payment, a CP claim must
be lodged within 14 days to ensure continuity of payment. This may be
extended up to 13 weeks if the carer’s medical condition was the sole or
dominant cause for not lodging within 14 days.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Wife Pension customers who were also getting payment level Carer
Allowance on 19 March 2020 remain qualified for CP (XWP) as long as
payment level CA continues without a break. They are not required to
satisfy the normal CP requirements including:

-   constant care
-   the 25 hour rule, or
-   CP care receiver assessments

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not
apply to CP (XWP). All CA rules continue to apply as normal.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason (including respite or hospitalisation) or
reduced to a zero rate due to Education, Training or Treatment (ETT), CP
(XWP) will automatically be cancelled.

A carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they have a
break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020.

CP (XWP) customers may wish to claim CP (Standard) for benefits not
available under CP (XWP), or may wish to reclaim CP (XWP) if it has been
cancelled and cannot be restored. The claimant will be assessed under
non-grandfathered provisions first. If they are not eligible for CP
(Standard), they will be granted CP (XWP) if eligible. For more
information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

CP claims

[] Carers can claim by using their Centrelink online account through
myGov. Carers will only need to provide information that is new or
updated. The online claim will be tailored to their circumstances.

A combined claim for CP and Carer Allowance (CA) can be made. The
information provided by the carer may be used to assess eligibility for
either or both payments.

Carers unable or unwilling to claim online can download paper forms at
Servicesaustralia.gov.au/individuals/forms.

Assessing CP claims

Claims for CP (child) are assessed under the Disability Care Load
Assessment Child Determination (DCLAD) (2010). The (DCLAD score
determines if the child qualifies for payments on the basis of the care
load and medical assessment for all CP (child) and Carer Allowance (CA)
(child) claims.

Claims for CP (adult) are assessed under the Adult Disability Assessment
Tool (ADAT). The ADAT measures the functional ability and care needs of
the care receiver. While the system calculates the scores in the ADAT,
these scores are derived from information provided by the Treating
Health Professional (THP) and the carer.

The ADAT has been designed specifically for use in the assessment of an
adult care receiver's functional ability, emotional state, behaviour and
special care needs, to determine their carer's entitlements to CP and/or
CA.

More than one carer for CP

A carer must be personally providing constant care and be considered the
primary carer to qualify for CP. If there is more than one carer,
details of the amount and frequency of the care must be provided to
determine whether each person personally provides constant care. In
situations where the care is shared equally, and neither carer provides
a sufficient degree of care to meet the requirements, neither carer
qualifies for CP.

CP (child) care receiver turning 16

The Carers Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT) process requires less
determination than a new claim and does not require the care receiver to
provide income or asset details for the assessment.

Eligible carers are sent an invitation letter when their care receiver
turns 15 years and 9 months (or 17 years and 9 months child with a
terminal condition), advising they should request a transfer by the due
date if they want their entitlement to be assessed under adult
provisions. See Carers Child to Adult Transfer.

If the transfer is not completed before the CP (payment level) child
turns 16 years and 3 months of age, (or 18 for a CP child with a
terminal condition) the payment(s) will automatically cancel.

Instructions on how carers can set up a MyGov account will be in the
invitation letter and on the Services Australia website. For
continuation of payment, the CTAT must be submitted [] online (or if a
paper form, lodged), before the child level of entitlement is cancelled
(i.e. 16 years and 3 months or 18 years).

Carers of children with a milestone age of 15 years and 9 months (or 17
years and 9 months) on or after 2 December 2017 are no longer restored
and backdated to the date of cancellation where the CTAT form is
received within 13 weeks after the date of cancellation.

Change of circumstances for CP

CP carers are obliged to advise Services Australia of any event or
change in circumstances that could affect their payment.

This includes contact details, and changes to accommodation or
relationship. It also includes changes in care arrangements and
cessation of care.

Death of a carer

The department needs to check whether the carer was receiving CP and/or
CA.

A decision needs to be made about whether the deceased estate is
entitled to a bereavement payment.

If the care receiver has also died, an assessment is required on whether
the deceased person is entitled to a bereavement payment (or would have
been if they had not themselves died).

For more information see Death of a carer (CLK).

Death of a care receiver

Before any action is taken, confirmation of death must be provided. Once
confirmed, it is important that the death be recorded as soon as
possible to ensure that carers receive their correct entitlement.

Qualification for bereavement assistance depends on whether the carer
receives CP and/or CA and on the circumstances of the carer/care
receiver before the death.

For more information, see Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA)
customers and bereavement assistance.

CP overseas absences

When a carer and/or care receiver advises of an overseas absence, it may
be necessary to code portability details as well as coding the respite
absence.

There are separate procedures concerning respite absences, and
portability for CP and/or CA depending on the payment the carer
receives.

CP cancellations, suspensions and restorations

CP can be suspended and/or cancelled when

-   a carer is no longer entitled to the payment as a result of changes
    in their or their care receiver's circumstances, or
-   they have failed to comply with the requirements for payment

Before suspending or cancelling a carer’s payment, confirm that the
carer is not eligible for payment. If deciding to suspend or cancel
payment, act fast to advise the carer of the reason and their review and
appeal rights, to avoid placing them in financial hardship.

When restoring CP, confirm the carer's eligibility restart payments from
the date they became eligible again. If there has been a change in
circumstances, update relevant details on their record before restoring
payments to avoid paying incorrect arrears.

Contents

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Transfers to Carer Payment (CP)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the same care
receiver

Carer Payment (CP) claims for care receivers aged under 16

Change of circumstances for Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Payment (CP) cancellations, suspensions and restorations

Related links

Progress of claim - Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) claims for care receivers aged 16 or over

Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Death of a carer (CLK)

Death of a care receiver (CLK)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) overseas absences

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
