
Calculating the total Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2020) score 009-05030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about calculating the Disability Care
Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2020) score for a child under 16
years of age. The DCLAD (2020) score determines if the carer qualifies
for payments on the basis of the care load and medical assessments for
all Carer Payment (CP) (child) and Carer Allowance (CA) (child) claims.

On this Page:

Qualifying rating for DCLAD (2020)

The DCLAD (2020) requires all carers claiming CP (child) (excluding
terminal care receivers) and CA (child) (excluding List of Recognised
Disabilities (LoRD) care receivers) to achieve a qualifying rating of
'intense'.

A qualifying rating of 'intense' is achieved if the carer and care
receiver achieve a score of:

-   'greater than zero' on the Treating Health Professional (THP)
    functional assessment
-   '85 or greater' on the Care Needs Assessment (CNA)

Assessing the DCLAD (2020)

Assessing the DCLAD (2020) involves 2 parts. The THP is required to
complete the medical report and the carer completes a CNA. Both CP
(child) and CA (child) are assessed using the same THP and CNA scores.

See Calculate the Treating Health Professional score for a child under
16 years on or after 1 July 2020 before continuing with this procedure.
Note: this procedure only relates to calculating the total DCLAD score.

It is possible to assess multiple and combined claims at the same time
when assessing the DCLAD (2020).

Validation

All claims for CP and/or CA (child) are checked for validation triggers.
This identifies if there are inconsistencies in some of the responses
provided in the THP and CNA questions relating to the child's behaviour
and special care needs.

The system identifies if validation is required by determining if the
sum total scores of the answers identified as inconsistent between the 2
question-sets would result in a change to the qualifying scores, and
therefore result in a grant of payment which might be rejected or a
rejection of payment which might be granted.

The Resources page contains a table that shows the validation question
triggers.

Grandfathering provisions

Carers who are current or suspended on 30 June 2010 and were:

-   granted CP (child) under the DCLAD (2009) or CA (child) under the
    Child Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) (2001) will
    maintain qualification and payability under their existing
    provisions. This remains until they are selected for review under
    DCLAD 2020 or lose qualification on or after 1 July 2010. This group
    of care receivers will not appear on the Carer Payment Grandfathered
    (CRGF) screen
-   granted CP (child) due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child
    (PDC), or two children who require the equivalent care of a PDC,
    will maintain qualification and payability under PDC provisions.
    This remains until they are selected for review under DCLAD 2020 or
    lose qualification on or after 1 July 2010. Carers in this group who
    reclaim CP (child) for the same care receiver from 1 July 2010 to 17
    August 2020 must provide a DCLAD (2020) care load assessment and
    medical report. These groups of care receivers will appear on the
    CRGF screen

Multiple medical reports

If a carer lodges multiple medical reports, usually the most recent
medical report is used for the CP/CA assessment. However the following
factors must be considered if multiple medical reports are lodged, as on
some occasions the older medical report will be used for the CP/CA
assessment.

For carers who lodge multiple medical reports, a Service Officer must
check the following:

-   is each medical report an accurate reflection of the care receiver’s
    care needs
-   the date of each medical report
-   the qualifications of the THP (are they on the approved THP list)
-   the relevance of the THP qualification in relation to all of the
    care receiver’s conditions

Where multiple medical reports have been lodged, but only 1 medical
report is being used for the assessment, only this report should be
recorded.

If this occurs, the carer may not be qualified at claim but:

-   becomes qualified and the early claim provisions apply
-   ceases to be qualified (this happens when a subsequent medical
    report is lodged and there has been a reduction is in the care needs
    which precludes payment. In this case both medical reports were an
    accurate reflection of the care needs at the time they were
    completed)

Note: It is possible for the latest medical report to reflect the care
receiver’s care needs from a date after the claim was submitted and for
the claim to be granted from the date of lodgement. See the Resources
section for examples of when multiple medical reports are lodged for the
same claim.

Related links

Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) (2020)

Calculating the Treating Health Professional score for a child under 16
years on or after 1 July 2010

Coding the paper Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Care Needs
Assessment for a child under 16 years (SA408 and SA394)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
