
Carer Restoration workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03110020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for restoring Carer Payment (CP)
and/or Carer Allowance (CA) using the Carer Restoration workflow when a
carer's qualification for payments has been re-established after a
cancellation or suspension of payments.

Restoration of CP and/or CA and eligibility

Restoration occurs as a result of a change of circumstances, a review of
Services Australia decision or after specified events have made them
temporarily ineligible for payments.

When restoring CP and/or CA, it is important to re-establish the carer's
eligibility and to recommence payment from the date they became eligible
again. If there has been a change in circumstances, update relevant
information on the system before restoring payments to avoid incorrect
arrears being paid.

Where CP and CA are being restored the Carer Restoration Workflow must
be used to restore CA first and then CP (except where payment was
cancelled CID). If only CP is restored or is restored first for a child
care receiver, CA auto may be granted instead of CA manual. This will
not be automatically corrected if CA is restored later.

Restoration of CP (XWP)

If CP (XWP) has been cancelled, it can be restored automatically or
manually if eligible, depending on the situation. A CP (XWP) customer
loses their qualification for CP under grandfathering provisions and CP
(XWP) can not be restored if payment level CA entitlement is not
reinstated without a gap. See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Carer Restoration Workflow

The Carer Restoration workflow cannot be used for third party processing
where the care receiver is not a dependent child or partner of the
carer.

Within the workflow there will be detailed help and direct links to
Operational Blueprint.

To make initial decisions about restorations, see:

-   Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)
-   Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

The Resources page contains information about what is required for a
carer to have their Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
restored.

Related links

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) inter-environment change of
address

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Suspension of Carer Payment (CP)

Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Returning to Australia

Return To Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA) where previously
re-granted after a cancellation due to exceeding respite bank

Continuation of respite after the expiry of hospitalisation

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
