
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements to process information about
child care receiver Age Milestone Mandatory reviews for CP (child) and
CA (child).

Carer review

The purpose of carer reviews is to establish and determine:

-   that the care receiver's care needs continue to qualify the carer
    for payment
-   that the carer continues to provide constant care for CP and care
    and attention for CA, and
-   if there are any changes in the carer's and/or care receiver's
    circumstances

To be selected for an Age Milestone Review, carers must be paid CP for a
mainstream care receiver under 14 years and 9 months of age.

Where the carer is paid CA for a child, CA will be reviewed at the same
time as CP.

The review auto-starts when a child care receiver reaches the following
age milestones:

-   4 years 8 months
-   13 years

Wife Pension transfers to CP (XWP)

Age Milestone reviews do not apply to CP (XWP) - CP that is paid under
grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. However, CP
(XWP) carers are subject to child medical reviews and adult medical
reviews for their CA care receivers.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled or changed to CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will auto-cancel. A CP
(XWP) carer loses qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they have a
break in payment level CA entitlement. See Transfer from Wife Pension
(WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

CA only children

Carers receiving CA only and CA HCC only for a child or additional
children will not be selected for an Age Milestone Mandatory review.
These carers will be reviewed under the Child Medical Reviews for Carer
Allowance (CA) (child). See Carer Allowance (CA) (child) Health Care
Card (HCC) only reviews.

Review process

At the initial contact, the following forms are issued to the carer:

-   Review of Carer Payment and Carer Allowance - Care Needs Assessment
    for a child under 16 years - SA416, and
-   Review of Carer Payment and Carer Allowance Medical Report (for a
    child under 16 years) - SA418

The carer has 28 days to complete the forms. In some circumstances, the
carer may need more time to return a medical review and request an
extension due to difficulties or delays in getting their forms completed
by a doctor or Treating Health Professional (THP). The granting of an
extension is at the Service Officer's discretion and they will need to
discuss the reasons for the request with the carer.

If the carer fails to respond within 28 days, a reminder letter is sent
with no forms enclosed.

If the carer fails to respond to the reminder letter within 28 days (56
days in total), payments are suspended. If no further response is
received within 13 weeks of suspension of payments, payments will be
cancelled.

If the carer returns only 1 part of the review and 28 days has passed
from the date of issue, process the review activity. This will result in
a cancellation for failing to return either the Medical Report or Care
Needs Assessment.

Encourage carers to return the Care Needs Assessment section of the
review as soon as possible, as recording the return of the Care Needs
Assessment will prevent the carers payment being suspended by removing
the activity from the FAL screen.

Note: Child Care Load reviews, service components 427, 428 and 430, are
not able to extended or deferred.

If the care receiver has more than 1 carer, both carers will be reviewed
at the same time.

Manual reviews

The following CP (child) qualification types will have the Age Milestone
Mandatory review completed manually:

-   combined care
-   multiple care
-   exchanged care

Review exemptions

The following customer groups are exempt from this review:

-   carers currently receiving CP (XWP)
-   carers paid CP and CA for a child with a disability or medical
    condition on the List of Recognised Disability (LoRD) used to
    determine Carer Allowance eligibility
-   carers paid CP for a child care receiver assessed under the pre 1
    July 2009 'Profoundly Disabled Child - severe medical condition'
    criteria (non-behavioural condition)
-   carers paid CP for a child care receiver assessed under the Short
    Term or Episodic conditions
-   children with an assessed Care Load score of >+ 300 and THP score >=
    4.00 and condition is 'relatively stable' or 'becoming worse over
    time'
-   carers granted CP and CA within the previous 12 months for the child
    care receiver
-   carers who have had an Age Milestone Mandatory or Care Load review
    within the previous 12 months for the child care receiver

Related links

Reviews of terminal illness for Carer Payment (CP) child

Care Load reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Medical reviews for child care receivers

Carer Payment (CP) (child) care receiver turning 16 years of age

Reviews of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing a recognised disability

Medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) (adult)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
