-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the requirements and process for restoring CP
after cancellation or suspension.

Cancellation and suspension of CP

CP may be cancelled or suspended due to:

-   a changes in circumstances
-   failure to return a CP review
-   events resulting in the carer being temporarily or permanently
    ineligible for payment, or
-   entering an extended employment extension period

Payment can be restored when the carer's qualification for CP has been
re-established.

Restoration of CP

When restoring CP, it is important to re-establish the carer's
eligibility and to restart CP from the date they become eligible again.
If there has been a change in circumstances, the carer's record must be
updated with the relevant information before restoring payments. This
will avoid incorrect arrears.

Where CP and Carer Allowance (CA) are being restored, the Carer
Restoration workflow must be used to restore CA first and then CP
(except where payment was cancelled reason CID). If only CP is restored
or is restored first for a child care receiver, CA auto may be granted
instead of CA manual. This will not auto-correct if CA is later
restored.

If CP was cancelled or suspended for failing to return review forms, CP
can be restored from the date of cancellation/suspension if the carer:

-   returns their form(s) within 13 weeks of the cancellation or
    suspension date, and
-   remains qualified

In these instances, refer the review activity to Carer Processing
Services for processing. See the Process page for instructions.

If CP was cancelled due failing to submit their CP Child to Adult
Transfer (CTAT), the carer must re-claim by submitting an online claim
or having an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) run. See Claiming Carer
Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) for online claims.

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

If CP (XWP) has been cancelled, it can be auto-restored or manually
restored if eligible, depending on the situation.

CP (XWP) may be auto-restored if payment level CA entitlement is
reinstated without a gap and within 13 weeks of the date of effect of
suspension or cancellation, or a change to CA HCC only or nil rate.

A manual follow up (MFU) is produced to restore CP (XWP) manually if
payment level CA is restored without a gap after 13 weeks, or CP (XWP)
grandfathering was coded manually.

A CP (XWP) carer loses their qualification for CP under grandfathering
provisions and CP (XWP) cannot be restored if payment level CA
entitlement is not reinstated without a gap.

See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Carer overseas

If CP was cancelled or suspended because the carer was overseas in
excess of the allowable portability period, see Carer Payment (CP)
customer going overseas to restore payments.

Carer released from prison

Carers who have been released from prison must have their release date
confirmed before they can be restored. Confirm the date of release with
the appropriate state corrections authority. The Resources page of
'Confirming prison admission and release dates' contains links to
contacts for confirming release.

If CP was cancelled for failing to report on a fortnightly basis and the
carer contacts within 13 weeks, their payment can be restored.

Re-claiming CP

[] If CP has been cancelled for more than 13 weeks, the carer must
re-claim by:

-   submitting an online claim, or
-   having the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) run

The online claim and ACC will determine if a new medical report or Care
Needs Assessment is required. See Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or
Carer Allowance (CA).

If CP has been suspended for more than 13 weeks, CP will usually cancel
and the carer must reclaim.

If CP has been cancelled because the carer has exceeded their balance of
63 days hospitalisation and/or respite absences in a calendar year, CP
cannot be restored. The carer must re-claim once the care receiver
returns to their care. If the carer re-claims CP in the same calendar
year as the cancellation, and again ceases to provide care, no
hospitalisation days or respite days will be available until the
following calendar year, unless their CP can be extended for a 'special
reason'.

If CP was cancelled due failing to submit their CP Child to Adult
Transfer (CTAT), the carer must reclaim.

Note: while there is no limit to hospitalisation days for CP (child) or
CA (child) care receivers, the 63 day respite limit still applies. Code
all absences.

Whereabouts unknown

If CP has been cancelled or suspended whereabouts unknown (WUK) the
payment may be restored with full arrears if the carer was qualified and
retained payability for their payment during the cancellation or
suspension period.

A carer may receive full arrears if contact is more than 13 weeks after
the decision to cancel or suspend payment. This is because it is assumed
the carer did not receive advice of the decision to cancel or suspend if
they were not at their known address and/or advice of the decision was
returned to Centrelink. This means the date of effect of the restoration
is the date of the original decision (date of suspension/cancellation).
See the References page for links to policy and legislation.

Consider each carer's circumstances individually to determine if they:

-   could be taken not to have received advice of the decision to cancel
    or suspend, and
-   retained qualification and payability during the period, and
    therefore receive arrears upon restoration

Care receiver with incorrect death action

If a death is incorrectly recorded on a care receiver's record, for
example, when they are not deceased, this will affect the carer's CP.

CP will be reassessed for a bereavement period depending on if the carer
has other care receivers. In some cases, the carer may also be paid a CP
lump sum bereavement payment. CP must be restored if it has been
cancelled. Undo the death action on the care receiver's record before
restoring the CP.

Extended employment suspension period

Carers receiving CP may enter an extended employment suspension period
for up to 2 years if their partner receiving Disability Support Pension
(DSP), Age Pension or an eligible DVA payment (DVA Age Pension,
Invalidity Service Pension, Income Support Supplement and Veteran
Payment) enters an extended employment suspension period.

Carers in an extended employment suspension period will have a benefit
status of CAR SUS-EPP.

If the carer becomes payable again within the 2 year suspension period,
they can request to have their payment restored instead of completing a
new claim.

If the carer requests a restoration but is no longer providing constant
care to the care receiver, the change on circumstances should be
recorded and CP cancelled.

If the carer requests a restoration, but is not payable for any other
reason/s (for example, income and/or assets over the limit), they can
remain suspended for the remainder of the 2 year period.

The Resources page contains information about what carers may be
required to do before CP can be restored.

Related links

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA) where previously
re-granted after a cancellation due to exceeding respite bank

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Carer Restoration workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Continuation of respite after the expiry of hospitalisation

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Payment deductions

Returning to Australia

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre Call
staff for pension payments

Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation (CLK)

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

Extended suspension periods for pension payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
