[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to cancellations, suspension
and restorations of Carer Payment (CP) and the corresponding workflows.

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for CP

Cancellation or suspension of Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA)
can only be done under the following reasons of the Social Security
Administration Act 1999 (SSAA).

-   s80 SSAA - loss of qualification
-   s81 SSAA - failure to comply with certain notices, or
-   s82 SSAA - failure to take action to obtain a foreign payment

Eligibility for CP

The choice to cancel or suspend CP is determined by whether the loss of
payment will be temporary or not. Any determination to cancel or suspend
must be documented with the reason and the section of the act quoted.

Cancellation of CP

Carer Payment (CP) can be automatically or manually cancelled when it
has been identified a carer is no longer entitled as a result of changes
in either their circumstances, or the care receiver's circumstances, or
if they have failed to comply with the requirements for payment. Before
automatically or manually cancelling CP, care should be taken to
establish that the carer is no longer eligible for payment.

See Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA).

Suspension of CP

CP and/or CA can be suspended and/or cancelled when a customer is no
longer entitled to the payment as a result of changes in their or their
care receiver's circumstances, or if they have failed to comply with the
requirements for payment.

Generally, appropriate requests for information or action are issued to
customers prior to any suspension action being considered and the
customer has been given reasonable time to respond to the request.

CP cannot be suspended pending investigation. Before a payment is
suspended or cancelled, the decision maker must be satisfied that there
is sufficient evidence that the carer is either not qualified for the
payment or the payment is not payable.

If the decision to suspend CP is made by Centrelink, prompt action
should be taken to issue a notice of decision to the carer. This advice
must clearly outline the reason their payment was suspended, including
the date of effect and the payment type together with the relevant
section(s) of the legislation. The advice must also include their review
and appeal rights. If it is necessary to suspend CP, and the carer is
also receiving CA it may also be necessary to suspend CA.

Notices of Decision must include:

-   details as to the information or action required
-   a timeframe for response (noting that this must be reasonable)
-   consequences of non-compliance
-   the relevant legislative reference under which the request has been
    made, and
-   the customers/carers review and appeal rights

A manual review should also be coded for the Service Officer to
follow-up the suspension of CP at a later date. See Suspension of
payments (CLK).

Restoration of CP

When restoring Carer Payment (CP) after cancellation or suspension, the
carer’s eligibility must be re-established and payment commenced from
the date the carer became eligible again. Changes of circumstances since
suspension or cancellation must be updated on the system before
restoration to ensure correct entitlements are paid.

Cancellation of Carer Payment CP (XWP)

CP (XWP) can be suspended, cancelled or restored automatically and
manually, depending on the reason.

CP (XWP) will automatically be cancelled if:

-   the carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or cancelled
    for any reason, or
-   changed to CA HCC only or nil rate due to Education, Training and
    Treatment (ETT)

CP (XWP) will be automatically restored if payment level CA is restored
or reinstated without a gap within 13 weeks. A Manual Follow Up (MFU) is
produced if reinstated without a gap after 13 weeks.

Certain cancellation codes cannot be used for CP (XWP) because it is not
subject to care receiver assessments or to care requirements (for
example, constant care and the 25 hour rule). Carer level assessments
such as the pension income and asset tests, portability rules and other
carer playability rules still apply as normal. For more information, see
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Carer restoration workflow for CP

When restoring Carer Payment (CP), it is important to re-establish the
carer's eligibility to recommence payment, from the date the carer
became eligible again. If there has been a change in circumstances,
update relevant information on the system before restoring payments to
avoid incorrect arrears being paid.

The Carer Restoration workflow cannot be used for third party processing
where the care receiver is not a dependent child or partner of the
carer. Within the workflow there will be detailed help and direct links
to Operational Blue Print.

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for CP

The Centrelink system uses codes when a decision to cancel or suspend a
payment, or to reject a claim, is recorded. A description of the code is
used when communicating with customers. Carer Payment (CP) may be
cancelled, rejected or suspended due to the customer not meeting
specific eligibility requirements or for various other reasons. The
customer will receive a letter explaining the reason for non-payment.

Contents

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Carer Restoration workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Suspension of payments (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
