
Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care 009-04070010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers assess
short term care provisions for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)
(child).

On this Page:

Short term care provisions

These provisions apply when a care receiver aged under 16 years of age
has a severe disability or severe medical condition that is expected to
require care for a 'one off' period - at least 3 months but less than 6
months (this is it is not expected to re-occur). If the period of care
extends beyond 6 months, the carer may be considered for mainstream CP
(Child).

In addition to the above, to be eligible for payment of CP (child) under
the short term care provisions:

-   the carer must personally provide constant care to the care receiver
-   the care receiver attains a qualifying rating of intense
-   the carer must complete the carer assessment process
-   the carer must meet the required threshold for the level of care
    provided to the care receiver, assessed using the Disability Care
    Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD (2010)

When CP (child) is granted due to short-term care, the care receiver is
issued with a Health Care Card with entitlement for the dates of the
short term care.

Extension of short term care

The carer will need to provide a Medical Certificate for Carer Payment
(for a child under 16 years) Extension and Reclaim of Episodic
Care/Extension of Short Term Care (SA395) completed by a Treating Health
Professional (THP).

This must be provided before CP (child) cancels for an extension to be
approved. If CP (child) cancels the carer will need to reapply for CP
(child) short term care.

Carer Allowance (CA) (auto)

CA (auto) is available to all recipients of CP (child).

If CP (child) cancels, CA (auto) will cancel automatically at the same
time. The customer will need to lodge a new claim for CA (child) if the
child requires and receives additional daily care due to their
disability or medical condition.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information for carers and the medical certificate for extending CP for
short term care.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for two to four children each
with a disability or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and one or
two children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Payment (CP) for care receivers aged under 16

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
