
Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years or over 009-04030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers when assessing a
claim for Carer Payment (CP) for an adult care receiver who is aged 16
years or over.

On this Page:

Carer requirements

To be eligible for CP a carer must personally provide constant care, for
either:

-   An adult with an Adult Disability Assessment (ADAT) score of 25 with
    a minimum Treating Health Professional (THP) score of 10, or
-   An adult with a lower ADAT score of 20 with a minimum THP score of 8
    where the care receiver provides care for a dependent child. The
    care receiver's dependent child must be under 6 years of age, or
    6-16 years attracting CA. See Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)
    under the Lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) provisions

The care must be expected to be for a minimum period of 6 months (unless
the care receiver is in the final phase of a terminal illness and not
expected to live more than 3 months).

The carer will also need to meet all the following

-   satisfy the residence requirements
-   provide care in the home of the care receiver (the carer is not
    required to live with the care receiver)
-   have income and assets below the maximum allowed under the pensions
    income and assets tests

In certain situations, 2 or more carers may qualify for CP for the same
care receiver aged 16 years or over.

Carers can participate in paid work or study and still qualify for CP as
long as the total time they are not providing constant care, including
the time taken to travel, does not exceed 25 hours per week.

If a care receiver is in respite care (not hospital) at the time a carer
lodges a claim, see Complications to Grants of Carer Payment and/or
Carer Allowance.

Carers of workforce age receiving CP are eligible for Working Credit. If
a carer has unused working credits or a Student Income Bank (SIB), they
may be able to restore them within 12 months.

Care receiver requirements

To qualify a carer for CP (16 years or over) a care receiver must:

be either:

-   an Australian resident, or
-   a higher ADAT score adult who is receiving a social security pension
    and CP may be granted to another person for the adult under a
    scheduled international social security agreement

meet income and assets test requirements

-   be receiving a social security pension or benefit, or a Service
    Pension, or Income Support Supplement (ISS), or Veteran Payment, or
    would receive one of these payments if they have been an Australian
    resident long enough, or
-   satisfy the non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test
    (noting that some assets are disregarded)

require care permanently or for a minimum period of 6 months (unless the
care receiver is in the final phase of a terminal illness and is not
expected to live more than 3 months)

Transfer from Wife Pension to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Wife Pension customers who were getting payment level Carer Allowance on
19 March 2020 qualify for Carer Payment (XWP) under grandfathering
provisions as long as payment level CA continues without a break. They
are not required to satisfy the normal CP requirements such as constant
care, the 25 hour rule, or CP reviews including the Care Receiver Income
and Assets (CRIA) test. However, pension income and asset tests continue
to apply. Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation)
rules do not apply to CP (XWP) however, CA rules continue to apply to CA
as normal.

When a CP (XWP) customer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason (including due to respite or hospitalisation)
or reduced to a zero rate due to Education, Training or Treatment (ETT),
CP (XWP) will automatically be cancelled. A carer will lose
qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they have a break in payment
level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020. For more information, see
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Age considerations

While there are no legislative age limits applicable to carers, claims
from carers under 18 years of age, or 80 years of age or older, require
a mandatory referral to a social worker.

It is necessary to ensure that the carer can and does provide the care
receiver with the level of care and attention on a daily basis that is
required. A very young or elderly carer may have difficulty accessing
support services and resources. A social worker can provide assistance
in this regard.

Referral to a social worker

A check for basic qualification (e.g. residence, income and assets) is
to be completed before the referral to a Social Worker to ensure
unnecessary referrals are not made. Once basic qualification can be
established, all carers under 18 or over 80 years of age must be
referred to a Centrelink social worker before the claim is finalised.
The referral is to ensure that the carer has the physical and emotional
capacity to provide the level of care required and also to provide
information and assistance in accessing support services.

A social worker will assess and document the care situation and, where
possible, visit the carer and provide an assessment to ensure that:

-   the carer has the physical and emotional capacity to provide the
    level of care required
-   a very young or elderly carer can access support services and
    resources

For carers under the minimum school leaving age in the state of
territory in which they live, the social worker should check that the
appropriate education authority has given permission for the young
person to leave school.

Where there are concerns about the capacity of the carer to provide the
appropriate level of care, regardless of their age, advice from a social
worker should be sought.

If the care receiver has passed away before the claim is finalised, the
referral to the social worker is not required. A decision should be made
on the evidence available and if in doubt advice sought from the Carer
Helpdesk.

Social worker assistance in determining claims

A social worker can provide information to help a Service Officer make a
decision about qualification for CP including:

-   whether the carer can and does provide the care receiver with the
    constant care required
-   the care receiver's personal care or supervision needs in the home
-   the level of care or supervision actually being provided by the
    carer
-   whether the carer has the physical and/or emotional capacity to deal
    with the care receiver's care needs

Information provided by a social worker can contribute to a decision
about qualification for CP, but the Service Officer makes the decision
about qualification. CP should not be rejected or cancelled without
contacting the carer and/or THP to discuss conflicting information.

The Service Officer should update the carer's record to include the
outcome/ recommendation of the social worker assessment.

Care receiver is a carer

There is no legislative restriction on a carer receiving CP for a care
receiver who in turn receives CP for caring for another care receiver.
However, in this situation, a social worker can provide assistance to
determine whether both carers are personally providing constant care and
therefore qualify for CP.

Although social workers may provide a variety of information that
contributes to decisions about qualification, the final decision
regarding qualification is not made by them. See Social worker
assessment of care situations for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA) claims for more information.

When granting CP in this situation the error message 'Cannot link carer
to carer' may prevent the claim from being finalised:

-   The Service Officer must approach the relevant Level 1 contact
    (Senior Service Officer for example) who can escalate, if
    appropriate after checking the details of the case, to the Level 2
    Policy Helpdesk
-   The Level 2 Policy Helpdesk will ensure that the social worker has
    been involved in assessing the care situation and establishing that
    constant care is being provided. The Helpdesk will then liaise with
    the relevant ICT Service Desk for a system workaround in order to
    grant CP in these situations.

For CA, an adult care receiver may also qualify for CA for dependent
children with disabilities in their care but cannot qualify for CA for
another adult with a disability.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) care receivers: if a carer claims
CP for a DVA income support recipient, it may be necessary to contact
the DVA Clearance Team (SCS) to ensure the DVA care receiver is
currently receiving a Service Pension, Income Support Supplement (ISS),
Veteran Payment or Social Security Age Pension (paid by DVA). If CP is
granted, notify DVA of any changes in the service pensioner's
circumstances.

Constant care

A carer is said to provide constant care if they personally provide care
on a daily basis for a significant period during each day. The care may
be active, supervisory or monitoring. This includes circumstances where
the carer or care receiver is absent from the care situation for part of
the day, but the intensity of the care required and provided during the
remainder of any 24 hour period is such that it roughly equates to a
normal working day.

The assessing Service Officer has the delegation to determine if
constant care provisions are satisfied, based on the medical report and
the ADAT Claimant Questionnaire provided with the CP (adult) claim. The
constant care requirements are usually satisfied if the THP report and
ADAT Claimant Questionnaire result in a qualifying score for CP, or an
assessment of terminal illness unless there are circumstances indicating
constant care is not being provided. If there are circumstances that
could indicate constant care is not being provided this can be taken
into account.

The Service Officer needs to consider the care receiver's medical
condition(s), the THP score, the carers score, the THP carer's responses
to the provision of significant care and any other relevant factors. Any
inconsistency needs to be considered and in some instances clarified.
For example: if the condition is consistent with high THP and carer
scores but the THP report states significant care was not required,
clarify with the THP why they believe personal care is not required for
a significant period on a daily basis. They may not have considered the
need for supervision/monitoring. Even if they do not change their view
on the need for significant care, the delegation rests with the Service
Officer.

Note: carers can be contacted to clarify the care they provide, however
carers are not required to provide care schedules or care plans.
Provision of the claim form is the carer's declaration that additional
care is provided. Clarification should only be sought if there is a
dispute about the care being provided or there are concerns as to
whether the carer is providing constant or daily care.

If a carer is claiming CA and has lodged a Carer Allowance Questionnaire
(SA381) should not be used on its own to determine if constant care is
being provided. For example, if the SA381 states that for CA the carer
is not providing care and attention on a daily basis, it should not be
assumed that constant care is not being provided for CP. The SA381 can
only be used to determine whether personal care and attention provided
by a non-co-resident carer addresses special care needs and whether the
amount of time taken undertaking that caring for CA is reasonable. If
the SA381 indicates constant care is not being provided, the situation
needs to be clarified prior to a decision being made and the carer
should be contacted.

The Resources page contains contact details for the DVA Clearance Team
(SCS).

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Calculating the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score

Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the same care
receiver

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Pension income and assets tests

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Social work services

Complications to Grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
