
Medical reviews for child care receivers (CLK) 009-08040000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about medical reviews for child care
receivers. Medical reviews for children differ for Carer Payment (CP)
and/or Carer Allowance (CA). Payment may continue pending the outcome of
a review, unless there is clear evidence of a loss of entitlement, or
the parent or guardian has consistently refused to provide the necessary
information.

On this Page:

Manual reviews

If a carer advises that the care receiver's medical condition has
improved significantly, a Service Officer can initiate a medical review
taking into consideration if a review has been completed in the last 12
months. The Service Officer should send the carer the appropriate
medical review forms and create a manual review for the return of these
forms.

Child Medical review

Child Medical reviews only apply to carers paid Carer Allowance (child).
The reviews are undertaken through the host system and carers will be
reviewed at the following age milestones:

-   4 years and 8 months
-   10 years, and
-   13 years

If the carer is also paid Carer Payment (child) for the care receiver,
separate reviews for both payments will be undertaken through Service
Profiling

If the carer is also paid Carer Payment (XWP) they will only be reviewed
for their CA child care receiver.

Age Milestone Mandatory review

To be selected for the Age Milestone Mandatory Review, carers must be
paid Carer Payment with a care receiver under 14 years and 9 months of
age. The review commences automatically once the child reaches the age
of 4 years and 8 months or 13 years. Carer Payment (XWP) customers will
not be selected for these reviews.

Severe multiple and physical disability review

Child care receivers with a recognised disability are not generally
medically reviewed. However, some conditions are only considered to be a
recognised disability for certain periods of time, as the condition can
be of a temporary nature.

Carers paid Carer Allowance for a child care receiver with a recognised
disability of Severe Multiple Disabilities - Seizures (SMS) will have a
manual follow up Care Load review when the child reaches 6 months of
age. If the carer is paid Carer Payment (child) and Carer Allowance
(auto) or is a Carer Payment (XWP), a manual follow up Care Load review
is not required.

Child in hospital review

The carer of a hospitalised child is reviewed every 12 weeks (84 days)
of continuous hospitalisation using a Review of Carer Payment and Carer
Allowance while your child is in hospital (SA396) pre-populated form.
Carer Payment (XWP) customers will be selected for these reviews in
respect of their CA child care receiver.

Contents

Recognised disability medical reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Carer Allowance (CA) (child)Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews

Hospitalisation reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
for a child under 16 years

Related links

Child Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Care Load reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Recognised disability medical reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Age Milestone Mandatory reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child) and Carer
Allowance (CA) (child)

Carer Allowance

Carer Payment

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Forms

Transfer from Wife Pension(WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
