
What to do with an absence Manual Follow-up (MFU) 009-06010080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to follow when a carer who is in
receipt of a Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) may be
temporarily absent from the caring situation.

On this Page:

Respite and hospitalisation absence

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carers have up to 63 days
per calendar year where they can be temporarily absent from the caring
situation but still qualify for payment. This is called a 'respite'
absence.

Carers caring for an adult 16 years and older, are also allowed 63 days
when the care receiver is receiving care in hospital and the carer is
participating in that care. This is called a 'hospitalisation' absence.

When an absence has been recorded by the Australian Government agency
Services Australia for a period that brings the cumulative total of
absence days of the relevant type to more than 63, a Manual Follow-up
(MFU) activity is created. This procedure helps Service Officers action
the MFU.

Manual Follow-up (MFU)

The MFU is created on the carer's record 14 days before the 63 days are
due to expire. The MFU is a reminder for the Service Officer to contact
the carer to advise that their payment will be affected by the temporary
absence within a fortnight.

When the details of an absence are recorded that is nearing or would
exceed a threshold, messages will be displayed to prompt the Service
Officer to discuss options with the carer. Messages will not appear if
the balance of respite days is equivalent to the number of days left in
the calendar year ending 31 December. When an MFU is created, and
details of a discussion are already recorded, further action may not be
required.

Possible consequences when absence exceeds 63 days

The consequence to a carer when their absences exceed 63 days in a
calendar year depend on the circumstances. Generally, payment would be
cancelled, as the carer no longer meets the qualification provisions.

Special circumstance

The Australian Government agency Services Australia has the discretion
to extend the period of respite in special circumstances. If a special
reason exists, a carer can cease to provide the care receiver with
constant care for more than 63 days in a calendar year, and still retain
qualification.

A special reason is determined by an APS 5/6 level officer. A special
reason would not exist if the carer simply chose to extend a holiday
beyond 63 days. The APS5 does not have to occupy any particular position
to have the delegation for this decision, but will usually be the
supervisor of the Processing Service Officer actioning the review.

Generally, a decision to continue payment would only be made if the
reason for ceasing care was outside the control of the carer and
consistent with the need for, and provision of, personal care and
attention. It should be clear in these situations that a return to care
at the required level can be expected after a definite period and that
the carer will resume providing the care.

Hospitalisation cannot be extended beyond 63 days. However, if the
absence continues after the expiry of the hospitalisation days the
carer's remaining temporary cessation of care (respite) days, if any,
can be used to allow continuation of payment.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Regular absence rules do not apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that
is paid under grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers.
However regular absence rules continue to apply to CA as normal. This
means CP (XWP) carers who are not providing additional care and
attention each day as the care receiver is absent, can continue to be
paid CA by using their TCC (respite and hospitalisation) days for CA.
Absence codes that relate only to CP should not be recorded for any TCC
days for a carer receiving CP(XWP). Absence MFUs for CP (XWP) carers
only apply to their CA.

When a CP (XWP) carer's only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason or changed to CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will be
automatically cancelled. A carer loses their qualification for CP (XWP)
permanently if payment level CA is not reinstated with out a gap in
entitlement.

For more information about these rules for CA see, Transfer from Wife
Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Related links

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
