
Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03070020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a carer or care receiver advises
of a change of address and the carer is receiving CP and/or CA.

Change of details

All carers must notify Services Australia of a change of address within
14 days of moving.

A home address change for the carer, or carer receiver, may mean a
change in caring circumstances has occurred. Service Officers must check
with the carer, or care receiver, for:

-   any change in circumstances
-   continuing eligibility for CP and/or CA, and
-   if any further action or information is needed

Some address changes may generate a manual follow-up (MFU) on the
carer’s or care receiver’s record. Service Officers must investigate the
MFU to check:

-   continuing eligibility for CP and/or CA, and
-   if any further action or information is needed

If a carer's mail is returned from an address held on the agency's
records, Service Officers must attempt to contact the carer or their
correspondence nominee by phone.

If the carer’s correct address details cannot be obtained:

-   record the contact attempts to the carer on their record, and
-   suspend their payments(s) as whereabouts unknown

Change of address via Centrelink online account or Express Plus mobile app

A carer's eligibility to continue to receive CP and /or CA is
re-assessed when they:

-   update their address using Centrelink online account or the
    Centrelink Express Plus mobile app, and
-   advise they no longer live with the care receiver aged 16 years or
    over

The change of address creates an ‘Update your caring details’ online
task. The carer completes the task using their Centrelink online account
or Centrelink Express Plus mobile app. A 'Carer Allowance Questionnaire
(SA381) does not need to be issued. While updating their address online,
the carer is advised to tell the care receiver to update their address
with Centrelink.

Care situations - principal home exemptions

A carer or care receiver who vacates their principal home to enter a
care situation may be entitled to a 2 year asset test exemption on their
former principal home. This 2 year exemption may apply if the:

-   care receiver has left their principal home to receive care in a
    care situation in a private home for at least 14 consecutive days
-   carer has left their principal home to provide a substantial level
    of care to a person in a private home for at least 14 consecutive
    days

See Permanent vacation of principal home.

CP

CP qualifications require that care must be provided in a private
residence (the home of the carer or care receiver).

It is not necessary for the carer and the care receiver to live in the
same home for CP qualification. However, a review must be carried out if
either person notifies a change of address, to ensure the carer
continues to provide constant care.

If the carer and care receiver are not living together, consider the
time taken for the carer to travel to the care receiver's home. The
distance and time travelled between the carer and care receiver's
residences may make it difficult for the carer to provide constant care
to remain eligible for CP. The accessibility of the carer to the care
receiver, must be considered to ensure qualifications continue to be
met. See Actions to assess ongoing eligibility for CA information on the
Process page for more details.

Note: constant care does not apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that
is paid under grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers.
Care requirements apply to CA as normal. See CA information below. If CA
care requirements are not met and the carer’s only or last payment level
CA is suspended or cancelled, CP (XWP) will auto-cancel. See Transfer
from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

CA under 16 years

When CA is paid to the carer of a child (under section 953 of the Social
Security Act), care and attention must be provided in a private home
that is the residence of the carer and the care receiver.

Note: carers paid CA (auto) through qualification for CP (child)
including a child who has a terminal condition, are not subject to
standard provisions under CA (child). For instance, the child is not a
dependent child of the carer. See Eligibility for CA (auto) when a carer
is also receiving CP (child).

CA 16 years or over

If the carer notifies the agency they are no longer residing with the
care receiver in person or by phone, issue a ‘Carer Allowance
Questionnaire’ to the carer. This is because CA can be paid to carers
under 2 different provisions of the Social Security Act:

-   under section 954, daily care and attention must be provided in a
    private home that is the residence of the carer and the care
    receiver
-   under section 954A, CA may be paid if daily care is provided in the
    private home of either the carer or care receiver. See Eligibility
    for CA (adult) when caring in a private home not shared by the adult
    and carer

In general, for grants of CA under sections 953 or 954, the carer and
care receiver must reside together, unless certain exceptions are met.

Private residence

A private home can be any residence that a person regards as their home
if:

-   the person (either the carer, care receiver or sharing carer) lives
    in that residence, and
-   the person carries out their main domestic functions there, and
-   there are no commercial arrangements in place for the provision of
    personal care (such as those arrangements that may be found in a
    nursing home)

The Resources page contains links to forms and publications, and help on
considering daily and constant care when the carer and care receiver are
not living together.

Related links

Changing address (CLK)

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Vacation of principal home to provide care

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
