
Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP) for carers of young children 009-07020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the CAP to help Service Officers answer enquiries
from carers.

The CAP measure

CAP is a payment for families following a catastrophic event involving a
young child under 7 years. CAP helps the family with the extra costs
related to caring for the child during the period of significant
adjustment.

Lodgement of CAP claims

Claims for CAP must be lodged within 2 years from the date of diagnosis
of a severe illness, medical condition or major disability following the
catastrophic event.

Circumstances for CAP

CAP is a one-off non-taxable payment to families in exceptional
circumstances. The maximum amount to any family is $10,000 for each
child in a catastrophic event. The amount payable depends on the
family's circumstances.

The diagnosis of a specific illness or condition, including congenital
conditions, does not exclude or guarantee a payment of CAP. The Process
page has more details on qualification for CAP.

Consideration on a case by case basis

Applications for payment are considered on a case by case basis and a
decision is made by a senior officer in the Department of Social
Services (DSS).

Advise carers to present their case by explaining their circumstances
and describing the ways in which their family's life has been disrupted
resulting in them needing extra support. This may include disruptions to
things like the parent or carer's capacity to work, and/or care
arrangements for other children in the family.

Review of a CAP decision

The standard review and appeal process does not apply to CAP decisions.
No details are to be recorded in the Appeals (APL) system.

Wagga Carer Processing Service

The Carer Adjustment Payment (SS454) claim form should be scanned to the
carer's record. Wagga Carers Smart Centre (WPH) will then forward the
claim to Department of Social Services (DSS) for determination. The DSS
decisions are implemented by a centralised processing team at the WPH,
within Services Australia.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
contact details, and FAQs about the claim process and the claim form.

Related links

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
