
Carer Allowance (CA) customer going overseas 009-03100020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for a Service Officer to decide
whether Carer Allowance (CA) is payable to the customer while they are
overseas and for how long when the portability script is not available.
It also explains the action to be taken by the Service Officer and the
customer before their departure.

On this Page:

Leaving to live in another country (permanent absence)

CA is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer or care receiver leaves Australia to live in another
country, CA is cancelled from the date the customer or care receiver
leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
CA during any temporary returns to Australia.

Temporary absence

CA is portable for the maximum portability period of 6 weeks as long as
the departure is temporary. CA can be paid outside Australia for any
reason, however, respite rules and portability rules need to be
considered together to decide whether payment can be made overseas. If
the customer is unable to return at the end of 6 weeks, Centrelink has
discretion to extend the period of payability under certain
circumstances.

Respite provisions can only be used concurrently with (not in addition
to) the normal portability provisions.

Add-on payments can continue during a temporary departure if the
customer remains qualified for the payment.

Respite

When a carer or care receiver advises an overseas absence, it may be
necessary to record portability details or a temporary cessation of care
(respite) absence, or both, depending on the circumstances.

Whether the portability and/or respite should be coded depends on:

-   whether the carer is outside Australia with one or more care
    receivers
-   whether the carer and care receiver both leave Australia together
-   the age of the care receiver
-   whether the care receiver is in receipt of a Centrelink payment or
    concession card

Portability Interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns is to be used to assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while overseas. The script can
also be used to assess the customer's entitlement where they are only
thinking about going overseas and want to know about their payment
before making a final decision.

A letter can be sent to the customer confirming the advice given and
providing contact details for Services Australia while overseas.

Portability period

A person's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence - they are considered to be inside Australia on that day and
therefore no longer affected by portability rules.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer contacted or not. Department of Home
Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular circumstances where customers should
advise of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, the payment may be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment ceasing.

The Resources page contains some examples of customers going overseas
and the effect the absence will have on Carer Allowance (CA). It also
contains links to the Services Australia Website for information about
payments while overseas and travelling overseas with medicines.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Portability of Add-ons

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Absences for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) overseas absences

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Discretion to extend portability period

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer payment (CP)
when the care receiver is absent

Coding an absence where no Carer Payment (CP) link exists

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
