
Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16 years or over

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assessing eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)
for a person caring for a care receiver (aged 16 years or over).

On this Page:

About CA

Carer Allowance (CA) is a payment that recognises the impact of a care
receiver's disability on the family. The greater the level of
disability, the greater the impact. CA (adult) provides financial
assistance in respect of the care receiver aged 16 years or over with a
severe level of disability. This payment acknowledges the impact of
significant levels of disability, on the family in social, occupational,
emotional and financial terms.

Assessment and qualification

CA (adult) is assessed under the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT). The ADAT measures the functional ability and care needs of the
care receiver.

The section 954A Social Security Act 1991 qualification provisions are
outlined in Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring for a
disabled adult in a private home not shared by the adult and carer.

A person is qualified for CA for an adult with a disability, if the care
receiver:

Is an Australian resident, and

Is a family member of the person or is a person approved in writing by
the Secretary - see the References page, and

Has been assessed and rated under the ADAT, with a total score of at
least 30, and a Treating Health Professional (THP) score of at least 12,
and

Has a functional impairment (a physical, intellectual or psychiatric
disability) sufficient to necessitate the provision of care, and is
either:

-   In the terminal phase of a terminal illness certified by a medical
    practitioner, and is expected to live for less than 3 months. Their
    carer will generally qualify for CA (adult) without further
    investigation subject to meeting the other qualification criteria,
    or
-   Is likely to suffer from the disability permanently or for an
    extended period (that is, care is required for 12 months or longer),
    and

Receives care on a daily basis from the carer in a private home that is
the residence of the carer and the care receiver. If the home is not
shared by the carer and care receiver, but is still a private residence,
the carer may still qualify for payment under section 954A of the Social
Security Act 1991. See Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring
for a disabled adult in a private home not shared by the adult and
carer. A link to the Guide definition of 'daily basis' in connection
with CA (including examples) can be found in the References page
section, under the heading Carer Allowance (CA) definitions.

The carer must also be an Australian resident.

A care receiver aged 16 or over may be eligible for an Income Support
Payment (ISP). First Contact Service Offer must be run separately for a
customer who is a care receiver.

Note: if a carer is qualified for CA (caring for a disabled adult), that
disabled adult cannot then qualify to receive CA for caring for another
disabled adult. However, an adult care receiver may also qualify to
receive CA (child) for a dependent child/ren with disabilities in their
care.

Age considerations

While there are no legislative age limits applicable to carers, claims
from carers under 18 years of age, or 80 years of age or older, require
a referral to a social worker. It is necessary to ensure that the carer
can and does, provide the care receiver with the level of care and
attention on a daily basis that is required. A very young or elderly
carer may have difficulty accessing support services and resources. A
social worker can provide assistance in this regard.

More than one care receiver

A person may qualify for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2, but no more than 2,
adults with a disability who meet the CA (adult) criteria, and may
qualify for each dependent child with a disability that meets the CA
(child) criteria, regardless of the number of children.

Care should be taken when a carer who is already receiving Carer Payment
(CP) and/or CA contacts to claim CP and/or CA for a second care
receiver. A discussion should be had with the carer as to whether CP is
more appropriate for the new care receiver; this will all depend on the
individual aspects of the carer and care receiver's circumstances. If
the new care receiver is suffering from a terminal medical condition, it
may be more appropriate to claim CP for the new care receiver due to
bereavement provisions.

Two carers sharing one CA

Carer Allowance (CA) may be shared by 2 people who care for the same
care receiver(s), provided the 2 carers are not a couple. There are 2
sections of the Social Security Act under which people sharing the care
of an adult care receiver may be paid, s954 and s954A. For adult care
receivers, a carer who qualifies for CA under s954 can only share CA
with another carer under s954. Similarly a carer getting CA under s954A
can only share CA with another carer under s954A. However, a person
cannot be paid under section 954A if someone is already being paid, or
has lodged a claim and been determined qualified, in respect of that
care receiver under section 954. For detailed information about 2 carers
for CA, see Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA).

If 2 customers who receive a shared care rate of CA for the same care
receiver advise that they have become partnered, CA can no longer be
paid to both partners. See Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance
(CA).

Change in circumstances

A situation may arise where a carer ceases to qualify for Carer
Allowance (CA) as they move out of the care receiver's home (or are
already a non co-resident carer under section 954A), and a qualified
co-resident carer claims CA under section 954. The first carer would no
longer be qualified under either section 954 or section 954A, as someone
else qualifies under section 954. If the first carer is still providing
daily care, however no longer qualifies for CA, care should be taken to
cancel their CA.

Assessment

The care receiver's medical condition and the level of the care provided
must be assessed. First Contact Service Offer will issue the relevant
forms for the carer to complete to test their eligibility for payment.

Backdating

In most cases, the usual backdating rules for Carer Allowance (CA)
apply. However, if a decision is made to pay CA to 2 carers under the
shared care provision, the date of effect is the date the decision is
made, so other date of effect provisions (for example, deemed date of
claim, backdating, arrears) do not apply.

Commercial carers

A person may qualify for Carer Allowance (CA) even if they are utilising
the services of a commercial carer to assist with care .See Resources
page for example.

Commercial carers do not qualify for CA. Additionally, the care provided
by a commercial carer cannot be used towards qualifying another person
for CA. See Resources page for example.

A person may qualify for Carer Allowance (CA) when the carer is being
paid to care for the care receiver when they both reside in the same
private home. See Resources page for example.

Coding and qualification

When the claim form is lodged, entitlement is determined by coding a
claim for Carer Allowance (CA). When the care and medical details are
recorded, the qualification for Carer Allowance is assessed. If a care
receiver is in respite (not hospital) at the time a customer lodges a
CP/CA claim or the care receiver has passed away see Complications to
Grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

If the carer or the THP has ticked more than one answer, the answer that
gives the highest ADAT score should be accepted. Where no answer has
been provided, the carer or THP should be contacted to find out why. The
carer or THP should be given the opportunity to answer unanswered
questions in their respective questionnaires. Note: where the ADAT
produces a qualifying score and there are unanswered questions which
have no bearing on the carer's qualification for CP or CA, staff are not
required to contact the carer or THP but should document this on the
carer’s record.

The Resources page contains Processing Service details for: CP/CA New
Claims, examples of 'commercial care', suggested letter text and a link
to online forms.

Related links

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring for a disabled adult in
a private home not shared by the adult and carer

Identifying customers for referral to a social worker

Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

First Contact Service Offer (FSCO)

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
