-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assessing and coding a one-off
absence for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) where the care
receiver is absent from the care situation.

On this Page:

Regular absence and one-off absence

A regular absence is where a carer advises that a care receiver will be
absent from the home for 2 days every week for a certain period of time.
A one-off absence, by contrast, would occur where the care receiver is
entering respite care for 1 period.

Regular absences from care are assessed and coded differently from
one-off absences.

'Day' of absence

For respite and hospitalisation purposes, a 'day' must include an
overnight stay - that is, a whole 24 hour period, that is: 12am to 12am
(midnight to midnight). Part days do not count in the calculation of
absences for CP and CA.

This principle also applies when calculating absences where a CA child
is away from the care situation for education, training and treatment
(ETT).

This does not change the special rules around coding of respite in
conjunction with the 25 hour rule - the 25 hour provision cannot be
extended by using a carer’s TCC (respite) entitlement. For example, if a
carer was absent from the caring situation for 6 hours per day due to
work, they would reach 24 hours by Thursday (assuming the work was
Monday to Friday). They could not then declare the Friday to be their
Temporary Cessation of Care (TCC) day, because this would mean they were
absent in excess of 25 hours per week. For more information, see Carer
Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid employment,
self-employment, voluntary work, education or training activities.

Different assessment and coding is also required when the carer is
absent.

Care receiver or carer overseas

If the care receiver or carer are absent due to being overseas, the
rules for TCC and portability may differ between CP and CA depending on
the situation. TCC (respite) and portability rules must be considered
together. For more information, see Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance
(CA) interaction of portability and temporary cessation of carer
(respite) rules.

Note: if a child care receiver is in the care of the other parent when
the carer parent is absent or overseas, this absence will be counted for
CP only and will not be counted for CA. If the child is in the care of
either parent, CA is payable and TCC provisions do not apply.

Care receiver imprisoned

If the care receiver is imprisoned, this is also considered an absence
and the carer's qualification for payment may continue. CP and/or CA
will then auto cancel when the 63 days per calendar year temporary
cessation of care limit is reached.

Care receiver has more than one carer

If there is more than 1 carer, does 1 carer receive CP and the other CA?
If yes, the absence must be recorded against both carers when the care
receiver is absent from both carers.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Regular and one-off absence rules and the 25 hour rule do not apply to
CP (XWP) – Carer Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering
provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. However, regular and one-off
absences still apply to CA as normal.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason, or reduced to a CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will be
automatically be cancelled. A carer loses their qualification for CP
(XWP) permanently if payment level CA is not reinstated without a gap in
entitlement.

Absence codes that only relate to CP should not be recorded for any TCC
days for a carer receiving CP (XWP).

For more information see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP)

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information for carers, and to the My Aged Care website for information
about Commonwealth Respite and Carelink Centres.

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding a regular absence for Carer Allowance (CA) and/or Carer Payment
(CP) when the care receiver is absent

Carer Allowance (CA) child care receiver undertakes education, training
or treatment

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Carer Payment (CP) carer is absent

Carer Allowance (CA) carer is absent

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Carer Allowance (CA) customer going overseas

Carer Allowance (CA) and/or Carer Payment (CP) care receiver commences
or returns to work

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

View/Update Absence From Care online

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
