
Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (adult) when caring in a private home not shared by the adult and carer 009-03020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when Carer Allowance (CA) (adult) may be payable
to carers who do not live with the person they provide care for. This
qualification is contained in Section 954A of the Social Security Act.
CA may be paid if personal care is provided in the private home of
either the carer or care receiver, and this care is provided on a daily
basis.

On this Page:

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (adult) when 'living apart'

It may not always be possible or appropriate for the carer to live with
their care receiver, but the carer still provides a significant level of
care which may allow the care receiver to continue to live in their own
home. It is also recognised that people have different living
arrangements and should be allowed the flexibility to choose the
arrangements that best suit their particular circumstances while still
qualifying for CA.

There are some requirements for carers claiming under the 'living apart'
rules that do not apply to other eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)
for an adult care receiver:

-   the carer must be providing at least 20 hours of personal care per
    week
-   the care and attention provided must address special care needs that
    the care receiver is assessed as having under the Adult Disability
    Assessment Tool (ADAT)
-   the carer cannot be receiving wages at or above the relevant minimum
    wage to provide the care
-   the care must be provided in the private home of either the carer or
    care receiver

Common eligibility requirements for CA (adult) and CA ‘living apart’ (adult)

Provisions which are common to CA qualifications under both Sections 954
(CA adult) and 954A (CA adult ‘living apart’) of the Social Security Act
are:

the care receiver must receive a rating of at least 30 on the ADAT,
including a Treating Health Professional (THP) Component of at least 12

both carer and care receiver must be Australian residents

the care receiver must be a family member of the carer, or a person
approved in writing by the Secretary - see Legislation on the References
page

unless temporary cessation of care provisions (TCC) can be applied, the
care and attention must be received on a daily basis, that is, 7 days
per week

the carer may qualify for 2 payments of CA if they care for 2, but no
more than 2, adult care receivers. Note: it does not matter which
section of the Act these CA payments are made under. That is, it is
possible for the carer to be paid 1 payment of CA under section 954 and
1 under 954A)

TCC provisions apply. Under Section 954A, if a carer ceases to provide
care for a whole day (midnight to midnight) it is considered as
temporary cessation of care

-   for shared care, absences are only counted where neither carer is
    providing care
-   hospitalisation provisions apply if it is reasonable to expect that
    upon release, the care receiver is expected to return to the care of
    the carer at the appropriate residence

the review regime that applies to CA (adult) remains the same

A care receiver aged 16 years or over may be eligible for an income
support payment. Care receivers should be directed to the Services
Australia website to explore payment options available.

Note: if a carer is qualified for CA (adult), the adult care receiver
cannot then qualify to receive CA for caring for another adult. However,
an adult care receiver may also qualify to receive CA (child) for a
dependent child or children with disabilities in their care.

Two carers sharing 1 Carer Allowance (CA)

CA may be shared by 2 people who care for the same care receiver(s),
provided the 2 carers are not members of a couple. The 2 sections of the
Social Security Act under which people sharing the care of an adult care
receiver may be paid are s954 (CA adult) and s954A (CA adult ‘living
apart’). A carer who qualifies for CA under s954 can only share CA with
another carer under s954. Similarly, a carer getting CA under s954A can
only share CA with another carer under s954A. However, a carer cannot be
paid under section 954A if someone is already being paid, or has lodged
a claim and been determined qualified in respect of that care receiver
under section 954. For detailed information about 2 carers for CA, see
Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA).

Two carers may share one payment of CA under section 954A provided that
together they are providing the 20 hours of personal care per week and
this care is being provided on a daily basis.

If 2 carers who receive a shared care rate of CA for the same care
receiver advise that they have become partnered, CA can no longer be
paid to both partners. See Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

A situation may arise where a carer ceases to qualify for CA when they
move out of the care receiver's home (or are already a non co-resident
carer under section 954A), and a qualified co-resident carer claims CA
under section 954. The first carer would no longer be qualified under
either section 954 or section 954A, as someone else qualifies under
section 954. If the first carer is still providing daily care, however
no longer qualifies for CA, care should be taken to cancel their CA.

Carer does not provide daily care

If:

-   another non co-resident carer provides care on the other days, the
    carer is qualified for CA and there is no TCC. The shared care
    provisions may apply
-   a co-resident carer provides care on the other days and the
    co-resident has not claimed CA, the carer is not qualified for CA
    unless the cessation of care does not exceed 1 day per week. If
    qualified for CA, the TCC provisions apply
-   no care received on the other days, the carer is not qualified for
    CA unless the cessation of care does not exceed 1 day per week. If
    qualified for CA, the TCC provisions apply

See Assessing daily care provided by one or more carers table for
examples of daily care provisions, including where there are multiple
carers claiming/receiving CA shared care.

Age considerations

There are no legislative age limits applicable to carers, claims from
carers under 18 years of age, or 80 years of age or older, require a
referral to a social worker. It is necessary to ensure that the carer
can and does, provide the care receiver with the care and attention on a
daily basis that is required. A very young or elderly carer may have
difficulty accessing support services and resources. A social worker can
provide assistance in this regard.

Commercial carers

A person may qualify for CA even if they are utilising the services of a
commercial carer to assist with care.

Commercial carers do not qualify for CA. Additionally, the care provided
by a commercial carer cannot be used towards qualifying another person
for CA.

The Resources page contains examples of 'commercial care', links to
forms and letters, information about supplementary assessments which may
have to be undertaken and task cards for determining whether care
provided is reasonable and the level of care required against the ADAT.

Related links

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Social Work Services

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
