
Assessing and coding Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) term enrolment checks 010-21020228

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment process for Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) enrolment checks.

Enrolment checks

AIC students are subject to enrolment checks each term.

Information received from education providers may identify one or more
of the following. The student:

-   is not enrolled at the recorded education provider
-   has ceased studies
-   did not commence studies
-   commenced studies late
-   changed study load

The enrolment check is used to determine the student's eligibility
during their course of study.

Initiation of enrolment checks

AIC enrolment checks are issued either electronically or as a paper form
sent by mail, depending on the education provider recorded on the
student's Education Details (EDC) screen:

Electronically, through the Integrated Review System (IRS) for:

-   SA Secondary government schools
-   QLD, WA, TAS and ACT Primary and Secondary government schools

Manual paper forms for:

-   NSW, VIC and NT Primary and Secondary government schools
-   SA Primary government schools
-   all non-government schools

Customer contact

When an enrolment information response is returned and a discrepancy is
identified, Service Officers must make 2 genuine contact attempts to
contact the applicant to confirm the student's circumstances.

AIC payment(s) can be re-assessed, where the applicant:

-   confirms the information provided in the enrolment check
-   can provide a reasonable excuse for the discrepancy in the
    information, or
-   advises the student was impacted by circumstances beyond their
    control.

Where the applicant does not meet one of the above criteria,
verification documents are required.

If the applicant cannot be contacted by phone, the AIC payment(s) may be
suspended and written notification issued to the applicant.

AIC applicants have 21 days to contact from the date information is
requested, to discuss the student's circumstances. If the applicant
fails to contact Services Australia within this period, their AIC
payment(s) for that student may be stopped.

Verification

Where evidence is required, a Request for Information (Q781) letter must
be issued, requesting the applicant provide the documents within 21
days.

Third parties and applicants have an obligation to provide the
information under section 343 of the Student Assistance Act 1973.

Integrated Review System (IRS)

When the AIC enrolment check has been actioned and updates are made to
the student's record, the electronic enrolment check outcome must be
recorded in the Integrated Review System (IRS).

If the updates result in an overpayment, appropriate action to
investigate and raise a debt must be taken before finalising the
enrolment check. See Using the Integrated Review System (IRS).

Cancelling an Enrolment Check

Enrolment checks are non-discretionary reviews, and should only be
cancelled by AIC-skilled Service Officers.

Unfavourable decisions

When an unfavourable decision is made, a Decision Maker (DM) must
provide the applicant with an explanation of the decision and an
opportunity to provide further information or evidence relevant to the
decision. The DM must also advise the applicant of their review rights
and if required, record a request for a review of the decision. This
includes unfavourable decisions made by Service Officers within a Smart
Centre Call.

If a DM is not speaking with an applicant at the time of making a
decision, they are required to make 2 genuine attempts to contact by
phone an applicant, before finalising an unfavourable decision.

If the applicant has been advised verbally or in writing that they must
provide further information, there is no requirement to attempt to
contact the customer. This does not apply to vulnerable or at risk
customers.

Related links

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Changing study or training details for Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme

Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Change of circumstances for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme applicants

Approved studies for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
