
Non-student beneficiaries for ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance 010-02070090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance can be
payable to non-student beneficiaries.

Away from Base assistance

Under certain circumstances it may be necessary or desirable for a
person other than the student to receive Away from Base assistance.

Non-student beneficiaries can be:

-   education institution representatives, or
-   drivers or pilots of chartered transport

ABSTUDY will not cover the costs of participation in an Away from Base
activity for any persons other than specified above. This includes:

-   education institution representatives who accompany or participate
    in an approved activity with students, and
-   the partners or children of participating students

Note: Away from Base assistance is not available for Away from Base
activities that are part of an Australian Apprenticeship.

Education institution representatives

An education institution may be able to demonstrate that it is more
cost-effective for its representatives to travel to a community, or
communities, to deliver an approved Away from Base activity than for
individual students to travel to the institution. This would only apply
for approved testing and assessment and residential school activities.
Situations may exist where an education institution representative and
students may be approved for the same activity. For example, this could
occur where a teacher conducts a residential school in a community but
other enrolled students in different locations must also attend the
residential school.

Allowances available for education institution representatives cover:

-   fares, and
-   meals and accommodation, via
-   a residential expense package, or
-   travel allowance

Drivers or pilots of chartered transport

If the appropriate mode of transport for an Away from Base activity
requires the driver or pilot to be away from their normal home for the
period of the activity (usually only applicable for a field trip), meals
and accommodation costs can be payable (through a residential expenses
package). Meals and accommodation costs are only payable in this
circumstance where the cost of the charter did not include meals and
accommodation for the driver or pilot.

Note: travel allowance is not payable for a charter pilot or driver.

The Resources page contains examples relating to non-student
beneficiaries of Away from Base assistance.

Related links

Away from Base travel for ABSTUDY

Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
