
Completing the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040) 010-03010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how to complete the Claims for
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040). The SY040 is used to
apply for AIC Boarding Allowance, Distance Education Allowance, Second
Home Allowance or Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

On this Page:

How to lodge this claim

The claim should be lodged by 31 December in the year of study. Claims
will not be accepted under any circumstances if a form has not been
lodged by 31 December of the year of study.

Applicants can claim by contacting the AIC Customer Service number or by
contacting Services Australia in person, by post or by fax. For contact
details, see Assistance for Isolated Children in ABSTUDY and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC).

Online

[] Registered customers can upload their claim and any supporting
documents online. For information about how to lodge documents online,
see the Resources page.

Faxed claims

Claims may be accepted by fax. The date the fax is received is
considered the date of receipt for processing purposes.

Customers can send the forms directly to the relevant AIC Smart Centre
as stated on the SY040, or lodge it at any Service Centre.

How to complete this claim

Parents and guardians need to complete the questions on the SY040
relating to:

-   Student details
-   Applicant details
-   Student's living arrangements
-   Reason for applying for AIC
-   Payment details
-   Tax File Number
-   Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA), if the parent or guardian is
    applying for ABA

A person claiming on behalf of an organisation needs to complete the
following questions on the SY040:

-   Student details in questions 1-4 and follow all prompts from
    question 5 onwards, and
-   the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Organisation details
    (SY067) will need completing

All applicants should complete the checklist and must sign the
declaration in the statement section. The applicant's partner is only
required to sign the declaration if ABA is being claimed.

Documents required

Evidence is often required to support an AIC claim. Normally original
documents or photocopies that have been certified by a Justice of the
Peace or a Commissioner of Declarations are required.

Applicants living in isolated areas may have their original documents
photocopied and endorsed by an official of the local court, police
station or other government office. The photocopies must be stamped (if
an office stamp is used), signed and dated by the person viewing the
original documents.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website,
forms for claiming AIC and contact details. It also contains information
about how to lodge documents online.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Assessing the new claim for Assistance for Isolated children (AIC)
(SY040)

Completing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Organisation
Details (SY067)

Completing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Current Tax Year
Assessment (SY042)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
