
Defining level of study for special schools 010-07010040

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to define the level of study for special
schools.

On this Page:

Eligibility for payments

To be paid one of Services Australia's administered payments for
students, a customer must be undertaking an approved course of study at
an approved institution. Generally, the requirement is the approved
course of study is at the secondary or tertiary level.

Some families will receive ABSTUDY or the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme while a dependant is undertaking primary school
level study.

Possible concern with studying equivalent to secondary level

In the past there was some concern about the study level of particular
students at special schools who were of secondary school age and whether
they were actually undertaking study equivalent to secondary level. This
concern arose because individual's study plans are, at least to some
extent, dependent on their level of disability, so that each student
effectively had a personalised course of study which may or may not be
secondary study.

In recent years, State and Territory education authorities have usually
decided that students in special schools of secondary school age or who
are over school leaving age are regarded as undertaking accredited
secondary study. Where this is the case, for ABSTUDY, AIC, Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and Youth Allowance (YA) purposes, they are
undertaking approved courses for the purpose of the Education Minister's
Determination of Education Institutions and Courses.

ABSTUDY

To be eligible for ABSTUDY Living Allowance or ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), students who are studying at a special
school are required to undertake study that:

-   the State/Territory education authority
-   a non-government education authority
-   or the school Principal has stated, in writing, to be at secondary
    level

Criteria for primary / secondary level

Where a student is studying at a special school in studies at a primary
level or an equivalent ungraded level, they would not be able to access
ABSTUDY Living Allowance or ABSTUDY PES. In these cases there may be
eligibility for an allowance under the Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme.

For students considered to be studying at a secondary level, the year of
study for coding purposes is Year 9, unless a year level has been
specifically advised by the relevant education authority for that
student.

Youth Disability Supplement

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is paid to full-time students and
Australian Apprentices in receipt of YA or ABSTUDY if the customer is 21
years of age and under and has been assessed by an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) as having a partial capacity to work of less than 30
hours per week.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Centrelink administered payments for
students

Coding education details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
