-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines issues that may arise when a student is
undertaking or will be undertaking distance education/external study
(previously known as correspondence study).

On this Page:

Course requirements for payments to students

The course requirements for Services Australia administered payments for
students require a student to be undertaking an approved course provided
by an approved educational institution.

A course may be delivered to students in a variety of ways. These modes
of teaching could include:

-   formal face-to-face classes (on campus or 'internal' enrolment)
-   one-on-one tuition
-   external or distance education study (including school of the air)
    using computer/online/internet based learning
-   distance education (including School of the Air) involving
    lessons/work received and returned by mail (that is, correspondence)
-   on-the-job training (including practical or professional placements)
-   residential schools (also known as 'block releases') for students
    normally undertaking external or distance education study away from
    the study location
-   mixed-mode course or course with a mixture of the above.

Other methods are also possible. As long as the course has been approved
for a particular style or styles of delivery then student eligibility is
not affected. For example, a university medical course might be taught
by a combination of formal classes, internet based lessons and
on-the-job training.

Distance education courses may be studied through, but are not limited
to:

-   TAFE Digital
-   Open Universities Australia (OUA)
-   an Australian University
-   TAFE
-   a private provider, or
-   secondary school

ABSTUDY customers

ABSTUDY customers can undertake a course of study delivered by a
combination of external studies and 'blocks' of internal on-campus study
during the year. This delivery method is called 'mixed mode' study and
ABSTUDY students can qualify for ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance for
the costs associated with attending the internal on-campus study
activities.

Students studying by this delivery method may also be eligible to
receive the away from home rate of ABSTUDY, see Away from home rate for
ABSTUDY.

Note: an ABSTUDY customer who is undertaking study via the mixed mode
method of course delivery must complete a portion of work by distance
education or external studies. A course comprised wholly of Away from
Base on-campus blocks of study (that is, residential school) and which
contains no additional external work requirements is not an approved
course for ABSTUDY assistance.

Delivery method

While for most courses the actual delivery method does not affect
satisfactory progress (that is, allowable or reasonable time rules
applicable to most payments) it may affect other aspects of entitlement,
such as the away from home rate, the type of allowance payable and the
availability of Fares Allowance (FAA). This is particularly the case
with distance/external study. Most of the reasons to live away from home
for ABSTUDY or for Youth Allowance (YA) do not apply to a student
undertaking distance education/external study. These dependent students
are usually living at home and are not attending the institution on a
daily basis so would not qualify for the away from home rate.

Assistance for Isolated Children

The Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme pays Distance
Education Allowance (DED) for eligible students undertaking distance
education study. DED can also be paid for students:

-   in approved home schooling (undertaking home tuition)
-   secondary students enrolled in distance education study, but
    attending (but not enrolled at) a local primary school to receive
    face-to-face support
-   students attending Homeland Learning Centres, located outside remote
    communities in the Northern Territory

Where a student who meets the AIC eligibility criteria lives in an
approved second home that provides closer access to local school, Second
Home Allowance may be paid.

Study load

The study load requirements for student payments are the same whether a
student is studying through distance education or on campus. A student
must maintain a full time study load.

Each institution measures study loads in a different way. Each
Institution's website or handbook will provide information on what they
consider a full time study load. Study loads for distance education
courses are generally measured by either a unit weighting or the total
hours specified for the course.

Distance education while overseas

Students undertaking study via distance education are generally not
eligible to receive student payments while overseas.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site.

Related links

Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities
Australia

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

The away from home rate for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Second
Home Allowance (SHA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Distance
Education Allowance (DED)

Assessing study load requirements

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
