
Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices 010-08010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Personal Income Test applies to full-time
(or concessional study load) students and Australian Apprentices who are
claiming or receiving ABSTUDY, Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA),
including the application of the Income Bank. Students or Australian
Apprentices receiving these payments are not entitled to Working Credit
as they have access to the Income Bank.

Personal Income Test

ABSTUDY, Austudy and YA full-time (or concessional study load) students
and Australian Apprentices are subject to a Personal Income Test on any
income they receive. This includes ordinary income from various sources,
see Assessment of other ordinary income for Centrelink payments. They
have access to the Student Income Bank or the Australian Apprentice
Income Bank, which enables them to build up credits when their income
does not exceed the income free area.

For ABSTUDY:

-   only customers receiving Living Allowance are subject to these
    Personal Income Test rules
-   customers under 16 year of age are not subject to the Personal
    Income Test unless they are an independent Australian Apprentice

Income Bank

Income Bank applies to any fortnight in which the customer is a
full-time (or concessional study-load) student or Australian Apprentice
(even if the customer is a student or Australian Apprentice for 1 day in
the fortnight). When income paid during the fortnight is less than the
income test threshold, the difference can be held as a credit. This
credit can then be used to offset any employment income they are paid
later (for example, during vacation periods when students have time to
work more hours).

The maximum Income Bank balance that can be accumulated for a full-time
(or concessional study-load) student is 11,300 credits, while the
maximum Income Bank balance for an Australian Apprentice is 1,000
credits.

The Income Bank credit is not set to zero annually, but will revert to a
zero balance if:

-   the customer loses qualification as a full-time (or concessional
    study-load) student or an Australian Apprentice
-   there is a gap in eligibility between 2 payments that both attract
    the Student Income Bank, or
-   the customer transfers between 2 payments that both attract the
    Student Income Bank

See the Resources page for examples.

If the student/Australian Apprentice travels overseas and their payment
is suspended, the Income Bank credit balance accumulated before the trip
will be reinstated when the customer's record is restored on return to
Australia.

Note: the Student Income Bank only applies to the customer's personal
income. Partner income is not reduced by the Income Bank balance.

Other income tests

Depending on their circumstances, students/Australian Apprentices may
also be subject to a Partner Income Test or the Parental Means Test. A
student's payment each fortnight will be determined by the test which
will result in the greatest reduction of the customer's payment. If this
rate is nil, payment will not be made in that fortnight.

Income free area

Students and Australian Apprentices who are paid money from work can
access the Income Bank, which allows them to keep more of their YA,
Austudy or ABSTUDY (Living Allowance) payment. Students and Australian
Apprentices can be paid up to $452 a fortnight before their payment (or
Income Bank credits) reduces. The Resources page has a link to Income
Bank.

Full-time students and Australian Apprentices have a fortnightly
ordinary income free area of $452. If the customer's income is less than
or equal to $452, the affecting income is nil. The unused part of the
fortnightly ordinary income free area ($0-$452) is accrued each
fortnight as credit in the Income Bank. This means full-time (or
concessional study-load) students and Australian Apprentices can be paid
some money and still accrue a credit.

Example

A student or Australian Apprentice may have regular ordinary income of
$60 per fortnight. Each fortnight an amount of 392 credits would accrue
in their Income Bank. Credit continues to accrue until the maximum
credit of 11,300 for students or 1,000 for Australian Apprentices is
reached.

Effect of other payments

For children born or entering care:

-   on or after 1 October 2016, Paid Parental Leave (PPL) and Dad and
    Partner Pay (DAP) granted to the customer (and/or their partner) are
    treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment for
    YA, Austudy and ABSTUDY
-   prior to 1 October 2016, PPL and DAP were not treated as assessable
    income for YA, Austudy and ABSTUDY

Transferring to another payment

If an ABSTUDY or YA (student) transfers to a YA (other) payment, they
will be able to transfer the lower of their Student Income Bank balance
or 3,500 credits to their new Working Credit balance.

ABSTUDY or YA (students) transferring to another payment that attracts
Working Credit, for example JobSeeker Payment (JSP), will be able to
transfer the lower of their Income Bank balance or 1,000 Income Bank
credits to their new Working Credit balance.

Austudy students transferring to another payment that attracts Working
Credit, for example JSP, will be able to transfer the lower of their
Income Bank balance or 1,000 Income Bank credits to their new Working
Credit balance.

If a YA (other) customer transfers to ABSTUDY or YA (student) they will
be able to transfer up to a maximum of 3,500 credits of their Working
Credit balance to their new Student Income Bank balance.

If an ABSTUDY or YA Australian Apprentice transfers to a YA (other)
payment, they will be able to transfer the lower of their Australian
Apprentice Income Bank or 1,000 credits to their new Working Credit
balance.

Once a student or Australian Apprentice becomes a job seeker their
ordinary income free area is $150 if they receive YA (other) JSP, Widow
Allowance (WA), or Partner Allowance (PA).

If the customer returned to full-time study or a full-time Australian
Apprenticeship after a short break, they are unable to access their
previous Income Bank credit. However, they will be able to transfer any
credits from their Working Credit balance to their Income Bank.

The Resources page contains a table that provides information on the
maximum credits that can be transferred between eligible payments.

Transfer of credits

There are no provisions for a customer to carry over Income Bank balance
credits between YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY. For example, if a customer was
in receipt of YA as a student and then decides to cancel their YA and
transfer to ABSTUDY, any Income Bank balance does not carry over to
ABSTUDY, it is forfeited.

Online accounts

[] Customers can view their current Income Bank balance.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains examples, maximum credits transferrable
between eligible payments, and links to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Under 16 ABSTUDY customers and the Personal Income Test

Using Centrelink self service

Earnings and reporting workflow tool

Assessing scholarship income

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
