-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines FAA eligibility for customers receiving YA,
Austudy or PES.

FAA

FAA is a non-taxable payment for eligible tertiary students receiving
YA, Austudy or PES who have to live away from their permanent home to
study.

FAA can only be paid for travel in Australia.

FAA covers the cost of the cheapest - practical mode of transport
between the student's permanent home and their educational institution.
If no public transport is available on the route, a per-kilometre rate
may be paid for the use of a private vehicle or taxi. FAA can also cover
the cost of private transport when it is more practical than public
transport. This includes where it is not practical for the student to
use public transport to move a significant amount of living necessities
or personal belongings, like essential kitchenware and bedding, from
their permanent home to study.

FAA is available for a limited number of journeys each year. The number
of journeys covered depends on the type and length of the course of
study. For more information, see Completing the Claim for Fares
Allowance (tertiary students only) (SY005) for Youth Allowance, Austudy,
Pensioner Education Supplement.

FAA is normally paid as a reimbursement after the journey. However,
Services Australia can arrange pre-booked travel for students.

To claim for reimbursement, customers must lodge a claim before 1 April
in the year after the year of study. To claim for pre-booked FAA,
students should generally lodge their claim at least 7 days before
travel to allow for booking of travel. However, subject to availability,
Services Australia will try to fulfil travel requests lodged within 7
days of travel. For more information, see Completing the FSY005.

FAA for ABSTUDY is covered separately as it has different eligibility
and assessment procedures.

Eligibility for FAA

FAA is payable to tertiary students receiving YA, Austudy or PES as a
tertiary student who are:

-   considered dependent and eligible for the away from home rate of YA
-   considered independent and have a partner they live away from
    because they are studying
-   required to live away from their dependent children because they are
    studying
-   required to live away from home and have become independent, will
    remain payable for that study year
-   studying an approved distance or online course at an Australian
    institution in Australia and they have to travel to the institution
    for a compulsory residential component of their course

Single independent students without dependent children are generally not
eligible for FAA (except for the compulsory on site part of an external
course). This is because their permanent home is wherever they are
living at the time. Other than for short periods, they cannot be
considered to be living away from the permanent home.

FAA is not payable if the customer is away from their institution for a
practical part of the course. For example, field excursions, practical
teaching sessions or hospital residency.

Special provisions for YA students who become independent during the
year of study

If a YA student becomes independent during a year of study either
because they:

-   reach the independence age, or
-   meet the self-supporting through paid employment independence
    criteria

the student stays eligible for FAA for the rest of that year as long as
they were eligible for FAA before becoming independent.

When a person is not eligible for FAA

A student is not eligible for FAA in the following circumstances:

-   The student is dependent and receiving the 'at home' rate of YA
-   For travel to do external practical requirements of a course at a
    location somewhere other than the institution where the student is
    enrolled. For example, a student teacher doing their placement at a
    primary school interstate or nursing students who must travel to do
    a clinical placement at a hospital
-   The student's permanent home is outside Australia
-   The student is studying outside Australia (including in an approved
    course)
-   For daily travel costs or fares to field trips, etc
-   For flights paid in full with frequent flyer points or vouchers
-   The person is doing an Australian Apprenticeship
-   The student is on a medical exemption when the trip is made

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Process page explains what to do when unable to process a Fares
Allowance appeal work item.

Creating FAA Fast Note referral

Service Officers must use all available resources to help customers. If
a customer’s query cannot be finished at first point of contact, create
an open Fast Note. This is actioned by specialist fares processing
staff. For examples and instructions See Process page.

Contents

Completing the Claim for Fares Allowance (tertiary students only)
(SY005) for Youth Allowance, Austudy, Pensioner Education Supplement

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy or Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) after a customer
has died

Fares Allowance (FAA) paid in advance of travel for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Reimbursing fares for the cheapest mode of public transport for Youth
Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Reimbursing fares for the use of a private vehicle or taxi for Youth
Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Reimbursing fares after the customer has died for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Related links

Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
