
Assessing enh1ment to the Long Term Income Support rate of Austudy for students or migrants studying English language courses 010-04040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the assessment to Austudy Long
Term Income Support (LTIS) rate of entitlement.

LTIS rate

The LTIS rate of Austudy is a higher rate of Austudy. It is available to
some customers who are starting a course or an Australian Apprenticeship
after a long time on income support.

A person who has been on income support for a long time will probably
have an increased need for further training and/or education to be
competitive in the labour market. They are also less likely to have
savings to help support this need and will have adapted to living on the
payments they are getting. This is why there is a higher rate for long
term income support students and Australian Apprentices.

The LTIS rate is intended to ease the transition when these customers
decide to return to study or work. The higher rate gives the customer a
similar rate of basic benefit as JobSeeker Payment (JSP) if they meet
the relevant criteria.

The LTIS rate of Austudy is lower than the rate payable to single
customers over 60 years of age who have been on payments for at least 9
months and are getting JSP. These customers should consider the
reduction in rate before claiming Austudy.

Eligibility

Each time a student starts a new course or returns to a course following
a break in study, they must satisfy the eligibility criteria to be
considered a long term income support student.

The LTIS rate of Austudy is payable to a student who:

does not have a dependent child, and

-   is undertaking qualifying study for Austudy in a course with a
    duration of at least 12 months
-   is an Australian Apprentice and became an Australian Apprentice
    after turning 22, and

has, when starting their course of study, been getting one or more of
the following for at least 26 out of the preceding 39 weeks:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Newstart Allowance (NSA)
-   Wife Pension (WP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Sickness Allowance (SA)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB), or
-   Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

Note: the person must actually receive the payment. Nil rate periods are
not considered as receiving payment for the purposes of the Austudy LTIS
rate.

English as a second language

The LTIS rate may also be paid to customers who do not have English as a
first language and are undertaking an approved English language course.
In these cases, the period of time on income support is not relevant.

Lower rate of payment

The standard rates of payment for Austudy are lower than the payments
available for other income support payments such as JobSeeker Payment
(JSP).

Despite a higher income free area for Austudy, this lower basic payment
is often a disincentive for some customers who may be considering a
course of study or an Australian Apprenticeship, especially if they have
been on other income support payments for a significant time.

Dependent child

If the customer has a dependent child, the customer would be considered
for the rate of Austudy payable to a single or partnered person with a
dependent child (or some other payment) rather than the LTIS rate. The
rates for customers with a dependent child are higher than the standard
rates of Austudy.

Qualifying timeframe

The LTIS rate is a higher rate that may be paid to students or an
Australian Apprentice who qualify for Austudy who have been receiving
one of the relevant income support payments (Austudy rules) for at least
26 weeks in the 39 weeks just before starting or restarting an approved
course or Australian Apprenticeship.

In assessing this, 39 weeks is counted back from the day before the day
they started or restarted the approved course or Australian
Apprenticeship.

The customer does not need to have been continuously on income support
for the whole period. This could discourage a student from taking on
short-term employment. However, the total time on income support must
add up to at least 26 weeks (182 days) in the 39 weeks just before
starting the course or apprenticeship.

Periods on an employment income nil rate period do not count towards
time on income support.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains a way of saving time when considering
whether or not a student or Australian Apprentice has met the 26 week
requirement period.

Related links

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Reviews and appeals

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
