
Completing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Organisation details (SY067) 010-03010050

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how to complete the Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) Organisation details (SY067) which is used
by a non-government organisation together with the Claim for Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040) to apply for AIC for a student.

On this Page:

When to use this form

Organisation details

Related links

When to use this form

Claims for AIC can only be accepted from an organisation that does not
receive a foster care or similar allowance for the student.

The organisation must have full responsibility for the upkeep of the
student. This can either be due to:

-   placement of the student in their care by a state/territory
    authority or court, or
-   where the student's parents are not involved in decisions about the
    care of the student, do not provide any financial support for the
    student and are either unable to be contacted to complete the form
    or are unwilling to do so.

If the organisation is accepted as the applicant, the income test for
Additional Boarding Allowance may be waived.

Organisation details

An organisation may receive AIC for a student who:

-   normally lives at an institution but the institution is
    geographically isolated from an appropriate state school
-   resides full-time at an institution because of the nature and extent
    of a disability or illness and the institution has special
    facilities to cater for the disability or illness.

An organisation may also receive AIC (as a non-applicant) on behalf of a
parent/guardian applicant for a student who boards there during the
school term if a geographic isolation rule is met with regard to the
student's access to an appropriate state school from their parents'
home.

Who should complete this form

Along with the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040)
the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Organisation details (SY067)
must be signed by the chief officer (or other officer with power to act
on behalf of the organisation). By signing Claim form (SY040), the
officer accepts the applicant notification responsibilities on behalf of
the organisation and responsibility for any overpayment which may occur.

The Resources page contains links to forms for an organisation to claim
AIC.

Related links

Claiming Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Isolation conditions for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
