
Examination travel for ABSTUDY 010-02100160

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when an ABSTUDY student may receive Fares
Allowance (FAA) to attend examinations (exams) for an approved course.

On this Page:

Remaining for examination period

Tertiary students are expected to remain at their place of study until
their study requirements for the semester are complete. This would
usually mean the student would not return home until after all exams are
completed. These are normally held in the examination period that
closely follows the end of classes.

Exams held later

Some students will have exams held on a later date, for 2 main reasons:

-   Deferred exams - an exam may be deferred because the student was
    unable to take it at the set time. This is usually due to illness or
    incapacity but may be for whatever reason the education institution
    will accept. The exam will be rescheduled to a time at which the
    student is able to take it and which suits the education institution
    (for example, not between Christmas and New Year)
-   Supplementary exams - where progress in a course of study depends on
    passing all subjects in a semester or year, a student who fails a
    single subject may be given the chance to re-sit that exam rather
    than repeat the whole semester/year. This may also happen where the
    failed subject is the last one needed to complete the course. The
    need for a supplementary exam will not be established until results
    are known. The student must then be informed and they will usually
    be allowed a period of time for remedial study before the exam is
    held

Note: teacher education students in NSW are required to undertake
literacy and numeracy exams as part of their course requirements. These
exams are only held at 4 campuses. The Department of Social Services
(DSS) has advised that students who do not meet the FAA criteria, will
be eligible for FAA to attend these exams if they are required to travel
away from their usual campus.

Due to the time delay, most students with deferred or supplementary
exams will have returned home prior to the new exam date.

Fares Allowance (FAA) payability and requirements

An FAA eligible, full-time ABSTUDY student may receive FAA to attend an
unexpected deferred or supplementary exam (after the end of the normal
term or semester period) or where the student is expected to travel to a
location other than their normal place of residence to sit an exam.
Note: some larger educational institutions may offer exams at regional
locations. A student's FAA entitlement is based on the closest such site
rather than the institution’s main campus.

FAA would be available for 1 return journey for each approved exam or
set of exams.

The student will need to provide proof of the requirement to undertake a
deferred or supplementary exam.

Time limit for examination travel FAA claim

Examination travel claims must be submitted within 3 months of
travelling by completing an ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim form (SY032).
FAA may also be authorised in advance of travel if the student prefers.

Australian Apprentice

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to FAA for the Australian
Apprenticeship.

The Resources page contains examples relating to FAA for examination
travel.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Study requirements for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
