
Changing study/training details for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or AIC PES customers 010-05100000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines links to information relevant to students who
change their study or training details. It informs Service Officers in
relation to coding these changes, deciding whether or not further proof
of enrolment is required, and if the change will affect the student's
entitlement to Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES.

PES requirements

To qualify for:

-   PES or ABSTUDY PES, the student must be undertaking full-time (or
    concessional load) study in an approved course
-   for AIC PES, the student must be undertaking full-time primary or
    equivalent ungraded study in approved course

The student may change their course details throughout the year for a
variety of reasons including changing course, changing institution,
altering the course start or end date, studying overseas (if the
overseas study is part of the current course then course details don't
change), or changing their study load.

Every customer's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required.

Note: if the customer has authenticated themselves via IVR, address
details do not need to be confirmed.

Customers who are in receipt of PES or ABSTUDY PES who transferred to
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (job seeker) who were in the
DSP transition group and assessed as having a partial capacity to work
will cease to be eligible for PES or ABSTUDY PES if they defer or
withdraw prior to the end of their course. If they subsequently resume
the same course, they are still not eligible for PES or ABSTUDY PES.

Customers who are in receipt of ABSTUDY PES who transferred to JSP or
Youth Allowance (job seeker) from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) due to
their youngest child turning 8 years of age will cease to be eligible
for ABSTUDY PES if they defer or withdraw prior to the end of their
course. If they subsequently resume the same course, they are still not
eligible for ABSTUDY PES. If these circumstances applied to a PES
customer on JSP as a single principal carer and they resumed the course
they had previously deferred, or withdrawn from, they may be eligible
for continuation of PES.

Contents

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load

Effect of end of course on payments for students

Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Increasing study load for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) student becomes incapacitated

Customer will not commence full-time study

Student studying outside Australia

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
