-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to check whether a course can be approved as
a full-time or a part-time course for the purposes of ABSTUDY.

On this Page:

Eligibility criteria for ABSTUDY

One of the general eligibility criteria for ABSTUDY is that the student
must be enrolled in an approved course. For the purposes of ABSTUDY,
courses can be approved as either full-time courses or as part-time
courses. Determining whether a course is a full-time or part-time course
depends on the structure of the course.

Full-time or part-time ABSTUDY entitlements

Students must be undertaking study in a course approved as a full-time
course to be considered for full-time ABSTUDY entitlements. Students who
are undertaking courses that are approved as part-time can only receive
part-time ABSTUDY entitlements. Study load concessions cannot be applied
to part-time courses.

Note: determining whether a course is a full-time or part-time course is
completely unrelated to determining the level of study load a student is
undertaking. A student may be undertaking all available hours in a
part-time course, but enrolment in a part-time course can only qualify a
student for part-time benefits.

Two part-time courses

Two part-time courses cannot be grouped to make one full-time course.
The student is entitled to the benefits arising from each part-time
award. Exceptions to this are:

-   articulated courses, where two or more courses are linked together
    to form an overall qualification
-   two associated courses where one merges with or leads into the other
    course e.g. a bridging course leading into a degree course, or a
    supplementary program studied concurrently with a degree course
-   composite courses, also known as nested courses, where units from
    two or more different accredited courses that have the same course
    title recognised under the Australian Qualification Framework (AQF)
    are part of a coherent study sequence and lead to, or form part of,
    an overall qualification.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site.

Related links

Claiming ABSTUDY

Assessing ABSTUDY claims and forms

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Determining approval of mainstream or Indigenous courses for ABSTUDY

Assessing study load requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
