-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing a Claim for ABSTUDY
Student or Australian Apprentice in lawful custody (SY022).

Lawful custody

The definition of Lawful custody is where a person, because of a
criminal conviction, is:

-   imprisoned in a corrective institution
-   in detention on remand, or
-   in a youth training centre

The following circumstances, do not meet the definition of lawful
custody. However, entitlement under the general ABSTUDY Awards may
apply:

A person:

-   on parole
-   in a home detention program, or
-   on a work release or transfer release while living in the community

Students or Australian Apprentices in lawful custody

If they have been in lawful custody for more than 2 weeks and have
approval for the Lawful Custody Award, entitlement to the following
assistance may apply:

Students:

-   Lawful Custody Allowance - to assist with essential course costs or
    essential equipment costs, and/or
-   Away from Base assistance - if the correctional institution has
    given permission for the customer to attend

Australian Apprentices:

-   Lawful Custody Allowance - to assist with essential equipment costs
    required in the apprenticeship

Note: benefits for claimants in lawful custody are not income tested and
are non-taxable.

Claims and payment

The student or Australian Apprentice must complete a Claim for ABSTUDY
Student or Australian Apprentice in lawful custody (SY022). The SY022 is
used to determine their qualification for Lawful Custody Allowance.

The correctional institution must provide a separate itemised list of
essential course costs or equipment by completing the ABSTUDY Lawful
Custody Allowance, Claim for reimbursement - to support SY022 (SY108).
Payment will not occur until received. The Resources page contains a
copy of the form.

For information relating to claim lodgement, see Claiming ABSTUDY.

Payment of Lawful Custody Allowance does not go to a claimant, unless
the correctional institution has provided their approval. The payments
can go to the:

-   correctional institution for reimbursement to the student or
    Australian Apprentice
-   correctional institution as reimbursement for purchases made on
    behalf of the student or Australian Apprentice, or
-   education institution or supplier of textbooks or materials for
    services provided to the student or Australian Apprentice

Costs requiring prior approval

The claimant or correctional institution must seek prior approval of
costs from Services Australia. This applies if the annual cost per
student or Australian Apprentice exceeds:

-   the rate of ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance for a 24 week to 1 year
    course, or
-   twice the rate of ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance if the student or
    Australian Apprentice is undertaking 2 part-time courses

Receiving other assistance to study

Participants in lawful custody cannot receive a Lawful Custody Allowance
where it duplicates assistance provided from other sources. For example,
from an employer, scholarship, or government or non-government
programme.

A government programme may have funded a student in lawful custody for
their stationery or materials. The participant is therefore ineligible
for Lawful Custody Allowance for the essential course costs.

Australian Apprentices

An Australian Apprentice's Commonwealth Registration Number must remain
current while in lawful custody. The suspension of this number will mean
there is no entitlement to ABSTUDY as an Australian Apprentice. If the
customer indicates they are a full-time Australian Apprentice, Services
Australia will obtain the Australian Apprenticeship details from the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations.

Released from lawful custody

If a customer who has been in receipt of ABSTUDY under the Lawful
Custody Award is released from lawful custody and:

-   is continuing to study full-time, see Living Allowance for ABSTUDY,
    or
-   ceases studies or continues studying part-time, see Payment of
    ABSTUDY when a student is deferring or discontinuing study before
    the end of the course

Note: prisoners due for release who qualify for a Crisis Payment (CrP)
also have entitled to an Anticipated Payment (also known as hardship
advance). However, the Anticipated Payment does not apply to ABSTUDY
students. See New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from
prison or psychiatric confinement.

The Resources page contains links to the SY022 and SY108. It also
contains a letter template and list of WA providers for Lawful Custody
Allowance.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Lawful Custody Award

Claiming ABSTUDY

Issuing appropriate modules and additional forms for students and
Australian Apprentices

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Student or Australian Apprentice in
lawful custody (SY022)

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Not qualified for ABSTUDY if receiving other assistance to study or as
an Australian Apprentice

Coding ABSTUDY education details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
