
Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth Allowance (YA) 010-06010000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage the initial contact by students and
Australian Apprentices claiming YA.

Initial contact

A young person, or a third party on their behalf, may contact Services
Australia (the agency) to claim YA. Service Officers should identify if
YA is the most beneficial payment. See Identifying the most beneficial
payment for students or Australian Apprentices.

[] Students or Australian Apprentices who contact to apply for YA should
make a claim for YA using their Centrelink online account. See Resources
for a link to Claiming a payment online. Advise customers that payments
may only commence from the date they submit a claim, unless they are
identified as a vulnerable customer. See Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers.

Qualifying for YA

To qualify for YA, a customer must meet all of the following criteria:

-   be between the minimum and maximum ages of YA student and Australian
    Apprentice
-   satisfy the residence requirements for YA, and
-   be able to satisfy the activity test as it relates to students, or
-   be an Australian Apprentice undertaking a full-time Australian
    Apprenticeship and have a current Commonwealth Registration Number

Note: for a young person aged 16 to 17 in full-time secondary study and
living at home, Family Tax Benefit is the primary payment, which can be
claimed by the parent or guardian.

See Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices.

How to claim

[] Students and Australian Apprentices are required to claim using an
online account. See the Resources page for a link to claiming a payment
online. If a customer contacts in relation to making a new claim for YA
they must be referred to submit their claim online, unless:

-   self-service channels are currently unavailable, confirmed by a
    Network News Update (NNU) bulletin, or
-   the Service Officer determines the online transaction is not
    appropriate to be self-managed by the customer in that instance

Note: for customers in vulnerable circumstances, record an intent to
claim. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers before returning to
this process.

Only issue a paper Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001) where the Service
Officer determines the online transaction is not appropriate, that is,
the customer is unable to submit a claim using their online account and
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) cannot be used.

As Correspondence nominees do not have the required access to submit a
YA claim online on behalf of their principal, encourage completion of
the ACC at first point of contact. If the ACC is declined by the
nominee, issue a paper claim form.

A customer claiming online may be selected for a reduced question set if
they are:

-   already receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment
    Partnered or Single (PPP/PPS), or was receiving 1 of these payments
    within the last 52 weeks and is wanting to transfer. See Transfer to
    Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) (student) from another payment
-   YA customer (over 22 years or already have a non-reviewable
    independence reason) with a status of cancel next pay (CNP) or
    cancelled (CAN) within the last 52 weeks

The reduced question set claim will only request information that is not
known to the department. The reduced question set also applies to the
ACC process where applicable.

For information about claiming online, see Youth Allowance and Austudy
students and Australian Apprentices online claims and Assisted Customer
Claims.

Early claim

Under the early claim provisions, a claim for YA can be made up to 13
weeks before the student or Australian Apprentice becomes qualified for
payment. Some claims that are submitted early may not be able to be
assessed until the customer becomes qualified for YA. For example,
current JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers transferring to YA where their
apprenticeship start date is in the future.

The student or Australian Apprentice will be advised when to submit the
claim(s) to ensure full entitlement, and of other
documentation/information that will be required when lodging the claim.
This may include:

-   Identity Confirmation documentation
-   Tax File Number(s)
-   other supporting documentation

Note: advise customers that before submitting their claim, all required
documents must be provided. Exceptions are made to customers identified
as vulnerable. See Circumstance Change Monitor for more information.

The Resources page contains Services Australia website links to the
Students and trainees page, myGov, Claiming a payment online and
Centrelink self service options. It also contains an Intranet link for
the Claim for Youth Allowance.

Related links

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card Options online

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students, trainees and
Australian Apprentices (apprentices or trainees)

Employment assistance for full-time students

Employment assistance for students moving from secondary to tertiary
studies

Assessing and coding students and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Determining the minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA)

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Searching for a customer on the system

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Circumstance Change Monitor

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
