
Fares Allowance (FAA) authorised in advance of travel for ABSTUDY 010-02100040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers in
authorising and booking travel for eligible ABSTUDY students and
approved travellers in advance of their journey.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

ABSTUDY FAA is payable to eligible ABSTUDY students who are required to
live away from their permanent home to study or are participating in an
approved Away from Base activity. Generally, travel will be pre-booked
for the ABSTUDY student or approved traveller through Services
Australia's Travel Management Company (TMC). Travel can only be
pre-booked for ABSTUDY students and approved travellers who meet the
eligibility requirements for FAA.

Requesting fares to be booked in advance

An individual request for fares to be authorised and booked in advance
of the journey will normally need to be received by Services Australia
no later than 10 days before the journey.

Boarding schools or hostels that are organising a group travel request
for ABSTUDY secondary school students and approved travellers must
contact the agency no later than 6 weeks before the travel date.

This allows the ABSTUDY Smart Centre Travel and Away from Base Teams and
the Travel Management Company (TMC) enough time to source travel
providers and finalise bookings, and provide travel itineraries for all
travellers.

Where possible, forward and return travel arrangements should always be
booked for ABSTUDY travellers.

When authorising travel in advance, the TMC will be informed of the ages
of young secondary boarding students so that appropriate travel
arrangements are made. The TMC should ensure, for example, that young
students travel on the most direct route and are scheduled to arrive at
their destination at a reasonable hour. This is particularly important
where students are from remote communities and travelling without a
supervisor.

Safe Travel Plan (STP)

A Safe Travel Plan (STP) is developed between the school and the
student's family and ensures that options are in place in case of a
travel disruption.

Supervisor requirements

Services Australia may determine a secondary school student, or any
student under 18 years of age, needs mandatory supervision when
assessing a pre-booked travel request.

Service Officers must strongly encourage parent/guardian(s) to nominate
a supervisor for all other secondary students under 18 years of age who
are travelling great distances, on multiple carriers or who may be at
risk of a travel disruption.

Note: supervision may be requested after student travel has already been
booked. Treat these requests as individual travel requests and not
variations.

For further information on who can be a supervisor, see Non-student
travellers for ABSTUDY.

Weekend travel

For secondary students

Travel must not be booked on weekends or after hours, unless the student
has a supervisor and a Safe Travel Plan (STP) in place, as appropriate
support is not available if the student experiences disrupted travel.

If an education or boarding institution specifically requests weekend
travel, they must ensure that an appropriate supervisor is nominated to
travel with the student, and an STP is in place.

For tertiary students

There are minimal restrictions in place for tertiary students requesting
weekend travel.

If weekend travel is requested by a tertiary student or approved
traveller, the following must be taken into account:

-   duration of travel
-   flight availability
-   departure and arrival times

Prior to booking weekend travel, the student or approved traveller must
be made aware that if travel is approved and they experience disrupted
travel, they are responsible for managing the disruption including
overnight accommodation.

Variations to pre-booked travel

Students, parents/guardians, board providers or education institutions
can make travel variation or cancellation requests to Services
Australia.

Approval of requests to vary pre-booked travel, or travel authorised in
advance, occurs only if the variation or cancellation relates to:

-    unforeseen or exceptional circumstances, or
-    other allowable exceptions. See Determining the appropriate travel
    destination for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

For further information, see the Process page.

Cancellations to pre-booked travel

Travel cancellation requests can be made to Services Australia by
students, parents/guardians, board providers or education institutions.

Students and approved travellers must carefully consider their
cancellation request because if the journey is cancelled, then another
booking for the same journey will not be accepted. For further
information, see the Process page.

The agency needs a minimum of 24 hours' notice to cancel travel
arrangements on behalf of the traveller without penalty under the
agency's travel contract.

If a student or approved traveller does not request to cancel travel
arrangements at least 24 hours before departure, a No Show - Penalty may
be applied. For further information, see No show for ABSTUDY travel.

Away from home entitlements are to be reassessed when a secondary
boarding school student discontinues study before the end of term.
Eligibility to the 'away from home' rate will cease from the date the
student discontinues study.

Travel not undertaken

If travel is arranged, or a ticket authorised for a student or approved
traveller, and they do not travel as arranged, penalties may apply. For
further information, see No show for ABSTUDY travel.

Excluded students

Excluded students who subsequently re-enrol with the same school, may
have FAA authorised in advance for travel, even where the same journey
was previously cancelled because of the exclusion.

FAA claim processing

The ABSTUDY Smart Centre Travel and Away from Base Teams are responsible
for assessing all FAA claims, including authorising and booking travel.
See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries.

Accessing travel details

Copies of all travel itineraries are attached to the student's or
approved traveller's travel booking in the Travel Management Application
(TMA).

For further information, see Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA)
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES).

Destinations for advance bookings

FAA authorised in advance is usually booked between the student's or
approved traveller's permanent home and their term address. However, FAA
may be approved to or from an alternate location in some circumstances.
For further information, see Determining the appropriate travel
destination for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA).

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

Non-student travellers for ABSTUDY

Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Determining the appropriate travel destination for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
