
Relocation Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate study 010-02050040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the purpose of, eligibility for, and costs
covered by Relocation Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate study.

Relocation Allowance

Relocation Allowance is for full-time students who need to move to
another town or city to take up Masters or Doctorate studies. This
allowance is paid as an alternative to fares allowance. Once relocated,
there is no further travel entitlement to return to the former home
location. See Resources for a link to the Services Australia website for
information and rates for Relocation Allowance.

Eligibility for Relocation Allowance

For payment of Relocation Allowance, the student must:

qualify for the Masters and Doctorate Award, and

be receiving one of the following:

-   Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   a Defence Force Income Support-like payment under the Veterans
    Entitlements Act 1986

To qualify for payment of Relocation Allowance or tuition fees under the
Masters or Doctorate Award for the same period, students only need to
receive $1.00 of entitlement during the academic year claimed.

Costs covered by Relocation Allowance

Relocation Allowance pays for removal costs to cover transportation of
belongings through a removalist or hire truck and fares to the study
location for the student, the student's partner and dependent
child(ren).

Relocation Allowance does not cover the cost of establishing a new home.

Relocation Scholarship

An ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate student may also be eligible for the
Relocation Scholarship (RS). The student must meet the qualification
criteria for the RS. The payment of the Relocation Allowance does not
prevent a student being eligible for the RS

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information on Relocation Allowance.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

Masters and Doctorate travel for ABSTUDY

Payment of tuition fees or Student Contribution for ABSTUDY Masters and
Doctorate study

Thesis Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate

Assessing study load requirements

Payment rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
