
Processing ABSTUDY School Term Allowance payments 010-02050030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to enquiries and processing
of ABSTUDY School Term Allowance payments.

School Term Allowance

School Term Allowance assists Indigenous families with expenses
associated with the commencement of school for students aged under 16
years.

Eligibility

A student must meet attendance requirements to qualify for ABSTUDY
School Term Allowance (STA) payments. Automatic payment of the ABSTUDY
STA will apply to qualified students enrolled in and attending a
secondary school in Term 1 of the school year. Payment of STA in
subsequent terms requires qualified students to have attendance of 85
per cent or more in the previous term. See Rates and Thresholds for
current and historical rates of payment.

The ISIS system assesses the qualification requirements for STA against
the relevant term entitlement period. Students who lose their
qualification for STA before the start of a school term in a state or
territory, but within the term entitlement period, may still be eligible
for STA payment for that term. See the Resources page for examples.

Coronavirus COVID-19

As a result of COVID-19 disrupting normal study arrangements for many
students during 2020, the Department of Social Services implemented a
temporary policy change for assessment of STA for the term 3 and 4
payments in 2020 only. Payment of STA in term 3 and 4 requires a student
to have attendance of 85% or more in term 1 of 2020. Therefore, a check
was not undertaken with schools for student attendance in term 2 and 3
2020. Customer records were updated by a dedicated team based on the
attendance result recorded for term 1 2020. See the Resources page for
scenarios.

Payment

School Term Allowance (STA) rates are the same for:

-   Terms 1 and 3
-   Terms 2 and 4

Changes to a student's circumstances throughout a term may affect the
rate of STA paid for that term.

See Rates and Thresholds for current and historical rate information.

Payments will issue when there is a recorded attendance result as
Satisfactory (SAT). This confirms the student has met the 85% attendance
requirement for the relevant term.

ABSTUDY students who are enrolled in:

-   Home Schooling
-   Distance Education, or
-   Undertaking secondary schooling at a vocational education and
    training institution, for example, TAFE

Are considered to have met the 85 per cent attendance requirement where
the education authority appropriate to their method of study that is, a
state or territory education authority, a distance education provider or
vocational education and training provider certify they have met the
requirements of the course for the previous term.

Note: students undertaking Home Schooling in NSW, TAS, or WA are
required to confirm a current registration in order to meet the 85%
attendance requirement for payment of ABSTUDY School Term Allowance in
the relevant term.

The following requires manual assessment when a student:

-   commences study late in a term
-   discontinues studying part way through a term
-   changes schools during the school term

These students may be eligible for STA if they have completed at least
85% of the total days of the school term.

An ABSTUDY Schooling A claim submitted or finalised before the closing
date, but after the Term 1 entitlement period, will require a manual
retrospective assessment. Arrears of STA payments will be issued once
attendance has been confirmed and recorded.

Payments issued through Payments Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

There are some circumstances where the system cannot correctly pay
School Term Allowance to a qualified student. Issuing of the payment
must occur through the Payments Adjustment (PYAJ) screen. This includes
circumstances where a student has turned 16 years old midway through a
school term.

The Resources page contains links to the Education Institutions
eService, contact details, scenarios, OTAC release dates, OTAC and Q999
letters.

Related links

ABSTUDY School Term Allowance

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A Award

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) at home rate (Group 1)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
