
Reimbursing fares after the customer has died for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-04060070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Fares Allowance (FAA) claims made
for a deceased estate. It shows Service Officers the coding to grant a
FAA claim for a deceased estate.

When a customer is not eligible

If a customer has used frequent flyer points to undertake their trip,
they are not eligible for reimbursement.

Fares Allowance may be reimbursed for a non-frequent flyer portion of a
fare where evidence is provided. For example, a customer booked a flight
using a combination of frequent flyer points and payment.

Fares Allowance (FAA) can only be paid for travel within Australia.

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to Fares Allowance.

Payment options

Payment of FAA is usually made by lump sum to the student's account.
This would remain the preferred method of payment for deceased students
as it may be assumed that the legal executors of the estate will have
access to the bank account. Immediate payment of FAA may be arranged if
the authorised person is in financial hardship due to verified costs
associated with the student's death.

Coding of claim

Coding the claim for FAA for a deceased student is similar to processing
payments for a living student. However, as the student's record may not
be current, special care will be taken by Services Australia to avoid
overpayments arising and inappropriate advices being sent to relatives
and/or others.

Timeliness of claim lodgement

Another person may claim FAA on behalf of a deceased student and their
estate within 26 weeks after death and before 1 April in the year after
the year of study. Extended lodgement may be approved by the Secretary
outside of 26 weeks if special circumstances apply.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) after a customer has
died

Reimbursing fares for the cheapest mode of public transport for Youth
Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Reimbursing fares for the use of a private vehicle or taxi for Youth
Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
