
Referrals to Course Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs) 010-20100142

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to make referrals to a Course Assessment and
Liaison Officer (CALO).

National Course Approvals (NCA)

Investigate the approval of a course and/or education provider for
student payments by accessing the National Course Approvals sub-site
before:

-   making a decision, or
-   advising customers about approved courses and education providers

Private providers

There is a provider page within the National Course Approvals sub-site
if there is an assessment for a private provider. If there is no page
for a private provider, create a CALO referral. See the Process page for
details.

The absence of a provider page for a private provider is not an
indication the education provider or their courses are unapproved. Where
a course delivered by a private provider has been assessed, details are
found on the Assessed Courses tab of the provider's page.

If a course at an assessed private provider is not listed:

-   go to the Institution Information tab
-   select the Education authority link and review the Scope tab

If the course is:

listed under the Scope tab:

-   create a CALO Referral

not listed under the Scope tab:

-   contact the customer to clarify their enrolment circumstance and
    request Proof of Enrolment before creating a CALO Referral

Diploma level or higher courses can only be approved if both the
education provider and the course are Vet Student Loan (VSL) approved.
If a customer advises they are studying a Diploma or higher level
course, check the Assessed courses tab.

If message No Diploma or Higher level courses starting from 1/1/2018 are
approved with this provider displays, do not to send a CALO Referral,
even if the course is listed under the Scope tab. This does not apply to
ABSTUDY courses approved as Indigenous Special Courses (ISC) or Tertiary
Access Payment (TAP). Diploma level or higher courses do not need to be
VSL approved to be approved for ABSTUDY Indigenous Special Courses (ISC)
or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP).

If the course has not been assessed as an ISC but would meet the
criteria of an ISC send a CALO referral.

Note: if a current ABSTUDY customer is undertaking an approved course
that becomes non approved for ABSTUDY purposes, the customer can
continue to receive their payment until they finish the course, provided
there is no break in entitlement.

Private providers may deliver or outsource delivery of courses to other
education providers under a partnering agreement. Known partnering
agreements are found on the relevant provider page. Service Officers
must make sure partnering arrangements are considered when assessing
qualification.

TAFE

All TAFEs have a provider page within the National Course Approvals
sub-site.

A spreadsheet detailing approved and non-approved courses is on the
Assessed Courses tab of each TAFE's provider page. Refer to the
following sub-headings:

-   List of Vocational Education and Training (VET) Courses
-   Approved Undergraduate and Postgraduate (Higher Education) courses,
    and
-   Approved Courses with Structure Explanation

Universities

All Universities have a provider page within the National Course
Approvals sub-site.

Australian Universities are self-accrediting education providers, apart
from those listed as Unapproved Courses on the relevant university page
of the National Course Approvals sub-site:

for ABSTUDY, all university courses are considered approved, including
Masters and Doctorates with the exception of ABSTUDY excluded courses
which are assessed on a case by case basis

for YA, Austudy and PES customers:

-   Doctorate level courses are not approved
-   Approved Masters are located on the Approved Masters Courses list

all other courses are considered approved

Combined courses or those with anomalies are under Assessed Courses on
the university's provider page in, Approved Higher Education (HED)
courses with structure explanations section.

Courses and providers that are yet to be assessed

Create a CALO Referral in Process Direct after completing relevant
checks, to determine if a course can be approved if:

-   an education provider does not have its own provider page, or
-   there is no assessment for a course that is available on an
    education provider's Scope tab

The CALO will:

-   assess the referral
-   request course details and/or other information from the education
    provider
-   annotate the Notes section of the CALO Referral in Process Direct,
    and
-   finalise the referral

Diploma level or higher courses can only be approved if both the
education provider and the course are VET Student Loan (VSL) approved.
If a customer advises they are studying a Diploma or higher level
course, check the Assessed courses tab. If the message No Diploma or
Higher level courses starting from 1/1/2018 are approved with this
provider displays, do not send a CALO Referral even if the course is
listed under the Scope tab.

CALO Referrals with Linked Transactions

CALO Referrals in Process Direct can be initiated from within certain
New Claim and Change of Circumstance transactions. These are known as
Linked Transactions as the referral is linked to the originating
transaction and will change the work item's status to:

-   On HOLD, when the CALO Referral is created, and
-   In Process, when the CALO Referral is finalised

Only transactions that are processed in Process Direct can be a Linked
Transaction. See the Resources page for a list of Linked Transactions.

To create a referral from a Linked Transaction, the work item status
must be open. For example, In Process, In Progress or For Manual Action.

Standalone CALO Referrals

Create a standalone CALO referral to:

-   answer a customer enquiry
-   process an update that is not processed in Process Direct, or
-   process an update that is not associated with a Linked Transaction

See the Resources page for a list of Linked Transactions.

Urgent CALO referral

If the customer meets the definition of at risk flag the CALO Referral
as urgent. The referral will be prioritised for assessment. See the
Process page for details.

Viewing completed CALO referrals

Completed CALO Referrals can be found under the Transactions tab in
Process Direct by clicking on ALL Transactions. Select the CALO Referral
and click next to step through the completed referral to view details of
the referral. CALO notes for completed referrals can be viewed in the
Notes section of Process Direct by selecting the CALO Referral and
selecting the Display/Note icon.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site and Linked Transactions.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Approved courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
