
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information around qualifying study for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES).

Eligibility criteria

A customer must be undertaking, or intending to undertake a qualifying
course of study to be eligible for PES. The study load may be either
full-time (at least 75 percent of the 'normal amount of full-time
study'), or a concessional study load (at least 25 percent concessional
study load or 66 percent concessional study load).

This topic only addresses PES and provides information about the type of
study.

Qualifying study

'Qualifying study' is a course which is approved under the Student
Assistance (Education Institutions and Courses) determination 2019. The
types of courses are listed in the Determination. The References page
contains a link to the Determination. 'Qualifying study' is also known
as 'approved study'. Small Business Training courses (as part of
Self-Employment Assistance) may be approved for PES.

Note: a customer cannot be considered to be undertaking qualifying study
if they are employed on a full-time basis as an apprentice or trainee
including an Australian Apprenticeship. A customer also cannot be
considered to be undertaking qualifying study if they have previously
completed a degree of Master or Doctor at an Australian or overseas
education institution.

Contents

Assessing qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for 66% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing satisfactory progress for secondary students for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing satisfactory progress and allowable time for tertiary students
for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Related links

Assessing the pensioner study load concession for ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
