
ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2) 010-02050110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2) is to
assist Indigenous secondary school students and their
parent(s)/guardian(s) to meet the costs of the School fees charge levied
by the approved education provider.

Home schooled, distance education and overseas exchanges

Home schooled, distance education students and students on overseas
exchanges may also qualify for SFA. Even though they do not physically
attend at a school, they may have fees levied by an education provider
that meets SFA (Group 2) requirements.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY SFA (Group 2)

To determine if the student is eligible for ABSTUDY School Fees
Allowance (Group 2), see the Process page.

Payment delivery

ABSTUDY SFA (Group 2) can be paid either to the school or to the person
incurring the expenses. For further information, see the Process page.

Payment rate

The SFA (Group 2) payment rate includes two components - one is income
tested and the other is not.

The income tested component of SFA (Group 2) will be reduced by The
Parental Means Test.

The Personal Income Test does not affect the rate of SFA (Group 2).

Where a student is only entitled to the non-means tested SFA (Group 2),
the parent/guardian should also be encouraged to test their eligibility
for Family Tax Benefit (FTB). Payment of the non-means tested SFA (Group
2) component will not exclude a student from being an FTB child.

From 1 January 2020, customers aged 16-19 years who receive a means
tested SFA (Group 2) payment as a full-time secondary student and live
away from home to attend secondary studies, will not be excluded from
being an FTB child.

Student changes schools or ceases study

If a student ceases study and/or changes schools (including mid-term
changes), further entitlement to SFA (Group 2) will be determined by the
date the student discontinued.

SFA (Group 2) is payable for a subsequent school in circumstances where
the student changes schools during the school year (including mid-term
changes), and incurs a new School fees charge at the new school. The
available SFA (Group 2) payable for school fees at the subsequent school
is the lower of:

-   the unused portion of the student's maximum entitlement of SFA
    (Group 2), or
-   the annual school fee amount charged by the school

Students paid SFA (Group 2) who satisfy the away from home criteria due
to limited local school facilities or travel time and access criteria
but elect to remain at home and attend a local non-government school,
will always have a debt raised for the unused portion of the school
fees, regardless of the institution's refund policy. The unused portion
can be transferred to the new school.

Transfer of unused SFA (Group 2) to pay boarding costs

If a student is eligible to receive the away from home rate of Living
Allowance and boards at a hostel, boarding school, or in an approved
ABSTUDY Homestay arrangement, and the level of boarding fees charged by
the boarding institution is more than the Living Allowance entitlement
for the full year, then the remaining SFA (Group 2) may be used to meet
outstanding board fees. Transfer of unused SFA (Group 2) to meet excess
board costs is automatic.

No Local Government School and SFA (Group 2)

See the Resources page for the SFA (Group 2) Invite letter that can be
sent to private schools.

Secondary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic, which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some boarding providers closed and others had reduced capacity due
to social distancing requirements within the board facility.
Additionally, some students may not be able to return to their board
arrangements due to travel restrictions. Students who returned to the
permanent home and did not return to their boarding arrangements in Term
2, 3 or 4 of 2020 or Term 3 or 4 of 2021 or Term 1 or 2 of 2022 may
continue to be eligible for SFA (Group 2).

Continuing students

Students remain eligible for SFA (Group 2) in Term 2, 3 or 4 of 2020 and
Term 3 or 4 of 2021 or Term 1 or 2 of 2022 if:

-   they were approved for boarding entitlements in the term immediately
    prior
-   the student remains enrolled/registered for the same boarding
    arrangement during the relevant term
-   their board provider held a boarding place for them
-   the student intended to return to board as soon as possible, and
-   the school/board provider continued to support the student study
    remotely using other methods, such as online

Continuing students who changed board providers

Eligibility to SFA (Group 2) for continuing students who commenced with
a new board provider in Term 2, 3 or 4 of 2020 and Term 3 or 4 of 2021
or Term 1 or 2 of 2022 was dependant on their study mode and enrolment
or acceptance date.

Continuing students who have changed board providers before the first
day of the relevant term, remain eligible for SFA (Group 2) where:

-   they were approved for boarding entitlements in the term immediately
    prior to the impacted term
-   their board provider holds a boarding place for them in the impacted
    term
-   the student intends to return to board as soon as possible, and
-   the school/board provider continues to support the student study
    remotely using other methods, such as online

Students who changed board providers after the first day of the relevant
term, will only be eligible once they physically present at the new
boarding provider.

There is no change for students who continued to board and study in
person.

New Claims

For ABSTUDY boarding claims granted from 1 April 2020, a student will be
eligible for SFA (Group 2) in Term 2 of 2020 if they were:

-   accepted to board before the end of Term 1 and will study either in
    person or online during Term 2, or
-   accepted to board after the start of Term 2 and will physically
    attend at the boarding provider during Term 2

For new ABSTUDY boarding claims, a student will only qualify for SFA
(Group 2) in Term 3 or 4 of 2021 or Term 1 or 2 of 2022 if the student's
enrolment was finalised before the first day of the relevant term and:

-   the student satisfies eligibility criteria for Away From Home
    entitlements
-   the student remains enrolled/registered for the same boarding
    arrangement during the relevant term
-   their board provider held a boarding place for them
-   the student intended to commence the boarding arrangements as soon
    as possible
-   the school/board provider continued to support the student study
    remotely using other methods, such as online

Assess these claims as per Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling B
Award, Tertiary Award and Masters and Doctorate Award.

For all other ABSTUDY boarding claims, a student will only qualify for
SFA (Group 2) once the students physically attends the boarding
provider.

There was no change for students who continued to board and study in
person.

The Resources page contains examples of the SFA (Group 2) invite letter,
a link to the 'CEPS-Third Party Payments' form, examples of how to
manually calculate payments for boarding students and an ABSTUDY Living
Allowance and School Fees Group 2 calculation template.

Related links

Rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
