
Claiming ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES 010-05010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about claiming requirements for
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) PES.

On this Page:

Policy

-   ABSTUDY PES payments are administered under the ABSTUDY Policy.
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES is administered under the
    Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme Guidelines.

Claiming ABSTUDY PES

Customers can claim ABSTUDY PES by calling ABSTUDY on 1800 132 317 or
lodging a paper claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(SY020).

Some customers eligible for ABSTUDY PES may also be eligible for PES.
Each type of PES has different associated entitlements (eg Incidentals
Allowance and Away from Base Assistance available to ABSTUDY PES
recipients or Education Entry Payment available to PES recipients) and
its own claim form. Customers should therefore claim the PES type most
beneficial or appropriate to their circumstances, noting only one type
of PES is payable at a time.

For any ABSTUDY PES claim it must be established that the claimant is
currently receiving a qualifying income support payment from either
Services Australia or the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) and is
either intending to undertake or is currently undertaking an approved
course of education or study. Note: there is a separate process for DVA
customers.

Claiming AIC PES

Applicants claiming AIC PES for a student are required to complete the
Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (SY040) form.

For an AIC PES claim it must be established that the student is
currently receiving Parenting Payment Single or Disability Support
Pension. In addition the student must meet one of the AIC isolation
conditions, and be:

-   boarding away from home, undertaking distance education or similar
    study or living in a second family home that provides better access
    to local schooling
-   aged under 21 years and
-   studying at primary level or equivalent ungraded level.

The Resources page contains links to Online Forms.

Contents

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and ABSTUDY (PES)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020)

Related links

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Qualifying payments for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme claims

Completing the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040)

Completing the Claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (SY004)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
