
Assessing Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) claims 010-05040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of the PES which is paid
fortnightly. The amount payable depends on the qualifying payment the
applicant is receiving. PES is administered under social security law.

Eligibility and qualification for PES

Customers receiving a qualifying payment for PES and undertaking
relevant study are qualified for PES in addition to the primary
qualifying income support payment. Customers must satisfy basic
qualifications:

-   minimum age
-   be receiving a qualifying income support payment. Verify receipt of
    this payment before proceeding with the PES assessment
-   residency requirements, and
-   qualifying study

Claim lodgement rules

PES closing date rules are the same as ABSTUDY PES (no concessions for
late lodgement).

Note: for customers in vulnerable circumstances, see Intent to claim and
vulnerable customers.

PES processing arrangements

PES processing has been consolidated into Smart Centre Processing
centres nationally. See  Office Locator  >  Student Network - National
PES / AIC > Office Messages > Office Notes.

Unfavourable decisions and internal review

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   allow them to provide more information, and
-   explain their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains a link to the Claim for Pensioner Education
Supplement (SY004).

Contents

Assessing Claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) (SY004)

Calculating the start day for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and
ABSTUDY PES

Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, Austudy, Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Related links

Qualifying payments for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY
PES

Review of decision

Making an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
