-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine the duration that ABSTUDY is
payable. There are limits placed on the amount of study an ABSTUDY
student may undertake and still remain eligible for payment.

Reasonable time rules for ABSTUDY

Reasonable time rules for ABSTUDY customers apply to customers studying
secondary non-school or tertiary level courses. Reasonable time is
related to the normal length of the student's current course (the normal
length of a course is also known as minimum time). To determine whether
a student has reached this limit, the student's study in the current
course is assessed. Study in previous courses may also be included. If
the student is not making sufficient progress towards completing their
course then ABSTUDY may cease.

Limits of assistance for courses

Limits of assistance rules do not apply to studies other than Statement
of Attainment, Certificate levels 1 and 2, Bachelor, Masters or
Doctorate level courses.

ABSTUDY assistance is limited to:

four years of study for any combination of Statement of Attainment,
Certificate 1 or 2 level courses, and

one completed undergraduate Bachelor degree, or time equivalent to one
completed undergraduate Bachelor degree (including Honours, Masters
qualifying year/s, combined degrees and/or prerequisite studies), and

one of the following three options:

-   one (or time equivalent to one) completed degree at Master level and
    one (or time equivalent to one) completed at Doctorate level
-   two (or time equivalent to two) completed degrees at Masters level,
    or
-   two (or time equivalent to two) completed degrees at Doctorate level

Where a student has reached or exceeded the limit of assistance for a
particular level of study, no form of ABSTUDY assistance is payable for
further studies at that level.

Assessing eligibility for ABSTUDY

When assessing eligibility for ABSTUDY it is necessary to consider:

-   how much previous study the student has done (in addition to the
    current study)
-   whether any of that study can be disregarded
-   whether addition to/extension of reasonable time should be allowed

The ABSTUDY progress rules limit the length of time a student may
receive ABSTUDY to study in a particular course. Where a student has
reached or exceeded the reasonable time and/or limit of assistance for
study in a course, ABSTUDY is no longer payable.

The Resources page contains examples of situations that may arise when
determining the duration of ABSTUDY assistance, a link to Australian
Universities as held on the Universities Australia website and links to
pages containing links to University and TAFE websites.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY PES, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
