
Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding 010-07030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for payment and coding of the
Relocation Scholarship (RS).

Relocation Scholarship (RS)

The RS is intended to help students with the cost of establishing
accommodation away from their usual home to undertake qualifying higher
education studies

See Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility for more information.

Rates of RS

There are 3 rates of RS:

-   higher rate
-   regional rate
-   lower rate

The rate a student is eligible for depends on:

-   the number of RS qualifying year(s) the student has undertaken, and
-   the regional classification of the RS family home

See Rates and thresholds for the current amounts.

Higher rate of RS

The higher rate of RS can only be paid once and is determined by
calculating the number of RS qualifying year(s) the student has
undertaken, and (if applicable) the number of years the student has
received an RS precluding payment.

An eligible student will receive the higher rate of RS if:

-   they have not previously received an RS or an RS precluding payment,
    and
-   the student does not have a previous RS qualifying year(s)

Exception: a student who has previous RS qualifying year(s) may still
receive the higher rate of RS if the first time that a student was both
studying an approved scholarship course, and required to live away from
home or independent due to personal circumstances was less than 6 months
before the student's current RS qualification date.

See Rates and thresholds for the current amounts.

Regional rate of RS

The regional rate cannot be paid more than twice and is determined by
the regional classification of the RS family home location and
calculation of the student's RS qualifying year(s).

An eligible student will receive the regional rate of RS if they have 1
or 2 (but no more than 2) previous calendar years where:

-   the year is considered a RS qualifying year or they received a RS
    precluding payment and
-   their RS family home is located in an area classified as non-major
    (inner regional, outer regional, remote, or very remote) according
    to the Australian Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS)

See Rates and thresholds for the current amounts.

Lower rate of RS

The lower rate is paid to students who qualify for RS and:

-   they are in their fourth and subsequent year(s) of study, or
-   the RS family home is/was in a major city location and they have
    provided verification of study location in a regional location, or
-   initial qualification rules were satisfied in relation to when their
    course of study commenced and in a subsequent year of the course the
    RS family home and study locations are both in major city locations

See Rates and thresholds for the current amounts.

Latest RLD screen entry used to determine rate:

Prior to 2 December 2017, where a Regional Location Details (RLD) screen
entry was not recorded for a subsequent year of study the system was
paying the lower rate of RS.

A change was made as part of 2 December 2017 Major ICT Release resulting
in the most recent RLD screen entry being used to determine the rate of
RS payable. This change was retrospectively applied, which resulted in
some students being eligible to receive arrears payments for the
difference in rates (lower vs regional) – for example. $1,068 (2015),
$1,084 (2016), $1,095 (2017).

Recording the regional location

To ensure the correct rate of RS is calculated, the following
information must be recorded on the Regional Location Details (RLD)
screen:

-   the regional classification of the RS family home, and
-   the regional classification of the student's study location(s)

This coding on RLD is mandatory for Youth Allowance (YA) (Student) and
ABSTUDY Living Allowance students undertaking an approved scholarship
course. The coding will help determine a student's eligibility for the
RS as well as the correct rate of scholarship to be paid.

If a student resides in a major city but their study location is located
outside of a major city, verification of this must also be recorded on
the RLD screen.

The Resources page contains links to the Student Regional Area Search
Tool and Google maps, and an attachment to determine the latitude and
longitude of a student's home address.

Payment of RS

There is no claim form for RS. It is usually paid automatically to
eligible students. However, some students will need to provide
appropriate verification of their study location before RS can be paid.

If a student is required to provide verification of their campus
location, RS will not be paid until they provide appropriate
verification and the RLD screen has been updated.

RS is not payable unless the student is receiving Youth Allowance (YA)
(Student) or ABSTUDY Living Allowance.

A person is considered to be receiving YA or ABSTUDY Living Allowance or
Energy Supplement if at least $1 of basic benefit is payable in the
period.

Subject to the above:

-   for new claimants of YA and ABSTUDY Living Allowance, RS is usually
    paid with their first income support payment after grant, as long as
    all qualification criteria are met
-   for continuing students RS is usually paid late February or early
    March each year
-   for new claimants and continuing students who are required to
    provide verification of their study location, RS is paid on the
    student's next normal payday after the receipt of completed
    Verification of Campus form (SY101) and subsequent update of the RLD
    screen

RS is paid to the same bank account as the student's YA or ABSTUDY
Living Allowance payment.

Treatment of RS payments

RS payments are:

-   not taxable or means tested
-   income managed at 100% for income managed students
-   not included when calculating a student's advance payment
    entitlement
-   not treated as income for social security purposes

Overpayments of RS

An RS debt may be raised only if a student had no entitlement to an RS
for the period the payment was made.

If a person is found to have been ineligible for RS in relation to a
particular RS period, the full amount of the RS paid for that period
must be raised as a debt. It is not possible to raise an RS debt for a
proportional amount, except when raising a debt for the difference
between higher and lower rates of RS.

Before raising an overpayment, Service Officers must check the actual
start date of study or the date Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY was
granted (if the student was qualified for payment after they commenced
their course) and work out whether the student was undertaking study on
day 35.

When RS is not payable

-   If RS qualification requirements are not met, see Relocation
    Scholarship (RS) eligibility
-   If at the time of course commencement, the student's RS family home
    is in a major city area and the study location is also a major city
    location
-   If, where required, the student fails to provide verification of
    their non-major city study location

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains information about determining the amount of
RS payable, links to the SY101 form and the Student Regional Area Search
tool, and an attachment to find the longitude and latitude of a
student's home address, plus examples of calculating payments and
overpayments of RS.

Related links

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Commonwealth Scholarships

Assessing scholarship income

Payment of Residential Costs Option (RCO) for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
