
Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY 010-02100020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to determine if a student is
eligible for ABSTUDY FAA.

The purpose of FAA

The purpose of FAA is to cover the cost of travel to enable students to
attend their study while maintaining contact with their home community.
FAA is paid for travel between the student's permanent home and place of
study, although travel to a destination other than the permanent home or
usual study location may be available in certain circumstances. What is
considered the student's permanent home for FAA needs to be taken into
account. It cannot be paid for daily travel between the student's study
residence and the education institution.

FAA may be payable in circumstances where quarantine or self-isolation
is required.

Who may be eligible for FAA

FAA may be available to the following students:

-   full-time and concessional study-load dependent secondary and
    tertiary students eligible for the away from home rate
-   full-time and concessional study-load independent and pensioner
    students who meet 1 of the away from home criteria, and who need to
    study away from their permanent home
-   full-time and concessional study-load Masters and Doctorate students
    (instead of Relocation Allowance)
-   full-time, concessional study-load and part-time students to attend
    an approved Away From Base activity

FAA may also be available to non-student travellers.

A student or non-student traveller meeting the eligibility criteria to
access FAA assistance is subject to limits on the number of journeys, or
the total allowable cost of some travel types. Some restrictions may
also apply on interstate travel.

The amount of FAA payable depends on the mode of transport to which the
customer is assessed as being entitled.

Students requiring mandatory supervision during travel

Services Australia may determine a student requires mandatory
supervision while travelling. A student requiring mandatory supervision,
must be accompanied by an approved supervisor for FAA to be authorised
in advance of travel. This does not affect claims for reimbursement
after the journey has taken place.

Safe Travel Plans

A Safe Travel Plan (STP) is mandatory for all primary and secondary
student travellers under 18 years of age seeking to have their travel
pre-booked by Services Australia.

Claiming Fares Allowance

FAA can be authorised in advance of travel, however approved student and
non-student travellers may be penalised if they do not travel. To claim
for reimbursement after a journey has taken place, approved student and
non-student travellers must lodge an ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
(SY032) by the closing date.

For information on assessing Fare Allowance claims, see Processing
arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries.

The Resources page contains links to the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
(SY032) and useful links.

Related links

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
