
Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY 010-02060020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assist with determining the
appropriate payee and payment frequency for the delivery of ABSTUDY Away
from Home (AFH) allowances.

On this Page:

Eligibility for the Away from Home allowances

A customer who is approved for away from home rate may be entitled to a
range of allowances intended to assist with the costs associated with
undertaking study or an Australian Apprenticeship (apprentice or
trainee) away from their permanent home.

Payee and payment frequency

The payee and payment frequency of these Away from Home allowances is
dependent on the customer’s circumstances, including:

-   study level - tertiary, secondary non-schooling, secondary or
    Australian Apprentice
-   type of allowance
-   living arrangements while studying or working as an Australian
    Apprentice
-   level of entitlement
-   age

Who can be the payee?

ABSTUDY policy provisions determine who the correct payee is and the
payment delivery frequency. Correct coding of away from home allowances
on the customer’s record ensures the payment is delivered to the
appropriate payee.

The payee for these Away from Home allowances can be either the:

-   student or Australian Apprentice
-   parent
-   school
-   hostel providing board
-   a private board provider
-   or a combination of payees

A customer with multiple allowances may have different payees for each
allowance.

Tertiary and non-secondary student's payee

For tertiary and non-secondary students and Australian Apprentices who
are approved to live Away from Home, the payee for Living Allowance will
normally be the customer. The Living Allowance is paid
fortnight-in-arrears. Note: a student can choose payment via the
Residential Costs Option and direct payment to the residential college,
with the student receiving a reduced fortnight-in-arrears payment.

Secondary school student's payee

For secondary school students who are approved to live Away from Home,
the payee for Living Allowance and School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)
(where applicable) can be either the:

-   person who paid the school fee amount in full
-   boarding school or hostel
-   private boarder provider
-   parent/guardian, or
-   secondary school student

A secondary school student who is boarding privately, or who is boarding
at a school or hostel, may qualify for total entitlements which exceed
the board charge of the board provider. Any residual away from home rate
of Living Allowance in excess of the board charge is paid
fortnight-in-arrears to the appropriate payee as determined by this
procedure.

State care

In general, students or Australian Apprentices who qualify for ABSTUDY
under this provision receive their allowances direct, or where a student
attends a boarding school, some or all of the payments are made to the
institution. The carer does not receive payments on the student's or
Australian Apprentice's behalf.

However, the authority may request that payment be made direct to the
care giver or a person nominated by the student or Australian
Apprentice, if:

-   the relevant government authority or an organisation approved by
    that authority believes that payment of allowances direct to younger
    students or Australian Apprentices could jeopardise the
    student-carer or Australian Apprentice-carer relationship, or
-   it is determined that the student or Australian Apprentice is unable
    to manage his/her own finances, for example a student in a special
    school

The Resources page contains examples of how the ABSTUDY Away from Home
Rate is calculated and who can receive the payment. It also has links to
the Services Australia website and to the Request for private board
provider details form.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement

Payment on Advice for ABSTUDY away from home rate

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2))

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
