-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines ABSTUDY Tertiary Award and provides information
on additional benefits and allowances for approved students.

Eligibility requirements for the ABSTUDY Tertiary Award

To be eligible for the ABSTUDY Tertiary Award, the student or Australian
Apprentice (apprentice or trainee) must meet the general ABSTUDY
eligibility criteria. The customer must also satisfy specific criteria
for age, study, Australian Apprentices and residence.

Once meeting the general ABSTUDY eligibility criteria, the customer is
eligible for the ABSTUDY Tertiary Award if they:

-   are studying a full-time post-secondary course or meet the
    definition of an Australian Apprentice
-   have reached the minimum school leaving age as defined by the
    relevant state/territory education authority or has provided
    evidence that they have been granted exemption from the
    State/Territory education authority in order to attend TAFE or
    another tertiary institution
-   for students only - are studying the normal amount of full-time
    study or qualify for a study load concession
-   for students only - are making satisfactory progress (i.e. will
    complete the course within the time limits that Services Australia
    has approved)

Study load concessions

Students must continue to study full-time in their approved course to
remain eligible for assistance under the ABSTUDY Tertiary Award unless
they meet the eligibility criteria for either:

-   a two-thirds study load concession
-   a disability study load concession, or
-   a pensioner study load concession

Benefits and allowances available under Tertiary Award

A student approved for the ABSTUDY Tertiary Award may be entitled to one
or more of the following benefits:

-   Living Allowance or Pensioner Education Supplement
-   Incidentals Allowance
-   Additional Incidentals Allowance
-   Fares Allowance
-   Rent Assistance
-   Remote Area Allowance
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Away From Base assistance
-   Additional Assistance
-   Relocation Scholarship

Secondary school studies with a TAFE component

Secondary studies at high school that have a TAFE component to the
studies are becoming more common. The TAFE studies are vocationally
oriented, to provide the student with an opportunity to gain their
schooling qualification and a certificate qualification via the TAFE
system. These students are enrolled as full time secondary students
under their State Education system, and thereby would receive ABSTUDY
Schooling B Award payments. Their status should be confirmed to ensure
that Schooling B Award is appropriate. It is possible that Tertiary
Award may apply in some cases.

Australian Apprentices (apprentices or trainees)

A full-time Australian Apprentice must have a current Commonwealth
registration number. If this number is suspended or cancelled there is
no entitlement to ABSTUDY as an Australian Apprentice.

An Australian Apprentice approved for the ABSTUDY Tertiary Award may
qualify for the following benefits:

-   Living Allowance
-   Incidentals Allowance
-   Rent Assistance
-   Remote Area Allowance
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Additional Assistance

The Resources page contains a link to StudyAssist.

Related links

Claiming ABSTUDY

Assessing ABSTUDY claims

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Approval of courses as full-time or part-time for ABSTUDY

Startup Year Courses

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
