
Assessing parental home inadequate for study, work or job search for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away from home rate 010-06040080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assessing the away from home rate of Youth
Allowance (YA) in cases where the parental home is an inadequate place
for study, work or undertaking job search activities.

Parental home inadequate

Dependent YA customers may be eligible for the away from home rate of YA
if their parental home is considered an inadequate place for study, work
or job search activities. The parental home may be considered inadequate
if:

-   there is overcrowding of the parental home, meaning that the
    customer lacks the physical facilities and privacy required for
    study (but does not mean the customer requires a room for
    themselves), or
-   conflict exists between the parents, or between the customer and
    their parents, for example conflict involving alcoholism or assault,
    or
-   chronic illness in the family

These situations do not include the minor difficulties normally
encountered as a family. However, it may be possible for customers to
reasonably demonstrate other situations where the parental home is an
inadequate place for study, work or undertaking job search activities.
Each case must be assessed on its merits.

Social worker's recommendation for away from home rate

In some instances the away from home rate may be granted under this
criteria following a social worker's recommendation. This could occur
where the customer has applied for independence under the Unreasonable
to Live at Home (UTLAH) provisions but the situation is not considered
serious enough to meet those criteria.

It should be noted that conditions that would be inadequate for
full-time study, would not automatically be inadequate for work or job
search activities.

The circumstances of each case must be examined to determine if the
parental home is inadequate for the customer's needs.

The Resources page contains a table with information and examples of
factors which may be considered in assessing the away from home rate of
YA due to a customer's parental home being inadequate for study, work
(including an Australian Apprenticeship) or job search.

Related links

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Reviews and appeals

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
