-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details needed to negotiate an ABSTUDY Activity
Agreement (ABAA) when a student has had more than 5 unapproved absences
from secondary school in a term.

Purpose of ABAAs

ABAAs are designed to focus the student's attention on their study
requirements under ABSTUDY regulations, which includes their obligation
to attend classes while being paid as a full-time student.

Note: these rules do not apply to ABSTUDY Schooling A students.

Absences may indicate studies have ceased

Absence from school does not result in loss of qualification for
payment. However, a high level of unapproved absences is an indicator
that the student may have ceased studies. If investigation of the case
shows that the student has not ceased studies, they remain qualified for
payment but may potentially be required to enter into an Activity
Agreement.

Role of Compliance Team

The Compliance Team runs regular enrolment and attendance checks of
ABSTUDY students in secondary schools to identify students who have had
unapproved absences of more than 5 days in a term. Compliance processes
currently focus on cases where the customer has had a high number of
unapproved absences in a term.

Where local arrangements:

-   currently exist to refer cases of excessive unapproved absence to a
    service centre/Smart Centre Processing site or attendance initiative
    team for negotiation of an Activity Agreement with the student,
    compliance teams should continue these referral arrangements
-   do not currently exist, it is not necessary to undertake 'USE'
    reviews

Terms of ABAAs

An ABAA is negotiated using the ABSTUDY Activity Agreement (SY072) form.
The terms of the ABAA should state that the student agrees to attend
their course, and should include details of the:

-   type of course (for example, Year 12)
-   name of the institution
-   student status (for example full-time)
-   course start and end dates

The ABAA should also state that the student agrees to have no more than
5 absences in a term.

System coding of ABAAs

Centrelink systems contain a screen called 'Manage Activity Agreements
for Students' which is completed with basic information about a student
Activity Agreement. This screen can be used to:

-   add a new student Activity Agreement record
-   update an existing student Activity Agreement record, or
-   delete an existing student Activity Agreement record

However, as this screen does not trigger any action, have any impact on
payments or generate a printed full Activity Agreement the ABSTUDY
Activity Agreement (SY072) form must be printed and manually completed
when negotiating an Activity Agreement with these customers.

The Resources page contains a link to Online Forms.

Related links

Study requirements for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Study requirements for ABSTUDY

Determining Activity Test breaches for unapproved absences for ABSTUDY
secondary students

Negotiating Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students with unapproved absences

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
