
Completing the Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001) 010-06010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information that assists with completing the
SY001 claim form for full-time students and Australian Apprentices.

Claiming YA

[] Full-time students and Australian Apprentices are required to claim
YA using their Centrelink online account unless the transaction is not
appropriate.

The SY001 should only be issued to a customer when all other avenues for
completing a claim have been exhausted.

Claims lodged by customers applying for YA as a job seeker are processed
via the Online Participation workflow. These customers do not need to
complete a Youth Allowance paper claim.

Eligibility for Youth Disability Supplement

Full-time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt of YA are
eligible for Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) if they are:

-   21 years of age and under, and
-   assessed via an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) as having a
    partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week

Completing the YA claim - important points

Note the following important points when completing the YA claim:

All relevant questions on the claim should be answered. Many questions
need a Yes or No tick only and, depending on the answer, some questions
may be skipped

Claim must be signed by customer

Identity confirmation is required

Apprentices must provide details of their Australian Apprenticeship
including:

-   name of employer,
-   employer's Australian Business Number (ABN), and
-   start and end dates of apprenticeship.
    Services Australia will obtain the Australian Apprenticeship details
    from the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations

Other documentation may need to be provided, including proof of income.
The checklist at the back of the claim form indicates what documents are
required

Other forms may need to be completed before the claim can be assessed.
The claim indicates when these forms may be needed. Service Officers can
issue these forms

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) questions have been removed as Youth
Allowance customers are entitled to an automatic Health Care Card (HCC)
from 1 January 2019

Helping customers complete the YA claim

Service Officers must not make notations, comments or underline claim
forms signed by a customer and lodged with the agency.

Any notations or explanations to questions should be made on a separate
sheet of paper and attached to the claim.

Lodgement of claim

Customers must return the claim form, or attend any required appointment
in a timely manner to ensure correct backdating provisions for claim
lodgement apply (deemed claims). This is generally within 14 days,
unless other provisions apply (incapacity, caring or early claim).

For paper claims scanned onto the customer's record, the system will
auto-create a Social Online Application (SOA) shell in Process Direct.

The Resources page contains links to forms, and links to information
about self service and payments and services for students and trainees
on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
