
Approved studies for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 010-03030010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess students study details as one of
the eligibility requirements for a claim for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC).

Study requirements

A student must be enrolled in and undertaking a full-time study load at
an approved level in an approved course at an approved institution to be
eligible for benefits. The approved level of study is normally primary
and secondary study. The approved level of study can also include
ungraded level study such as 'living skills' training approved by state
or territory education or health authorities for students aged three and
a half years or over. Tertiary level study, i.e. study in vocational
education and training courses (e.g. TAFE) can also be undertaken, but
only by students who are below the minimum school leaving age for their
state. See the Resources page of Determining the Entitlement End Date
for the AIC Scheme for when AIC for a tertiary student ceases in each
state. Approved study can be assessed at the claim stage, or if there is
a change in the student's study details.

If the study is at primary or equivalent ungraded level and the student
receives Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting Payment Single
(PPS), the student is undertaking approved study for AIC Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Home Schooling at the primary or secondary level is also approvable for
AIC where the child has formal approval for this from the education
authority in the state or territory in which they live. See Home
Schooling arrangements for Youth Allowance (YA), Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) for the evidence
and other requirements.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Assessing claims and forms for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Assessing the new claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
(SY040)

Determining the Entitlement End date for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Home schooling arrangements for Youth Allowance (YA), Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
