
Changing study or training details for Austudy customers 010-04070000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relevant to students who change their
study or training details. It assists Service Officers in coding these
changes, deciding whether or not further proof of enrolment is required,
and if the change will affect the student's entitlement to Austudy.

On this Page:

Changes to study

The activity test for Austudy students requires the customer to be
undertaking full-time (or concessional load) study in an approved course
at an approved institution.

The student may change their course details throughout the year for a
variety of reasons including changing course, changing institution,
altering the course start or end date, changing their study load or
studying overseas (if the overseas study is part of their current course
then course details do not change).

Ceasing full-time study

If an Austudy student ceases full time study, they must notify Services
Australia. A debt may be generated for students who fail to notify
cessation of studies.

Activity Test

A customer receiving Austudy as an Australian Apprentice is not subject
to an activity test. However their Commonwealth registration number must
remain current.

Contact details

Every customer's address (including their postal address) and telephone
details (as well as mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the customer has
authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not need to be
confirmed.

Contents

Changing or correcting course of study or educational institution for
Youth Allowance, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement students

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Effect of end of course on payments for students

Payment of Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy when a student is deferring
or discontinuing study before the end of the course

Increasing study load for Austudy, Youth Allowance (YA) students

Austudy student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated

Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Student studying outside Australia

Manage study details option online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
