
No show for ABSTUDY travel 010-02100100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstance of a 'no show' for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA).

Pre-booked travel not undertaken

Services Australia pre-books travel for ABSTUDY students and approved
travellers where they meet the eligibility requirements for FAA.

A no show for ABSTUDY FAA refers to the situation where an approved
ABSTUDY traveller:

-   fails to begin or complete a journey authorised and booked in
    advance by the agency (a penalty may apply), or
-   cancels authorised or booked travel less than 24 hours prior to
    their departure

Approved travellers who have not begun their journey due to
circumstances:

-   beyond their control (for example, weather, and transport delays),
    can have their travel re-booked. To re-book travel, see ABSTUDY
    students experiencing disrupted travel
-   within their control (for example, slept in) will have a no show
    applied and may require their travel to be re-booked

Approved travellers who have begun their journey but:

-   miss a leg of travel mid journey due to circumstances beyond their
    control (for example, weather, transport delays), can have their
    travel re-booked. To re-book travel, see ABSTUDY students
    experiencing disrupted travel
-   choose to miss a leg of travel mid journey, will have a no show
    applied and may require their travel to be re-booked

Cancelling or amending travel arrangements

Services Australia requires a minimum of 24 hours' notice to cancel or
amend (in unforeseen or exceptional circumstances) travel arrangements
on behalf of the traveller without penalty under the agencies travel
contract.

Where an approved traveller does not travel nor cancels or requests
amendment of travel arrangements 24 hours prior to departure, a no show
may result and penalties applied unless unforeseen or exceptional
circumstances occur on the travel date. See Fares Allowance (FAA)
authorised in advance of travel for ABSTUDY.

Re-booking penalties

A re-booking penalty is where Services Australia will not pay, re-book
or authorise travel in advance. Re-booking penalties are not applied to
secondary school students or their associated non-student travellers.

Tertiary students, secondary non-school students, and their associated
non-student travellers who miss travel without a valid reason, will have
a re-booking penalty applied and therefore will not have travel for the
same journey re-booked or paid for in advance. A financial penalty may
also be applied.

Approved travellers who provide a valid circumstance for missed travel
will not have a re-booking penalty applied, and where required, may have
travel for that journey re-booked.

Where a re-booking penalty has been applied and the approved traveller
is still required to undertake the journey, they must purchase their own
ticket and lodge a Fares Allowance Claim (SY032). Their travel
ticket/receipts are to be provided as proof of purchase. If eligible,
the cost of travel will be reimbursed at the rate for the appropriate
mode of transport.

Financial penalties

Note: on 3 April 2020, Services Australia paused debt raising and
recovery activity to help ease pressure on people's budgets during
Coronavirus (COVID-19). The debt pause includes overpayments relating to
ABSTUDY travel that has been missed and financial penalties due to be
applied.

Where travel is missed, a travel provider may charge Services Australia
the cost of the ticket or charge an amount as a missed travel penalty. A
financial penalty will result in an overpayment being raised against the
approved traveller.

Approved travellers who provide a valid circumstance for missed travel
will not have a financial penalty applied.

Where the travel provider charges the agency an amount associated with
missed travel and a financial penalty is to be applied, the amount to be
raised as an overpayment varies dependent on traveller type:

-   For tertiary, secondary non-school students and their associated
    non-student travellers, the overpayment is the amount charged to the
    agency
-   For secondary school students, the overpayment is the amount charged
    to the agency, capped at a maximum of $100
-   Associated non-student travellers for secondary school students,
    such as supervisors, will not be charged a penalty if they miss
    travel

The Resources page contains a scenario about students who missed travel
mid journey.

Related links

Fares Allowance (FAA) authorised in advance of travel for ABSTUDY

Determining the appropriate mode of transport for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Non-student travellers for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY students experiencing disrupted travel

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Travel Management Application (TMA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
