
Assessing scholarships and mobility provisions for secondary students for ABSTUDY away from home rate 010-02060170

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines when dependent ABSTUDY students may be eligible
for a higher rate when living away from home due to a scholarship or
mobility provisions.

Circumstances for living away from home

Dependent ABSTUDY students are normally expected to live at home while
studying. Under certain circumstances they may have to live away from
home and become eligible for a higher rate of assistance.

These circumstances include where the student is:

offered an approved scholarship by a Boarding School

offered a Third Party Indigenous Scholarship

offered a Transition School Scholarship, or

permanently residing in 1 of 5 designated Cape York trial sites. These
sites are:

-   Aurukun
-   Coen
-   Hope Vale
-   Mossman Gorge and
-   Doomadgee

Approval for the away from home rate of ABSTUDY due to being offered
such a scholarship would be dependent on the type of scholarship.

Students receiving scholarships not fitting into 1 of the situations
above will be assessed under the general provisions for scholarships.
See Assessing scholarship income for the appropriate assessment for such
cases.

Boarding School scholarships

From 1 January 2019, the approval requirements for Boarding School
scholarships have been simplified. Boarding School scholarships must
meet the new requirements to be approved for away from home
entitlements.

A secondary school student may be approved for away from home
entitlements on the basis of being offered a scholarship by a boarding
school if all the following circumstances are met:

The school is an approved secondary school offering an approved course
of secondary studies

The boarding arrangement is an integral part of the school, and

The school contributes towards the scholarship, the greater of:

-   the Boarding School Scholarship Approval Threshold amount, or
-   25% of the school's annual boarding school and tuition fees

Students that are living away from the permanent home and attend a
boarding school on a weekly basis, will have the greater of the Boarding
School Scholarship Approval Threshold amount, or 25% applied against
their annual fees.

Note: all Boarding School scholarships offered before 1 January 2019
must be assessed under the scholarship approval requirements applicable
before 1 January 2019. This includes an Independent Boarding School
(IBS) scholarship offered in 2018 for the 2019 academic year. Only
scholarships offered on or after 1 January 2019 can be approved under
the new criteria.

Grandfathered scholarship holders

Grandfathering provisions apply to students who were approved for
ABSTUDY because they accepted an IBS scholarship prior to 1 January
2019. They will remain grandfathered for as long as they continue to
meet the criteria under which the IBS scholarship was approved, except
for the requirement to meet the Indigenous Education Consultative Board
(IECB) criteria.

Note: grandfathering provisions do not apply to the Third Party
Indigenous Scholarships or Transition School scholarships.

The Process page contains information relating to IBS scholarship,
Boarding School Scholarships, Transition School Scholarships as well as
approved Third Party Indigenous scholarships.

Mobility provisions for welfare reform designated trial sites

Secondary school students may be approved for the ABSTUDY Away from Home
provisions to enable the student to live away from the community and
attend a school at another location. To be eligible for this provision,
the student must permanently reside in 1 of 5 designated Cape York
Welfare Reform sites. These sites are:

-   Aurukun
-   Coen
-   Hope Vale
-   Mossman Gorge and
-   Doomadgee

The student must also meet all other ABSTUDY eligibility criteria.

The period for the Reform runs from 1 July 2008 until the government
advises of its closure.

When to cease mobility provisions

Approval of Away from Home entitlements on the basis of mobility
provisions ceases if:

-   the student's permanent home changes to a location that is outside
    of a designated trial site, or
-   the student returns from the boarding school to live on a permanent
    basis in the permanent home, unless continuity of study provisions
    apply

How to claim

Away from home rate can be claimed:

-   for new customers, via the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool (ACT) or the Claim
    for ABSTUDY forms (SY019 and SY092), or
-   for existing customers, via a statement (verbal or written)
    indicating the criteria under which they are seeking approval

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains scenarios, information on schools/providers
seeking to be approved to offer Third Party Indigenous Scholarships,
ABSTUDY Sporting Chance & IYLP equivalent project providers list,
contact details, and links to external websites.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

Assessing continuity of study for ABSTUDY away from home rate

Assessing scholarship income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
