
Thesis Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate 010-02050050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the entitlement of Thesis
allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate study.

Purpose of Thesis Allowance

Thesis Allowance is for ABSTUDY students who are undertaking or have
completed Masters or Doctorate studies. A Thesis Allowance is paid to
assist with the costs associated with the presentation of a thesis or
other similar course requirement. Students must qualify for ABSTUDY
Living Allowance, or Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and be
studying a full-time workload to be eligible for Thesis Allowance.

Qualification for Thesis Allowance

To qualify for Thesis Allowance a student must:

qualify for the Masters and Doctorate Award, and

be receiving one of the following:

-   Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, or
-   before 1 January 2022, a Defence Force Income Support-like
    (DFISA-like) payment under the Veterans’ Entitlement Act 1986

Students must be enrolled on a full-time or concessional study load
basis in an approved Masters degree or Doctorate (PhD) course and must
not be in receipt of any other form of government assistance. For
example, a student cannot be in receipt of both ABSTUDY Masters and
Doctorate Award and the Australian Government Research Training Program
(RTP).

To qualify for payment of Thesis Allowance under the Masters or
Doctorate Award for the same period, students only need to receive $1.00
of entitlement during the academic year claimed.

Note: Australian Apprentices are not entitled to Masters and Doctorate
Allowance therefore, are not entitled to Thesis Allowance.

Thesis Allowance rates

Qualified students are entitled to actual costs, where reasonable, up to
the maximum amount of the Thesis Allowance payable.

Thesis Allowance rates depend on whether the customer is completing a
Masters or Doctorate.

Timeframe to lodge claim

There is a limit of 2 years after last receiving ABSTUDY Living
Allowance for the masters or doctorate candidate to lodge a claim.
Students can claim by lodging a detailed letter outlining the expenses
incurred for their thesis. If reimbursement is sought, the letter must
be accompanied with original accounts or receipts for payment.

Related links

Payment of tuition fees or Student Contribution for ABSTUDY Masters and
Doctorate study

Relocation Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate study

Payment rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
