
Completing the ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim Form M (SY031) 010-02010160

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the more complex questions included on the
ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim Form M (SY031). This
claim form is divided into two sections; the student details section and
the School/Faculty Declaration section.

On this Page:

When to use this form

The claim for ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Form M (SY031) is
to be completed by customers who are full-time tertiary students and who
require financial assistance for the costs involved with essential
course costs/items.

How to lodge this form

ABSTUDY claims and forms may be lodged in person at the nearest Service
Centre. Claims and forms may also be posted using the appropriate reply
paid envelope or to the nearest ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing team.

Customers who are full-time tertiary students and who require financial
assistance for the costs involved with essential course costs/items are
required to complete and lodge an ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals
Allowance Claim - Form M (SY031).

The SY031 has been divided into two sections:

-   Student details
-   School/Faculty Declaration.

The student should ensure the signed form, official receipts and
quotations (for items not yet purchased) are returned to the service
centre that processed the ABSTUDY claim. Alternatively the form may be
lodged in person at the nearest service centre or ABSTUDY Smart Centre
Processing site, or in remote areas, with a field officer. Claims and
forms may also be posted to the nearest service centre or ABSTUDY Smart
Centre Processing site.

Note: the official receipts must display the name of the business,
details of each item purchased and the date and amount of each item
purchased. Likewise the quotations must display the name of the
business, date quote was supplied and a description of the items. These
must be lodged within three weeks of lodging the claim.

When assisting customers to complete a claim form, Service Officers must
not make any notations, underlines or comments of any sort on a claim
form that is to be signed by a customer and lodged with Services
Australia . Instead, any notations or explanations to questions on a
claim form should be made on a separate sheet of paper and attached to
the customer's claim form.

ABSTUDY processing has been consolidated across sites nationally.
Processing is now undertaken in one of four ABSTUDY Smart Centre
Processing sites. See the Resources page for a link to Office Locator
for more information about the responsibilities that each section of
Services Australia has when dealing with ABSTUDY-related matters.

The Resources page contains a link to the online version of the ABSTUDY
Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim - Form M (SY031) and a link to
Office Locator.

Related links

Claiming ABSTUDY

Assessing Form m (SY031) ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim

ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
