
Approved courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) 010-07010200

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine an approved course of study for
Services Australia administered student payments - ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY PES
and AIC.

Initial check of provider and course

The initial stage in checking if a course/provider is approved is to go
to the National Course Approvals sub-site. The Resources page contains a
link to this page.

Requirements to undertake an approved course of study

For customers to be regarded as students for the purposes of qualifying
for one of the Services Australia administered payments for students,
they must normally be undertaking an approved course of study as set out
in the Ministerial Determination of Education Providers and Courses.
Some different or additional requirements for approval of courses apply
to ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) but most courses undertaken by students
eligible for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY PES or AIC need to satisfy the
requirements of the Ministerial Determination.

Note: if a course becomes unapproved while the customer is receiving
payment, the customer will continue to receive their payment until the
end of the course or until there is a break in their entitlement.

Course and provider to meet certain requirements

For a course to be approved, both the course content and the provider
providing the course, must normally meet certain requirements. These
requirements are determined by the Tertiary Education Quality and
Standards Agency or the relevant state/territory authorities. Services
Australia is not involved in this accreditation process. For Services
Australia purposes, there is no minimum duration for a course to be
approved.

From 1 January 2018 to be an approved course of study for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY PES, Vocational Educational Training (VET) courses that are at
diploma level or higher must be:

-   a course approved for the VET Student Loan (VSL), and
-   undertaken with a provider approved to provide VSL courses

For a higher education course to be approved for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
it must be undertaken with a provider that is approved/authorised to
offer the Higher Education Loan Program (HELP).

Note: AIC, Indigenous Special Courses and ABSTUDY Lawful Custody award
are excluded from the VSL and HELP requirement.

ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES

Chapter 11.5, Approved Courses in the ABSTUDY Policy Manual advises that
all mainstream courses approved under the Ministerial Determination of
Education Institutions and Courses are normally approved for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY PES.

Some courses that are outside the scope of the Ministerial Determination
can also be approved for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES. Indigenous special
courses with a vocational education focus can be approved for ABSTUDY
and ABSTUDY PES whether they are accredited by an education provider or
relevant state/territory authority, or are only approved by a
correctional services authority for a student in lawful custody. The
latter courses are not accredited by an education provider or relevant
state/territory authority and so are outside the scope of the
Ministerial Determination.

ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES also have some additional course approval
requirements on top of those set out in mainstream requirements of the
Ministerial Determination. Courses that meet the requirements of the
Ministerial Determination, and attract Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
PES, can nonetheless be an excluded course.

The ABSTUDY course approval criteria apply to all forms of ABSTUDY
assistance, including for students just claiming non-means tested
assistance such as Incidentals Allowance.

If a student is ineligible for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY PES because the course
is an excluded course for ABSTUDY purposes, the student may be eligible
for YA, Austudy or PES if the course meets the requirements of the
Ministerial Determination. However students who have completed secondary
schooling and are qualified for entry to higher education are not
eligible for AIC, making tertiary courses of higher education beyond the
scope of AIC.

Indigenous special courses

Courses that are not available to all members of the Australian
community are normally excluded courses for ABSTUDY purposes. Courses
that are not accredited or offered by a provider that is not a
registered education provider, are also normally Excluded Courses.

An exception to these exclusions applies to an Indigenous special
course.

An Indigenous special course has:

-   a vocational education focus (that is, it is likely to provide
    skills that will increase employability in the labour market), and
-   been developed with course content designed specifically for
    Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students

and is either:

-   accredited by an education provider or relevant state/territory
    authority, or
-   a study programme approved by a correctional services authority for
    a student in lawful custody

This means that even though a course with a vocational education focus
could still be considered an approved Indigenous special course for the
purposes of ABSTUDY, even though it:

-   may not be available to all members of the Australian community, or
-   is only approved by a correctional services authority, and not a
    registered education provider (that is, not a registered training
    organisation or a recognised higher education provider), for payment
    of assistance under the Lawful Custody Award, and falls outside the
    scope of the Ministerial Determination

Note: if a course is being assessed to see if it is an Indigenous
special course but is an excluded course for any other reason, it cannot
be approved for ABSTUDY. However if the course is accredited by an
education provider, or relevant State/Territory authority or Australian
Government it can be an approved course for other student payments and
the student should test their eligibility for them.

Assessment of courses for ABSTUDY

The decision to approve courses for ABSTUDY, including Indigenous
special courses, is made by the Course Assessment and Liaison Officer
(CALO), in relation to meeting the 'mainstream' requirements.

As almost all courses meeting the mainstream requirements also meet the
specific ABSTUDY course approval requirements under the ABSTUDY Policy
Manual, the Level 2 ABSTUDY Policy helpdesk will complete a separate
assessment on a selective basis to ensure courses meet the specific
ABSTUDY requirements, including not being an 'excluded course'. A
separate assessment is only required where:

-   ABSTUDY Away from Base Assistance is being claimed for the course
    and there is a concern that it may be wholly or substantially
    comprised of away from base activities that would make it an
    excluded course. An Away from Base Officer in the ABSTUDY Smart
    Centre can refer such a course for a separate assessment if they
    have a reasonable belief that it may be an 'excluded course'. Very
    few courses with away from base activities have a substantial
    component of these activities. If the away from base component of a
    course is clearly not substantial (that is, doesn't exceed 80% of
    the total course content), the course will be considered an approved
    course for ABSTUDY and will not require a referral to the Level 2
    ABSTUDY Policy helpdesk to see if it needs to be referred for an
    assessment
-   there is reasonable doubt about whether a course meets the specific
    ABSTUDY requirements, that is, may be an excluded course, an ABSTUDY
    Service Officer can contact the Level 2 ABSTUDY Policy helpdesk to
    see if it needs to be referred for an assessment

Where a course is assessed as an ABSTUDY excluded course, a CALO will,
on the advice of the Level 2 ABSTUDY Policy helpdesk, record it as 'Not
Approved for ABSTUDY' in the assessed courses on the education
provider's page on the National Course Approvals sub-site.

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

Most courses for which AIC is paid are accredited primary, secondary or
tertiary courses and satisfy the requirements of the Ministerial
Determination. However, students who have completed secondary schooling
and are qualified for entry to higher education are not eligible for
AIC, making tertiary courses of higher education beyond the scope of
AIC.

An approved course for AIC can also include ungraded level study
(including 'living skills' training) approved by state or territory
education or health authorities. An approved provider (where these
courses are undertaken) includes a residential institution or
non-residential special school that caters for children with
disabilities, psychological, emotional or behavioural problems. The
providers must be approved by state or territory education or health
authorities. These courses and providers would normally be outside the
scope of the Ministerial Determination.

Combined Higher Education and Masters degrees

Some universities are delivering combined higher education
qualifications (for example, Bachelor degrees, Graduate Certificates or
Graduate Diplomas) with Masters degrees.

For ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES, all accredited Masters and Doctorate
courses (except if the course is an excluded course for ABSTUDY
purposes) are approved courses. All Masters components of accredited
courses combining Bachelor and Masters degrees (that are approved
ABSTUDY courses) are also approved courses for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES.
The restriction on the scope of approved Masters courses (applying to
YA, Austudy and PES) set out in the Schedule 3 of the Course
Determination Instrument doesn't apply to ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY PES.

Study details are to be coded on the student's record for the full
duration of the course.

Doctorate Level courses

A customer who is undertaking a Doctorate level course (other than one
with exit points for lower qualifications see 'Exit Points for lower
qualification') is not eligible for assistance under any payment type
other than ABSTUDY. Some courses may appear to be doctoral level courses
from the title, but are in fact approved as Masters courses (for
example, Juris Doctor). If in any doubt, check the current approved
Masters list. The Resources page links to this list.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site, information about general factors relating to course approval,
contact details, and Training.gov.au.

Related links

Using Centrelink self service

Determining approval of mainstream or Indigenous courses for ABSTUDY

Assessing the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award and
Masters and Doctorate Award

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award

Assessing the Claim for ABSTUDY Student or Australian Apprentice in
lawful custody (SY022)

Approved studies for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Home schooling arrangements for Youth Allowance (YA), Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Home schooling arrangements for ABSTUDY

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Review of decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
