-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Service Officers assisting
Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students and Australian
Apprentices complete a paper Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019).

When to use this claim form

The Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019) should be completed by Australian
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders who are:

-   an Australian Apprentice
-   a tertiary or postgraduate student
-   a secondary student aged 16 years or more, or
-   a secondary student under 16 years of age who is either claiming
    independent status or who will be living away from home

ABSTUDY claim forms must be completed by the correct applicant. For
further information, see Determining who should be the ABSTUDY
applicant.

Completing the paper claim

The Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019) has a Notes booklet attached. Always refer
to the Notes booklet when providing assistance with the completion of
the relevant questions, and to advise of any supporting documents
required.

Points to note in completing the claim:

-   The claim must be completed in blue or black pen
-   All relevant questions on the claim must be answered. Many questions
    only require a 'Yes' or 'No' tick

Note: Service Officers assisting customers to complete a claim must use
a separate sheet of paper (attached to the claim), to capture any
notations or explanations to questions. No underline or comments of any
sort are to be added to a claim that is to be signed by a customer and
lodged with Centrelink.

Lodging the paper claim

ABSTUDY paper claims and supporting documents can be lodged using any of
the following options:

-   [] Online - using the Upload documents service
-   Fax - see Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   Post - via a reply paid envelope or by posting to Services
    Australia. See Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
    PES
-   In person - at a service centre, or in remote areas, with a
    Centrelink field officer

The Resources page contains a link to the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019).

Related Links

Claiming ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

ASBTUDY qualifications

Aboriginality or Torres Strait Islander status for ABSTUDY purposes

Residence requirements for ABSTUDY

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award and
Masters and Doctorate Award

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
