
Effect of articulated short courses of study on continuing payment 010-07010100

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect of articulated short courses of study
and short courses under the Australian Qualification Framework (AQF) on
continuing payment.

On this Page:

Short course of study

This is a course of no more than 30 weeks for:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), and
-   ABSTUDY PES

It includes holidays and vacations. However, certain short courses link
together to form a longer course leading to a higher qualification.
These are articulated short courses, see below.

Articulated short course (including ABSTUDY

Articulated short courses are also called 'nested courses'.

For example, a TAFE may offer a Community Services course as:

-   4 semester - long certificate level courses, or
-   a 2 year Diploma level course

A student who successfully completes all 4 Certificates will have the
Diploma granted as well. Some students will prefer to enrol in
articulated short courses rather than the corresponding long course.

ABSTUDY students

Articulated short courses are recognised for ABSTUDY purposes as if they
are one long course. Depending on the circumstances, there may be
advantages and disadvantages for the student in articulated short course
study.

Under the Australian Qualification Framework (AQF), it is possible to
take the stages of an articulated course on a 'stand-alone' basis.
Students may choose to enrol this way to avoid committing themselves to
an extended period of study. For further information on AQF see the
Resources page for a link to the AQF website.

Successive short courses

In the above example, Services Australia would view the student who
enrols in successive short courses as if they were undertaking the
longer course. The 4 consecutive courses are related.

Note: this is not the same situation as a student who undertakes several
semesters of certificate level courses, then undertakes a 1 semester
Diploma level course in the same field. These courses are not
articulated.

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) students

Eligibility for payment for PES students who undertake a short course
usually stops on the last day of the course. If they start another short
course, payments could restart from the first day of the new course.
There would be no eligibility for the interim period.

Students doing articulated short courses of study, are considered to be
undertaking the longer course. Their eligibility for PES continues in
the period between the courses. The student would need to provide proof
of enrolment for each short course.

To consider a PES customer as a continuing student, they have to
re-enrol in a short course which is in the same group of articulated
short courses (this does not include a new, unrelated short course). PES
continues because they are considered to be undertaking the longer
course, which means they satisfy the activity test as a student between
the previous short course and the next one.

Note: this does not apply to Austudy and YA students receiving a payment
for the period between courses if they intend to study. ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY PES students can receive payments, in certain circumstances,
between approved short courses.

Period of entitlement for Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY students

YA and ABSTUDY time limits for articulated courses are whichever is the
greater of either:

-   minimum time for the course of study plus the usual additional
    period in any stage or stages with a minimum duration of more than a
    year, or
-   unlimited study where the stage or stages have a duration of 1 year
    or less

The student would have to show proof of their enrolment in the
articulated series of courses rather than the longer course.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Qualification
Framework (AQF) website.

Related links

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Approved short courses and student payment eligibility

Eligibility periods for full year courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and PES

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
