-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for the Relocation
Scholarship (RS). This payment assists eligible students with the cost
of establishing and maintaining accommodation away from their usual home
in order to undertake qualifying higher education studies.

Qualification

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY Living Allowance students may qualify
for a Relocation Scholarship if they are:

dependent students:

-   whose family home, as at the time of starting an approved
    scholarship course, is or was located in an inner regional, outer
    regional, remote or very remote area in Australia, or overseas, or
-   who are relocating to study in an inner regional, outer regional,
    remote or very remote area in Australia, or overseas, and
-   who have to live away from the family home for study, and
-   who are receiving the away from home rate, or

independent students who are disadvantaged by personal circumstances,
and

-   six months before starting an approved scholarship course, lived in
    an inner regional, outer regional, remote or very remote area in
    Australia, or overseas, or
-   are relocating to study in an inner regional, outer regional, remote
    or very remote area in Australia, or overseas, and
-   live away from their RS family home for study

and all of the following apply:

-   receiving at least $1 of YA basic benefit or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance in the period. Students receiving a nil rate who continue
    to receive either Energy Supplement or Youth Disability Supplement
    are considered to be receiving YA or ABSTUDY Living Allowance.
    Receiving Rent Assistance (RA), Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) or
    other supplements alone do not qualify the student for RS
-   undertaking an approved scholarship course
-   commencing or continuing to undertake study for 35 days
-   not likely to receive a Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship (CAS)
    in the next 12 months
-   not qualified for a relocation or similar scholarship payment in the
    preceding 12 months. (This can be shortened to a period of at least
    three months where such a determination would enable the person to
    qualify for RS on or near 1 January, provided they do not receive
    more than two RSs in a period of two successive years), and
-   not receiving Residential Costs Option

Austudy recipients do not qualify for RS.

Note:

-   There is no requirement for a recipient to be actually studying on
    the day they are paid the RS. See Qualification date below
-   A person studying online may be eligible to receive the RS. Online
    study is treated as an Australian major city campus
-   the locations of the RS family home and of the student's place of
    study are determined using the Australian Statistical Geography
    Standard (ASGS)
-   Students who will complete approved study overseas that contributes
    to their Australian Qualification while remaining enrolled in an
    Australian Institution may be eligible to receive the RS

A student is not qualified for RS if:

-   their RS family home is/was in an Australian major city location, at
    the time they start or started their course of study, and
-   their place of study is/was in an Australian major city location
    (even if the RS family home and the place of study are/were in
    different Australian major city locations)

For information regarding Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility in
2010 and 2011 see historical versions of this procedure.

Family Home Location Assessment

For qualification purposes, the RS family home location is assessed only
once at the time of course start. A change of RS family home location(s)
in a subsequent year is not used to reassess qualification but is used
to determine the rate of RS payable. For example, where qualification is
met at the time of course start and the RS family home location has
changed to an Australian major city location in a subsequent year the
'lower' rate of RS is payable.

Verification of study location must be provided before RS is paid, if:

-   a student whose RS family home is in an Australian major city
    location attends an institution, campus or placement that is in
    Australia and not classified as a major city location, or
-   they are studying overseas

If verification is not provided, RS will not be paid.

For information regarding assessment of the family home location before
December 2017 see historical versions of this procedure.

Note:

-   ABSTUDY Students in State Care (not receiving Foster Care Allowance)
    are to be assessed for the purposes of RS the same way as ABSTUDY
    dependent students who were living away from home
-   RS is also available to some students receiving a payment under the
    Veterans' Children's Entitlement Scheme (VCES) or Military
    Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme
    (MRCEATS). Relocation Scholarship under these schemes is paid by the
    Department of Veterans' Affairs (Veterans' Affairs), not by Services
    Australia. Students should contact DVA for further information. The
    Resources page has a link to DVA
-   [] Students can update their family home address using the 'Update
    Family Home address' online service via their Centrelink online
    account. Where a hand off is required for these online updates,
    staff can locate these via work allocation. See also Accessing Work
    Items in Customer First
-   For information regarding the remoteness structure prior to 1 July
    2023, see the Resources page

Changing independence status to qualify for RS

If a student wishes to change their independence status to qualify for
an RS, the following principles apply:

-   a person who has been granted independence under a non-reviewable
    criterion (such as workforce participation or age) cannot choose to
    revert back to dependant status
-   a person who has been granted independence under reviewable
    criterion (such as unable to live at home and parents unable to
    exercise responsibilities) may revert back to dependent only if
    their circumstances have changed and they no longer meet the
    independence criteria
-   a person who simultaneously meets multiple independence criteria
    (except due to age) can be considered independent under the
    criterion which provides them the greatest benefit
-   An independent student who is disadvantaged by personal
    circumstances who turns 22 years of age, will remain qualified for
    RS as long as they have received RS before they turned 22

The Resources page has Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility scenarios
which has examples of changing independence status.

Qualification date

A student's RS qualification date is the first day in the period on
which they meet all of the qualification criteria.

There is no requirement for a student to be actually studying on their
qualification date for RS. This means a student could essentially be
qualified and paid during a semester break.

For example, a student commenced a three year degree in March 2023, but
only claims YA on 10 December 2023 (during a semester break) as they are
now qualified for payment. The customer is qualified for YA from 10
December 2023 and is also qualified for RS for 2023 as they are
continuing to study for 35 days (as the course end date is November
2025). However, there needs to be a gap of at least 3 months before the
next scholarship payment in 2024.

For new assessments (who have not received the RS previously), the
qualification date is the start date of their course (institution start
date) or student start date, whichever is later. RS will be paid with
the student's first regular income support payment after the course
commences as long as all qualification criteria are met.

For continuing students (whose start date is before the current period),
the qualification date is the default study start date of 21 February.
This is because each student starts studying on different dates for each
year of study, and this information is not recorded on the student's
record. However, different rules apply if the customer loses
qualification for RS (for example, they withdraw from studies) and
Service Officers need to check when the student actually commenced
studies to determine if they were studying for 35 days before the change
occurred.

Payability

RS is not payable if income reduces the student's basic benefit of YA or
ABSTUDY Living Allowance to nil, unless they continue to receive either
Energy Supplement or Youth Disability Supplement. RS may become payable
to the student later in the period, once they receive at least $1 of
basic benefit.

A student whose RS family home is classified as being in an Australian
major city location and who is studying in Australia at a location
classified as not being in a major city location must provide
appropriate verification of their study location (institution and/or
campus) before RS will be paid. This includes students who are
undertaking an approved placement or practical at a location that is not
a typically recognised campus location for the educational institution
(for example, a teaching placement at a school or a nursing placement at
a hospital).

Overseas study

Verification of study location must be provided before RS is paid, if:

-   the RS family home is in an Australian major city location, and
-   the student is studying overseas

For this instance only, documents provided to verify the overseas study
at the portability interview are sufficient for RS.

Overseas RS Family Home

A student whose RS family home is or was overseas at the time of course
start qualifies them for the RS, but they cannot qualify for the
regional rate of payment in subsequent years of the course of study.
This is because an overseas RS family home is classified differently for
eligibility and rate purposes. For the purpose of:

-   eligibility, an overseas RS family home is treated the same as an
    inner regional, outer regional, remote or very remote area in
    Australia
-   rate, an overseas RS family home is treated the same as an
    Australian major city location

Minimum period between qualification dates

Normally, there must be 12 months between qualification dates for RS (or
between receipt of a Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship (CAS) and
the qualification date for an RS).

This period may be reduced to 3 months if it allows a student to receive
a RS payment at or around the time they start (or resume) the approved
scholarship course for which RS is being paid.

The period between qualification dates cannot be shortened so the
student receives more than two RS payments in two successive calendar
years.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship (CAS)

The RS effectively replaces the university offered Commonwealth
Accommodation Scholarship (CAS). Universities continue to offer CAS
payments, but only as a limited programme for Indigenous students.

Students cannot receive a CAS and a RS for the same period, however a
student may choose to relinquish their existing CAS in order to receive
an RS.

If the student is paid both CAS and a RS for the same period, the RS
payment will become an overpayment. See Commonwealth Scholarships.

Note: students who qualify for CAS in a particular period but who do not
receive their full entitlement only because that scholarship is
suspended (such as due to poor study results), cannot qualify for an RS
in relation to the same period.

Indigenous Access Scholarships (IAS)

From 2017, IAS scholarships ceased. See Commonwealth Scholarships.

Equity and Merit based Scholarships (EMS)

Equity or Merit based Scholarships do not preclude students from
receiving RS. However, these scholarships may be assessed as income. See
Assessing Scholarship income.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site.

Contents

Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding

Related links

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

ABSTUDY customer is independent through age

Commonwealth Scholarship offers

Assessing scholarship income

Payment of residential costs option for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Rates and Thresholds

Workload Management in Customer First

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

ABSTUDY customer in state care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
