-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines ABSTUDY away from home rate paid to dependent
students due to limited local school programs or facilities. It also
describes circumstances where it is not paid at all.

Away from home rate

Students receiving ABSTUDY are normally expected to live at home while
studying. They may, however, be paid a higher rate of assistance where
circumstances make it necessary for them to live away from home.

The away from home rate may be approved if government schools within
reasonable travelling time or distance are unable to provide an
appropriate level of schooling for a dependent secondary student, due to
a limited local school program or facilities.

Each State/Territory education authority provides Services Australia
with a list of secondary schools which:

-   do not offer a full range of years or grades
-   do not provide adequate facilities or programs to enable a student
    to gain a Year 12 certificate or tertiary entrance score

Away from home rate can be claimed:

-   for new customers, via the ABSTUDY Claim Form (SY019), or
-   for existing customers, via a statement (verbal or written)
    indicating the criteria under which they are seeking approval

Limited program school

A local government secondary school that is listed as a limited program
school by the State/Territory education authority does not offer a full
program at the year or grade in which the student is qualified to enrol.
The away from home rate can be approved for a student to bypass that
school and attend another institution offering an appropriate program as
long as the student is not within reasonable travelling time or distance
of other government schools at which the student is qualified to enrol.

A secondary school which is not listed as a limited local program school
by the State/Territory education authority will normally be regarded as
an appropriate government school irrespective of any claims about the
adequacy of that school by a customer or parent.

A Living Allowance at the away from home rate will be automatically paid
to enable dependent students to bypass a South Australian Special Rural
School and Tribal Aboriginal/Anangu School in order to attend a larger
secondary school.

Living Allowance at home rate

A Living Allowance at the away from home rate will not be paid in the
following circumstances:

-   to dependent schooling students studying by distance education or
    correspondence
-   to assist the student to bypass a government school offering the
    appropriate level of schooling within reasonable travelling time or
    distance to attend another school of their choice
-   because particular subjects which the student wishes to study are
    unavailable at the nearby school
-   where there is another government school within reasonable
    travelling time or distance
-   specifically to enable a student to attend a non-government or
    religious school
-   if the State or Territory education authority objects to the
    bypassing of the particular school or type of school involved
-   to enable the student to attend a special course if the student
    lives within a reasonable travelling time or distance of another
    institution offering the applicable special course, or
-   specifically to attend an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
    school (unless the school offers an approved special Indigenous
    course

Students who only have a non-Government school in their area

Assistance for those students who only have a non-Government School in
their local area Some students in rural or remote areas may
automatically qualify for the away from home rate due to travel time and
access or limited local school facilities as they have no access to a
government school offering the appropriate year of study. Many of these
students actually have access to a non-government school but cannot
afford to enrol, as the fees are extremely high. In these cases, ABSTUDY
may approve the Group 2 School Fee Allowance (SFA) so they can attend
the non-government school whilst continuing to live at home. The Group 2
SFA is made available to assist with the high cost of fees charged by
the non-government school. This allows the student to remain at home
with their family. For more information, refer to ABSTUDY School Fees
Allowance (SFA) (Group 2).

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains lists of schools that offer a limited
program.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

Assessing continuity of study for ABSTUDY away from home rate

A-B Rates and Thresholds

Assessing ABSTUDY travel time and access for the away from home rate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
