-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to help customers complete an ABSTUDY form.

Identity Confirmation (IC)

ABSTUDY customers are subject to Identity Confirmation. They may need to
confirm their identity when supplying ABSTUDY forms.

See Additional procedures exclusive to ABSTUDY apply in some
circumstances.

Completing the paper claim

Applicants will need to complete a paper claim if unable to use:

-   the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool
-   Assisted Customer Claim
-   Online services

Points to note in completing the claim:

-   The claim must be completed in blue or black pen
-   All relevant questions on the claim should be answered. Many
    questions only require a 'Yes' or 'No' tick

If helping applicants to complete a claim form, do not underline or make
any comments on the claim that is to be signed by the applicant and/or
customer and lodged with Centrelink. Always use a separate sheet of
paper to capture any notations or explanations to questions and attach
this to the claim.

Form help

Each ABSTUDY form has a notes section. This section:

-   is at the beginning of the form
-   helps applicants to complete specific form questions

The Process page contains details to help customers complete common
questions.

Lodgement

ABSTUDY paper claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any
of the following options:

-   [A self service option is available for customers: Placed under
    section headings or general content where self service options are
    available.] Online - using the Upload documents service
-   Fax - see Processing Service details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   Post - via a reply paid envelope or by posting to Services
    Australia. See Processing Service details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
    PES
-   In person - at a service centre, or in remote areas, with a
    Centrelink field officer

Processing

ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing Teams process ABSTUDY claims. See
Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries.

The Resources page has links to all the ABSTUDY forms.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Claiming ABSTUDY

Manage study details option online

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
