-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines who can apply for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme claims. A person or an organisation can apply for
AIC for a student.

Eligibility for AIC

To be eligible for AIC, the applicant must satisfy all of the following:

-   be an approved applicant
-   meet residence requirements
-   not be receiving certain other Australian Government assistance

Approved applicant requirements

An approved applicant must be the person with primary or joint
responsibility for the student's care and will be one of the following:

-   the natural or adoptive parent
-   the legal guardian of the student
-   the person with whom the student normally lives
-   in some cases, a non-government organisation or institution may be
    the applicant

While there may be more than one approved applicant for a student, only
one claim may be accepted for a student for a particular period. Where
the person who is an approved applicant for a student has changed, a new
claim must be lodged.

Death of an approved applicant or applicant's partner

When a person contacts to advise the death, the death must be confirmed.
Where the student lives with more than one possible applicant (for
example, with both parents) and the one who applied for benefits dies,
the surviving parent/guardian may be eligible to receive the remaining
entitlements for the year. However, a new claim for AIC will need to be
lodged, and eligibility criteria met to be payable. See Eligibility for
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Generally, the death of the applicant's partner will not have an impact
on the payment of AIC to the applicant, unless they are in receipt of
Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA).

Where the applicant is receiving ABA, the death of the applicant's
partner will impact the application of the Parental Income Test (PIT).
See Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT).

If the student lives with only one applicant (for example, a sole
parent) and the applicant dies, the continuing eligibility of the
student and the payment of benefits for the rest of the year will depend
on who has responsibility for the student and what is now the principal
family home. The continuity of schooling concession may apply in such
cases. Once this is determined, a new claim will need to be lodged by
the new applicant. See Claiming Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme and/or Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme allowances.

Related Links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Claiming Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Residence requirements for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Australian Government Assistance other than Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme received by applicant or student

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Assessing claims and forms for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
