
Payment of tuition fees or Student Contribution for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate study 010-02050060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility, assessment and payment process
for an ABSTUDY student requesting assistance to pay their tuition fees
or their Student Contribution (previously known as Higher Education
Contribution Scheme (HECS)) incurred for a course at the Masters or
Doctorate level of study.

Eligibility

For payment of student contributions or tuition fees, the student must:

qualify for the Masters and Doctorate Award, and

be receiving 1 of the following:

-   Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   a Defence Force Income Support-like payment under the Veterans
    Entitlements Act 1986

To qualify for payment of Student Contribution or tuition fees under the
Masters or Doctorate Award for the same period, students only need to
receive $1.00 of entitlement during the academic year claimed.

Note: students receiving a Research Training Program (RTP) Stipend are
not eligible for ABSTUDY. See ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters
and Doctorate award.

Entitlement period

The entitlement period for the purposes of paying tuition and fees for
the ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate Award:

-   commences on the first day of study, and
-   ceases on the last day of study of the approved course

How to apply

ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate Award students must:

choose the 'pay up-front' payment option, and

submit a written request before the census date, (or the date set by the
provider if earlier) and attach any 1 of the following:

-   the original course Fee Statement/Tax Invoice statement/receipt(s)
    showing payment
-   their Commonwealth Assistance Notice (CAN), or
-   Higher Education Loan Program (HELP) statement from the Australian
    Taxation Office (ATO)

Note: the student can still apply for assistance if they have
incorrectly nominated to defer their student contribution, instead of
choosing the up-front payment option, or has lodged their Request for
Commonwealth assistance form late. In such cases, the student is
responsible for any fees that may incur due to incorrect nomination or
late lodgement.

Payment of tuition fees or Student Contributions

Commonwealth Supported Courses are where the Commonwealth Government
pays some of the course fees with the remainder being payable by the
student. Student Contribution fees are the student's share of the fees
payable.

Students enrolled in a Commonwealth Supported course can apply for a
HECS-HELP loan to pay their Student Contribution.

Students not enrolled in a Commonwealth Supported course are charged
tuition fees. These students can apply for a FEE-HELP loan to pay the
fees.

All students may have to pay for student services and amenities.
Students can apply for a SA-HELP loan to pay for services and amenity
fees. These charges are not tuition or Student Contribution fees. The
student may be reimbursed if they are eligible for ABSTUDY Additional
Incidentals Allowance.

Students who study 2 Masters or Doctorate courses at the same time may
be eligible for payment of tuition fees or Student Contribution for both
courses. In these cases, a systems limitation means Living Allowance
needs to be paid for each course for at least 1 fortnight to allow fees
to be issued.

Payment of tuition or Student Contribution must contain the student's:

-   Commonwealth Higher Education Student Support Number (CHESSN). It is
    on the Commonwealth Assistance Notice issued by the Educational
    Institution
-   Commonwealth Assistance Notice number, or
-   Tax File Number (TFN). It is on the Higher Education Loan Program
    HELP notice issued by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Tuition fees or student contributions are normally paid to the ATO or
educational institution, not to the student.

The student will be responsible for fees incurred because they did not
lodge their request by the census date (or the date set by the provider
if earlier).

Late fees incurred because there were delays in processing the payment
request by Services Australia, may be paid.

Payment due dates

The Census date is the last date a student can drop a unit, subject or
course without being required to pay for it. The census date is also the
deadline to:

-   apply for a HECS-HELP loan
-   provide their Tax File Number (TFN) to the education provider
-   pay the tuition fee or student contribution if they are not
    deferring payment via a HELP loan

When the Census date passes, the education provider will either:

issue the student with a Commonwealth Assistance Notice

cancel the student's enrolment if the student has not:

-   paid the fees
-   applied for the HECS-HELP loan, by completing a request for
    Commonwealth Support and HECS-HELP form and provided their TFN

Census dates may vary depending on the education provider or the course.

Payment amount

Payment amount is the:

-   actual amount of the tuition fees or Student Contribution amount
    less any fee scholarship received from the higher education provider
-   cost of the Masters and/or Doctorate course fee only. ABSTUDY does
    not cover associated costs such as administration fees and amenities
    fees

ABSTUDY covers the tuition fee or Student Contribution amount of each
unit/subject of the Masters and/or Doctorate course undertaken only.

There is no maximum amount.

The Resources page contains text for Q999 letters and an example of when
tuition fees would be payable.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for the Masters and Doctorate Award

Relocation Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate study

Thesis Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate

Payment to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
