-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the independence criteria for ABSTUDY.

Independence

An ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice can be dependent or
independent. Independence status can affect eligibility and/or rate of
ABSTUDY. Students and Australian Apprentices aged 22 years and over are
automatically considered independent. For ABSTUDY purposes, the term
'independent' means they are exempt from the Parental Means Test.

Independent students or Australian Apprentices are subject to the
personal income and assets tests, and if partnered, the partner income
and assets tests.

There are 2 types of independent status:

-   permanent independent status
-   reviewable independent status

Permanent independent status

Permanent independent status for ABSTUDY is granted on the basis of a
criteria that cannot change. Students or Australian Apprentices granted
permanent independent status remain independent for ABSTUDY.

To meet the criteria for permanent independent status, the student or
Australian Apprentice must:

-   meet the age criteria
-   be currently or previously married or in a registered relationship
-   be 16 years of age or older, and in a de facto relationship that is
    6 months or more
-   have or have had a dependent child
-   meet certain workforce criteria
-   have been in lawful custody for a cumulative period of 6 months or
    more
-   be an orphan
-   be 15 years of age or older and have Special Adult Status in a
    traditional community

Reviewable independent status

Reviewable independent status is granted on the basis of a criteria that
can change. Students or Australian Apprentices no longer remain
independent if their circumstances change and they cease to meet the
conditions for which they were approved.

To meet the criteria of reviewable independence status, the student or
Australian Apprentice must:

-   currently have the care or custody of another person's dependent
    child
-   be 15 years of age or over and have parent(s) who cannot exercise
    parental responsibilities
-   be of school leaving age in the particular state or territory or at
    least 16 years of age, and meet the unreasonable to live at home
    criteria
-   be 16 years of age or over and living in an Indigenous community
    after previously being adopted or fostered by a non-Indigenous
    family for more than 2 years

Customers not meeting requirements

Students and Australian Apprentices often consider themselves to be
independent because they do not receive any support from, or have not
lived with a parent or carer for a period of time. For ABSTUDY purposes
these circumstances alone do not determine a student or Australian
Apprentice qualifies for independent status.

If a student or Australian Apprentice does not meet the requirements of
any of the independence criteria, they will be assessed as dependent and
subject to the Parental Means Test.

Students and Australian Apprentices who live away from home and do not
meet the ABSTUDY Independence criteria may be eligible for the Away from
home rate of ABSTUDY.

Note: there is no category of independence based solely on a student or
Australian Apprentice being, or having been, in state care. Instead, an
ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice in this circumstance applying
for ABSTUDY may be considered independent under ABSTUDY unreasonable to
live at home (UTLAH).

Contents

ABSTUDY customer currently or previously married or in a registered
relationship

ABSTUDY customer has, or has had, a dependent child

ABSTUDY customer is independent through workforce participation

ABSTUDY customer is an orphan

ABSTUDY unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)

ABSTUDY customer in state care

ABSTUDY customer’s parents cannot exercise their parental
responsibilities

ABSTUDY customer is independent through age

ABSTUDY customer is independent due to previous lawful custody

ABSTUDY customer who has Special Adult Status in a traditional community

ABSTUDY customer who has returned to live in an Indigenous Australian
community

ABSTUDY customer who has the care of another person's child

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Young Person (SY015)

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Parent(s) (SY016)

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Independent Third Party (SY017)

Assessing independence for full time or concessional study load students
from regional and remote areas under the self-supporting through
employment

Assessing independence when a student has undertaken approved
agricultural work

Reviews of independence for ABSTUDY

Related links

The Parental Means Test

Partner Income Test for ABSTUDY customers under 22 years old, Austudy
and Youth Allowance students and Australian Apprentices

Partner Income Test for ABSTUDY customers 22 years and over

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
