
Negotiating an Activity Agreement for Youth Allowance (YA) students returning to study after discontinuing a previous course 010-06090030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedures for negotiating an Activity
Agreement with Youth Allowance students who are starting a new course
after not completing a previous course.

When an Activity Agreement is necessary

A Youth Allowance (YA) student who is returning to study full time in a
new tertiary course after previously starting, but not completing a
different tertiary course, may be required to enter into an Activity
Agreement. This means the student will have to complete the second (or
subsequent) course within the time allowed for that course unless there
are special circumstances preventing them from doing so.

An Activity Agreement is usually required where the new course and the
discontinued course are at the same level of study.

Note: if a student returns to study in the same type of course (for
example, Bachelor of Arts) at a different institution, it is considered
to be a new course.

Activity Agreement automatically generated in the online claim

For YA tertiary students, who advise within the online claim:

-   they have only one previous incomplete tertiary course, and
-   they have not withdrawn or failed due to exceptional circumstances

will be subject to a YA Activity Agreement within the online claim. The
YA Activity Agreement will display a personalised agreement with a
declaration and allow the customer to agree/disagree.

In the following circumstances, Service Officers will need to negotiate
the Activity Agreement manually:

-   the study information provided in the online claim is incorrect
-   there are multiple incomplete tertiary courses

Note: claims must not be held awaiting the return of a YA Activity
Agreement. Finalise the claim, issue the activity agreement, and set a
review for 22 days to check that the activity agreement has been
returned or uploaded by the student.

Manually completing an Activity Agreement

When it is determined that an Activity Agreement is required, or the
customer has not agreed to the terms of the agreement within the online
claim, Service Officers should complete and issue either a:

-   SY102 - Youth Allowance secondary student - Activity Agreement, or
-   SY103 - Youth Allowance tertiary student - Activity Agreement

Note: these forms need to be opened in the Internet Explorer browser to
allow staff to prefill details before printing.

The Manage Activity Agreements for Students screen in the Student
Activity Agreement workflow in Customer First is used to record or view
information contained in an Activity Agreement, unless the Activity
Agreement was automatically generated in an online claim. In these
circumstances, Service Officers will be able to view the Activity
Agreement within the Process Direct claim Slider. 'YAAA' will display on
the Claim DOC Summary Line in the customer's document list.

Satisfactory progress

To remain eligible for YA, a student must be making satisfactory
progress in their course.

The Resources page contains Activity Agreement templates for secondary
and tertiary YA students.

Related links

Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) students

General course requirements for Centrelink administered payments for
students

Activity Test for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Participation and serious failures for students, trainees and Australian
Apprentices

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
