-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for accepting and checking claims and
forms for ABSTUDY.

Lodging ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any of
the following options:

-   [] Online using the Upload document service
-   Fax - see Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   Post via a reply paid envelope or by posting to Services Australia.
    See Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   In person at a service centre, or in remote areas, with a Centrelink
    field officer

Accepting claim forms and supporting documents

Service Officers accepting claims, forms and documents must use a
separate sheet of paper (attached to the claim, form or documents) to
capture any notations or explanations to questions.

Service Officers must accept all versions of ABSTUDY paper claim forms,
including older versions.

Service Officers trained in processing ABSTUDY claims must:

-   complete an assessment regardless of the version of form supplied,
    and
-   not reject a claim if a customer lodged an old version of a form

No underline or comments of any sort are to be added to a claim, form or
document that is to be signed by a customer and lodged with Centrelink.

Recording receipt of documents

When claims, forms or documentation are received, they must be checked
for completeness and scanned on the customer's record.

Documents meeting the scannable document exceptions will be recorded in
a DOC, showing where and when the document was received, action taken
and where it was sent.

Identify confirmation

Identity Confirmation does not need to be met for all ABSTUDY payment
types. Additional procedures exclusive to ABSTUDY apply in some
circumstances. See Identity Confirmation for more information.

The Resources page contains links to forms.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

Claiming ABSTUDY

Determining who should be the ABSTUDY applicant

Issuing appropriate modules and additional forms to students, trainees
and Australian Apprentices

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
