
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) 010-20111938

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the TAP.

Overview of the TAP

The TAP assists eligible students with the cost of relocating to
undertake tertiary study immediately following the completion of year 12
(or equivalent qualification) with no gap year.

Students must be relocating from their family home, which is located in:

-   an inner regional area
-   an outer regional area
-   a remote area, or
-   a very remote area

There is 2 payment types:

-   Students whose family home address is classified as outer regional,
    remote or very remote, receive a payment of $5000, paid in two
    instalments.
-   Students whose family home address is classified as inner regional
    receive a one off payment of $3000

The assessment and payment dates depends on the payment the student is
receiving.

Students can lodge TAP claims:

-   from 1 January to 31 December in the calendar year they commence
    their tertiary course, and
-   only after they have completed their year 12 or equivalent
    qualification)

Where a special circumstance exists, students may be able to lodge after
this date.

A student can lodge a claim for the TAP:

-   online, through their myGov account
-   over the phone or in person via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   via a paper claim

The Claim for Tertiary Access Payment (SY104) paper claim is not
available for the public to access. Only issue a paper claim where it is
inappropriate or unreasonable for customers to use the online service or
ACC.

Note: a student does not need to be in receipt of another Social
Security payment to be eligible for the TAP. Depending on their
circumstances they may be eligible for:

-   both a Social Security payment
-   a Relocation Scholarship (RS), and
-   the TAP

For full eligibility criteria, see Assessing and finalising claims for
the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP).

Effect on income support payments

TAP is considered an Equity or Merit based scholarship and is not
taxable. The TAP may be assessed as income where the student is
receiving scholarships totalling more than the exempt income amount for
Equity and Merit scholarships,. See Assessing Scholarship income.

Online reviews

The students’ study details need to be verified prior to each instalment
of the TAP payment. See Completing Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) online
reviews.

Customer contact

If a customer is requesting a rejected TAP claim to be reassessed, see
Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new
claim.

If unable to resolve a customer’s enquiry, create a Callback or ACTDOC
work item. See the Process page.

Cancel my current payment online service

TAP students are eligible to use the ‘Cancel my current payment’ service
if they:

-   have an active Centrelink online account
-   do not have a nominee agreement

Eligible TAP students should follow the process in Cancel my current
payment online.

If the system cannot automatically finalise the online cancellation, a
work item is created. Service Officers will be able to manually cancel
the payment, see the Process page.

Debts

Prior to issuing each instalment, the agency confirms eligibility via an
enrolment check. A student is eligible for TAP on the day the instalment
was paid, even if their circumstances change after receiving the
instalment.

The student can get a debt if:

-   they receive a payment in error, or
-   they receive the payment fraudulently

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to supply more details or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights, and record an application for
    a formal review of the decision if required

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

For TAP there are no time limits for seeking a review of the decision.

A customer can write to the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment, complaints team if they have concerns about TAP policy or
advice given by Services Australia.

The Resources page contains useful links.

Contents

Assessing and finalising claims for the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Completing Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) online reviews

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
