
Residence requirements for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 010-03030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the residence requirements for Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Residence requirements

To qualify for payment under the AIC Scheme, both the applicant and the
student must meet residence requirements. This procedure explains these
requirements and how they are verified.

The approved applicant and student must be either:

-   an Australian, an Australian permanent resident or
-   a New Zealand citizen permanently settled in Australia who has met
    the required residency (waiting) period, or
-   If they are not New Zealand citizens, evidence must be provided to
    show they are permanently settled in Australia and to support their
    claim as Australian residents

Note: a New Zealand citizen does not need to hold a protected Special
Category Visa (SCV) holder, as long as they meet the definition of
permanently settled, and the New Zealand residency (waiting period)
rules. The Process page has information on meeting the definition of
permanently settled and New Zealand residency rules.

Temporary absences

The student must normally be living in Australia during the period of
study. Students will continue to be eligible for payment during
temporary absences overseas while on school holidays.

Note: students receiving AIC Distance Education Allowance (DED) can
remain eligible whilst temporarily overseas under some circumstances.
See Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
Distance Education Allowance.

Exchange students

Applicants can continue receiving AIC allowances for a student who is
participating in an international student exchange if the student:

-   remains enrolled at an Australian education institution and the
    overseas study is credited to their Australian studies (however, if
    a student is paid AIC allowances while studying overseas but then
    needs to repeat all or part of that study in Australia, allowances
    are not payable for the period of overseas study that does not count
    towards their Australian studies),
-   is continuing to incur the costs in Australia for which the
    allowance is being paid (for example, if the Australian boarding
    school is still charging full boarding fees while the student is on
    exchange), and
-   continues to meet all other eligibility criteria.

Applicant temporarily absent

The applicant must normally live in Australia, but may be absent
temporarily (for work or holidays) and intend to return to Australia
within 2 years. The principal family home must be in Australia and must
continue to meet one of the geographical isolation rules (where
applicable).

Evidence and documents required

Original documents or photocopies that have been certified by a Justice
of the Peace or a Commissioner of Declarations are required. However,
applicants living in isolated areas may have their original documents
photocopied and endorsed by an official of the local court, police
station or other government office. The photocopies must be stamped (if
an office stamp is used), signed and dated by the official viewing the
documents.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
