
Activity test exemptions for Youth Allowance (student) customers when their partner dies 010-19101857

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Youth Allowance (YA) (student)
customers eligible for an activity test exemption when their partner
dies.

On this Page:

Interacting with customers who have a recently deceased partner

Offer the services of a social worker during the first contact with a
customer after the death of a partner. For more information see Initial
contact after someone has died.

Eligibility for a Bereavement Payment

YA students may be eligible for Bereavement Payment if their partner
dies.

Note: YA students do not need to be considered independent to be
eligible for a bereavement payment.

If the customer and partner's records are not linked they may need to
show proof of the relationship. For more information, see Member of a
Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments.

The customer may be entitled to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) or
Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV). PBV can be assessed as either part of
a new claim or when an existing customer contacts.

Partner Bereavement Activity Test exemptions

A YA student whose partner has died is eligible for a Partner
Bereavement Activity Test exemption. The exemption period is 14 weeks
from when their partner died. If the customer is pregnant at the time of
their partners death, they will be exempt from the activity test for the
period of the pregnancy.

During the exemption period the student can:

-   Cancel their enrolment
-   Defer their study
-   Take an approved leave of absence, or
-   Reduce their study load to part time

The customer must have an intention to return to qualifying study:

-   in the study period that commences immediately after the last day of
    the exemption period, and
-   within 21 weeks from the day after the exemption period ends

Customers who do not intend to return to qualifying study will no longer
qualify for YA (student). Eligibility for alternative payments must be
explored.

Note: if the customer transfers to a JobSeeker Payment, the partner
bereavement Activity Test exemption will continue for the bereavement
period.

Managing study details online during Partner Bereavement Activity Test exemption period

If a YA customer has a Bereavement Activity Test Exemption coded on
their Centrelink file and uses the Manage study details online service
to update their study details, the details will not be automatically
applied to their file. Service Officers may need to contact the customer
by phone to determine their future study intentions if they have advised
cessation of their course or a reduction in study load.

Independence after the death of a partner

YA customers usually need to be in a de facto relationship for 12 months
to be considered independent.

Note: in special circumstances, YA customers can be considered
independent where the de facto relationship lasts at least 6 months.

Customer independence does not impact the application of an activity
test exemption.

Complete a holistic assessment of a customer's circumstances after the
death of their partner.

For more information, see Assessing independence when a customer is/was
married or a member of a couple.

Related links

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Financial assistance after death occurs

Cultural considerations when someone dies

Payment and Service Finder

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Satisfying the activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) by undertaking
full-time study

Satisfying the activity test for customers who are intending to study
for Youth Allowance (YA)

Student to job seeker transfers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
