-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess satisfactory progress and allowable
time for tertiary students for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

Satisfactory progress

PES is paid to eligible tertiary students for a limited period while
they are studying. To receive PES, students must be making satisfactory
progress by not exceeding the allowable time for their course.

Vocational Education and Training (VET) students who meet all the
following criteria will never reach the allowable time for their course
as all previous study is disregarded:

-    receive Austudy or PES
-    studying a VET course that has a full-time duration of 1 year or
    less (generally at Certificate level via TAFE or a VET provider),
    and
-    have only ever studied tertiary level VET courses with a full-time
    duration of 1 year or less

Eligible full-time and 25% concessional VET students can continue to
receive Austudy or PES for these courses.

Allowable time

Allowable time is measured against the time allowed to study a course
based on the normal duration to study that course (sometimes called
minimum time). Deduct time already spent in study at the same level from
this limit to check if the customer is still undertaking qualifying
study. Study load concessions may extend the payment duration.

Customers can study a second course at the same level within the
allowable study time rules. They:

-    can use any additional time available to them to start a second
    course at the same level, and
-    will lose qualification once they exceed the allowable time for one
    course

On the relevant date:

-    make a decision about the student's progress. If the student is
    making satisfactory progress on this date, continue PES payment
    until the student exceeds the allowable time for the course
-    if the time already spent on courses at the same level (as the
    current course) exceeds the allowable time for the current course,
    consider if some or all the earlier study can be disregarded

Previous study

Current full-time students

If the previous study was undertaken as a full-time study load, only
take the normal minimum duration of a completed course into account,
whether or not the student studied for longer than that.

Where study load aggregation has been applied to satisfy full-time study
requirements, count all study periods included in the aggregation
assessment as full-time.

Treat any previous study undertaken as a 25% concessional study-load
student as equal to the minimum amount of time that a full-time student
would have taken to complete the previous study. For example, a student
completed 4 years as a 25% concessional study-load student and is now a
full-time student. Count their previous study as one year because this
is how long a full-time student would have taken to complete the same
study.

Current 25% concessional study-load students - measuring previous study

To measure previous study for a current 25% concessional study-load
student:

-    treat and count previous study as full years (regardless of whether
    study was 25% concessional, 66% concessional study-load or
    full-time, or if PES was paid)
-    take into account that PES is payable for twice the length of time
    it would take a full-time student to complete the current course
    being studied. For example, if the current course is 3 years
    full-time, PES is payable for 6 years
-    subtract any study previously undertaken at the same level, from
    the allowable time for the current course

It is not relevant if the previous study was full-time, 25% concessional
or if PES was paid.

For example, a 25% concessional study-load student starting a 3 year
course previously undertook 3 years study at the same level (as both a
full-time and 25% concessional study-load student). PES was paid only
for one year. Count the 3 past years of previous study as 3 years, so
the student can be paid PES for another 3 years if they continue as a
25% concessional study-load student.

Masters or Doctorate course completed

A customer cannot qualify for PES if they have completed:

-    a Masters or Doctorate level course in Australia, or
-    an overseas qualification of the same standing

The Resources page contains scenarios for satisfactory progress, a link
to the Student Programme Resource Tool, and an attachment relating to
measuring time spent for tertiary students.

Related links

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Defining levels of tertiary study

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing satisfactory progress for secondary students for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
