-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when to generate a potential participation
failure for a secondary school student who has had more than 5 days of
unapproved absences from school in a term.

State term differences

There are generally 4 terms in one year. There are different term dates
for each state. See the National Course Approvals sub-site for specific
terms dates.

Enrolment checks

Enrolment and attendance checks are conducted at least twice a year. If
a student has more than 5 days of unapproved absences in a term, they
must sign a Student Activity Agreement. If a student has a further 5
days of unapproved absences during the period covered by the terms of
the agreement, a participation failure may be generated for
investigation by the Participation Solutions Team (PST).

Student Activity Agreements

Negotiating an Activity Agreement for students is a manual process. Job
seekers negotiate Job Plans and Job Plans must not be used for students.
See Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) students for
information about these agreements.

An appointment or referral will be made for the student to attend the
service centre to discuss the issues of their absences. If there are no
special circumstances, the terms of the agreement and whether or not to
generate a potential participation failure for investigation and action
by the PST will be negotiated at this interview.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site.

Related links

Negotiating Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students with unapproved absences

Raising debts for students and Australian Apprentices

Generating participation failures for Youth Allowance and Austudy
students

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
