-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the study requirements for ABSTUDY. This includes
course approval, eligibility for various awards, study load concessions
and the ABSTUDY activity test.

On this Page:

Study requirements

Students must be enrolled in and studying an approved course to receive
ABSTUDY. They must also be studying full-time (undertaking at least 75
per cent of the normal full-time study load of the course) or receiving
an approved study load concession.

Secondary school students are required to participate in full-time
study, including full daily program attendance. Secondary school
students who have more than five unapproved absences from school in a
term may be required to enter into an ABSTUDY Activity Agreement (ABAA).

In terms of attendance, tertiary and secondary non-schooling students
simply need to meet the education institution's course requirements.

Student changes from full-time to part-time studies

Where a student changes from full-time to part-time studies, ABSTUDY may
remain payable in certain circumstances.

Youth Disability Supplement

Full-time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt of Youth
Allowance or ABSTUDY and 21 years of age and under may be entitled to
Youth Disability Supplement (YDS). The customer must have been assessed
by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment
(JCA) as having a partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per
week.

The Resources page contains further information regarding the full-time
study requirements for different students.

Contents

Determining approval of mainstream or Indigenous courses for ABSTUDY

Approval of a course as full-time or part-time for ABSTUDY

Home schooling arrangements for ABSTUDY

Determining progress and duration of assistance for ABSTUDY

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Assessing the disability study load concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

ABSTUDY Allowances for Primary Level Study

Exemptions from study for ABSTUDY

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Eligibility periods for full year courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) AND PES

Study exemptions for ABSTUDY and Activity Test exemptions for Austudy
and Youth Allowance (YA)

Coding ABSTUDY education details

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Tertiary Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Part-time Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Testing and Assessment Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Lawful Custody Award

Study requirements for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
