
Change of circumstances for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme applicants 010-03060000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures required when Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme applicants advise a change in their
circumstance.

Notification obligations

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme applicants (usually the
parents or guardians who apply for assistance on behalf of the student)
are obliged to advise Services Australia, usually within 14 days, of any
event or change in circumstances that could affect their payment. This
is required by section 48(1) of the Student Assistance Act 1973 (the
Act). The events or circumstances are called 'prescribed events' and are
listed in Part 3 of the Student Assistance Regulations 2003 that are
made under the Act.

Note: as most AIC payments are made in advance, even if an applicant
notifies within 14 days, there may be a debt. Care needs to be taken to
ensure that the date of event (the date from which the change occurred)
is the date from which the debt should be raised. That is the case
regardless of when the change was notified.

Once an applicant has signed their claim form (confirming, among other
things, that they have read and understood what changes they must
advise) they are bound by the notification provisions.

Notifiable events

Applicants are advised of the types of things they must notify in their
grant notification letter and on the back of each reassessment letter
sent to them.

Following is a list of the types of changes an applicant must advise. As
circumstances vary for each applicant and student, this list is not
exhaustive.

Changes of circumstance that may require review or update to a
customer's record include:

-   any changes to the student's study, such as not enrolling at the
    school or distance education course or ceasing full-time study
-   where the student does not begin school or distance education course
    within the first two weeks after the first day of the course in the
    study year
-   where the student has left the care of the applicant
-   death of the applicant or student
-   if the customer is in receipt of Assistance for Isolated Children
    (AIC) for the child leaving their care, or percentage of care has
    reduced below 50%, create a Fast Note - select Auto text, use
    Students, ABSTUDY and Apprentices > AIC > AIC update action
    required. A child receiving AIC will be displayed as an EIC Link
    type on the parents Link Summary (LS) screen
-   where the student moves from one parent's residence to the other
    parent's residence as a result of the parent's separation or divorce
-   where the student ceases to board away from home, live in a second
    family home or undertake distance education while living at home
-   any changes to the student's boarding costs
-   where the geographical isolation reason for which AIC was granted
    ceases to apply
-   where the student begins a full-time apprenticeship or traineeship
-   any increase in parental income, including commencing employment and
    Additional Boarding Allowance is being paid
-   if a parent or guardian begins to receive Rent Assistance for the
    second home and Second Home Allowance is being paid
-   any change to residency status for the student or parents or
    guardians

Failure to notify

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme applicants may incur an
overpayment if they fail to notify a change of circumstance which
results in a loss of entitlement.

Check and update contact details

Every applicant's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the applicant has
authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not need to be
confirmed.

Approved applicant for the student changes

Although there may be more than one approved applicant for a student,
only one claim may be accepted for a student for a particular period. If
the person who is the approved applicant for a student has changed, a
new claim must be lodged, for example, death of the original applicant.

Where the student lives with more than one possible applicant (for
example, with both parents) and the one who applied for benefits dies,
the other is entitled to receive remaining entitlements for the year.
However, they will need to lodge a new claim.

If the student lives with only one applicant (for example, a sole
parent) and the applicant dies, the continuing eligibility of the
student and the payment of benefits for the rest of the year will depend
on who now has responsibility for the student and what now constitutes
the principal family home. The continuity of schooling concession may
apply in such cases. Once this is determined, a new claim will need to
be lodged by the new applicant.

To determine who can assume responsibility for the student, see
Determining who can be the applicant for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme.

Contents

Actioning notification of the death of a student

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student turns 16

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student turns 19

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student becomes
incapacitated

Change of address for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
applicants or students

Commencement of full-time work for Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme customers

Commencing or returning to full-time work for parents/guardians of
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme students

Determining the Entitlement End Date for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Cancellation of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
