-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for ABSTUDY student and non-student
travellers who experience a disruption to their journey.

Disrupted travel

Weather, transport delays, carrier maintenance, missed connections
mid-journey or unexpected quarantine requirements can lead to a small
number of student and non-student travellers experiencing travel
disruptions. A disruption to travel can be in the form of a long delay
at the transit location (for example, airport), or require an overnight
stay at an in-transit location.

If a student or non-student traveller is experiencing disrupted travel,
Services Australia is usually notified by the Travel Management Company.
However, Services Australia may receive notification of a disruption
during business hours from a student, parent/guardian, or boarding
school/hostel.

Safe Travel Plan (STP)

A Safe Travel Plan (STP) is mandatory for all primary and secondary
school travellers under 18 years of age seeking to have their travel
plan pre-booked by Services Australia.

Note: in all cases where an STP is in place and the emergency contacts
are unavailable, or they have been unable to manage a disruption, a
period of mandatory supervision requirements will apply until 1 March of
the following year for any future pre-booked travel for the disrupted
student traveller.

Penalties for missed travel

Penalties exist in some circumstances for missed travel arrangements. To
determine whether a penalty applies to the student or non-student
traveller who misses a booked journey, or connection on a journey, see
No show for ABSTUDY travel.

Organising supervision for unaccompanied students

Unaccompanied students under 18 years of age experiencing a travel
disruption require supervision for long wait times at a transit
location, between travel connections or supervision overnight when
travel cannot be completed on the same day.

Related links

Determining the appropriate mode of transport for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

No show for ABSTUDY travel

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Travel Management Application (TMA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
