
Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Boarding Allowance (BA/ABA) 010-03040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when Basic Boarding Allowance (BA) and Additional
Boarding Allowance (ABA) can be paid under the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme for students who need to live away from home to
undertake approved study.

General eligibility

General AIC eligibility criteria must be met for the applicant and
student.

BA is payable for eligible students who need to live away from the
principal family home in an approved board arrangement during school
term to have daily access to appropriate schooling.

If a student needs to board for short periods during the year, for
example, to undertaking diagnostic testing and/or receive support for a
learning disability, or when access from the principal family home to
the school is cut off due to special weather conditions, short-term BA
is available.

BA is payable for eligible students living in a special institution
catering for students with disabilities or health-related conditions
where they are residing there for a period of at least 20 continuous
school days.

BA is not payable for students who have been formally placed in
full-time residential care at a special institution by a state/territory
authority which provides foster care allowance to the institution for
the upkeep of the student.

DSP and PPS customers

If the student receives Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting
Payment Single (PPS), and is undertaking primary or equivalent ungraded
study and qualifies for BA, AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) is
the appropriate payment.

Rate of Boarding Allowance

Maximum rate Boarding Allowance (BA) is payable for students boarding
full-time - at least 4 nights per week. Otherwise, the rate is based on
the number of nights per week boarding, or the short-term boarding
period.

Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA)

ABA is the only AIC allowance that is means tested. It is payable for
students:

-   who qualify for BA
-   whose parental income complies with the Parental Means Test
-   whose annual boarding costs (made up of the actual boarding charges
    plus $250 for incidentals) exceed the maximum annual Basic Boarding
    Allowance rate

Students impacted by COVID-19

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, some students may have been unable to
return to board for Term 2, 3 or 4 of 2020 or Term 3 or 4 in 2021.

Continuing students remain eligible for AIC BA and ABA in Term 2, 3 and
4 in 2020 or Term 3 and 4 of 2021, where:

-   they were impacted by COVID-19
-   they were approved for boarding entitlements in the term immediately
    prior to the impacted term
-   their board provider holds a boarding place for them in the impacted
    term
-   the student intends to return to board as soon as possible, and
-   the school/board provider continues to support the student study
    remotely using other methods, such as online

New students are only eligible for BA and ABA in the term in which they
commenced with the new provider, once they physically attend at the
boarding provider. This applies where the:

-   student was only accepted at a new boarding provider after the start
    of the impacted term, that is either Term 2, 3 or 4 2020 or Term 3
    or 4 2021
-   a new BA or ABA claim granted from 1 April 2020 for Term 2, 1 July
    2020 for Term 3 or 1 October 2020 for Term 4, or
-   a new BA or ABA claim granted from 1 July 2021 for Term 3 or 1
    October 2021 for Term 4

There is no change for students who continued to board and study in
person.

Students unable to begin away from home, face to face studies at the
start of the relevant term during 2021, due to COVID-19 impacts, may
remain eligible once the applicant/student provides evidence.

Students with COVID-19 impacts will be eligible to be paid once:

-   COVID-19 impacts are confirmed, and
-   the student begins study on campus

Evidence can include one of the following:

-   A letter from the board provider or advice from the education
    provider website confirming reduced capacity at boarding place
-   A medical practitioner confirming health related impacts. For
    example, an autoimmune disorder
-   State or territory education department websites confirming school
    closures, or
-   State or territory websites confirming travel restrictions

Students unable to attend away from home, face to face studies at the
start of any term during 2021, where there are no COVID-19 impacts, must
be assessed for ongoing eligibility to AIC. See Eligibility for
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Rates and thresholds

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Distance
Education Allowance (DED)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Second
Home Allowance (SHA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
