
Assessing ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) claims 010-05030000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of ABSTUDY PES which is paid
fortnightly. The amount payable depends on the qualifying payment the
applicant is receiving.

PES policy arrangements

PES is administered by Services Australia and is paid under 3 sets of
policy:

-   ABSTUDY policy. This is referred to as ABSTUDY PES
-   the Social Security Act. This is referred to as simply PES
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme policy. This is
    referred to as AIC PES

Eligibility and qualification for PES

Customers receiving a qualifying payment for PES and who are undertaking
qualifying study are qualified for PES in addition to the primary
qualifying income support payment. Qualification for PES relies mainly
on receipt of a qualifying income support payment. Receipt of this
payment must be verified before the PES assessment can proceed.

Customers must satisfy basic qualifications:

-   minimum age
-   residency requirements
-   qualifying study
-   receiving a qualifying income support payment. Receipt of this
    payment must be verified before the PES assessment can proceed, and
-   for ABSTUDY, Aboriginality

ABSTUDY PES and PES differences

Customers can choose whether they want to apply for ABSTUDY PES or PES.
Care should be exercised in offering customers a choice between the two
schemes, as there are differences in additional payments available. For
example:

-   Incidentals Allowance for ABSTUDY PES recipients
-   Additional Incidentals Allowance for ABSTUDY PES recipients
-   Away from Base Assistance for ABSTUDY PES recipients
-   Residential Cost Option for ABSTUDY PES recipients
-   Education Entry Payment (EdEP) for PES recipients

Note: see Assessing Claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
(SY004).

Claim lodgement rules

The closing dates for PES claims differ from other benefits administered
by Services Australia.

-   31 March if the course if a full year course starting before 1 April
-   31 July if the course starts on or after 1 July, or
-   28 days from the date of qualification if the course if less than 1
    year

To ensure the student is paid from the earliest date possible, they
should submit their claim by the closing dates above.

Note: for customers in vulnerable circumstances, see Intent to claim and
vulnerable customers.

Processing arrangements - ABSTUDY PES, AIC PES and PES

ABSTUDY PES claims are processed by one of four ABSTUDY Smart Centre
Processing teams. See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and
enquiries for more information about the responsibilities that each
section of the department has when dealing with ABSTUDY related matters.

AIC PES is limited to a very small number of customers and claims and
enquiries will be referred to the relevant AIC Smart Centre Processing
centre.

Look up Smart Centre Processing details for: Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC).

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains links to ABSTUDY PES claim forms and the
Services Australia website.

Contents

Assessing the Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020)

Processing transfers to Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) from
ABSTUDY PES to receive Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Processing transfers to ABSTUDY PES from Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Calculating the start day for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and
ABSTUDY PES

Rejecting a Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) or ABSTUDY PES claim

Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, Austudy, Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Related Links

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Claiming ABSTUDY

Rejecting an ABSTUDY claim

External review of ABSTUDY decisions

Review of decision

Making an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
