
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines approved non-high school secondary study. The
term 'secondary schooling' is often taken to mean 'study at a high
school or secondary college', but this is only one form of secondary
study. It is the academic level of the subjects undertaken rather than
the nature of the institution where they are offered that determines
whether study is secondary or not.

On this Page:

Secondary level study

Secondary level study may be undertaken:

-   at a high school or secondary college
-   at a Vocational Education and Training (VET) or Technical and
    Further Education (TAFE) institution
-   at a higher education institution
-   by distance education or external study
-   by home schooling, or
-   by a combination of some or all of the above

Home schooling

The only requirement in relation to the mode of education Services
Australia purposes is that it is an approved course of study at an
approved institution. Home schooling may be approved for ABSTUDY,
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme and Youth Allowance (YA)
where the relevant State/Territory authority has given specific approval
for an individual to study at home. For YA and ABSTUDY students, the
authority needs to confirm that this study will be credited towards an
accredited secondary qualification. For AIC students, the relevant
State/Territory education authority must formally approve the full-time
primary or secondary level course as a satisfactory alternative to a
State provided education.

Preparatory courses

All preparatory and similar courses at higher education institutions
(including universities) or VET institutions are regarded as secondary
courses. This includes a bridging course to allow entry to university.
Similarly, preparatory (or access) courses at VET institutions such as
certificates in general education for adults, other language, literacy
and numeracy courses and course that will allow access to a tertiary
level VET course are regarded as secondary courses.

Courses run by correctional authorities

Language, literacy and numeracy courses provided by correctional
institutions and approved by correctional authorities for people in
lawful custody are secondary courses for ABSTUDY purposes.

Secondary study overseas

In regards to ABSTUDY, a student undertaking secondary level study at an
equivalent overseas approved education institution is considered to be
undertaking secondary level study for qualification for ABSTUDY
entitlements.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Centrelink administered payments for
students

Approved correspondence/external study

Home schooling arrangements for ABSTUDY

Home schooling arrangements for Youth Allowance (YA), Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Approved studies for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
