-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to follow to determine the amount of
Fares Allowance (FAA) to be paid, and how to reimburse it once the Claim
for Fares Allowance tertiary students only (SY005) form has been
returned.

Fares reimbursement

FAA is normally paid for the cheapest and most practicable mode of
transport available for the journey taken. This is the amount that would
be paid regardless of the cost actually incurred by the student. In some
circumstances, the student may be eligible for a rail or airfare rather
than a bus, dependent on the length of the journey and if the student
has an illness or incapacity.

Cheapest mode of transport

The cheapest mode of public transport is generally bus, followed by
train, then by plane, but this is not always the case. Where an
alternative method of transport is cheaper than a bus service, the
student would be reimbursed for that method of transport.

Where a student chooses to travel by a more expensive mode of transport
and does not meet one of the exemptions shown below, they will only be
reimbursed for the cost of the cheapest mode of transport.

Students can be reimbursed for the next available cheapest mode of
travel if:

-   they are unable through illness or incapacity to travel by the
    cheapest mode of travel
-   a journey by bus would exceed 18 hours, including waiting time
    between connections, or
-   a journey by train would exceed 36 hours, including waiting time
    between connections. (The cost of a sleeping berth may be included
    in the cost of second-class rail travel if it is not possible for
    the journey to be made by day)

Note: if a customer has utilised frequent flyer points to undertake
their trip, they are not eligible for reimbursement. Fares Allowance may
be reimbursed for a non-frequent flyer portion of a fare where evidence
is provided. For example, a customer booked a flight using a combination
of frequent flyer points and payment.

Economy airfare

There are different levels of 'economy' airfares for example, saver
lite, saver and flexi fares.

FAA is reimbursed for the cheapest, most practicable mode of transport.
The Service Officer must choose the cheapest fare that provides one
economy seat plus the necessary baggage requirement. It is not possible
to obtain historical fare prices (QBT does not keep a list of past
fares). Where an applicant is claiming reimbursement for a flight
already taken, it is reasonable for the Service Officer to check the
best fare of the day over the next 5 business days commencing 7 days
from date claim is being processed. This amount can be averaged to
determine the reimbursement rate. If the amount of the flight was deemed
as reasonable, this is not required.

Additional costs not payable under FAA

The following travel costs would not be covered by FAA:

-   airport parking fees
-   manual check-in fees
-   SMS itinerary costs
-   travel insurance, or
-   entertainment bundles
-   seat allocation
-   accommodation booked during the period of travel

Additional luggage costs

Fares Allowance can generally be paid to students to cover the cost of
one standard piece of checked in luggage.

If an airline charges extra for 1 piece of luggage, FAA may be paid for
this luggage. This applies whether the person has pre-booked the fare
and luggage together, or the luggage is purchased at the time of
check-in.

Note: In some cases, additional luggage costs may be covered by FAA
where the cost of the excess baggage for a flight, is required to
transport living necessities or personal belongings, such as essential
kitchenware. While it would be reasonable to expect a student may
require excess baggage if they are moving to a premises for the first
time, it would not be reasonable for excess baggage to be booked if they
are returning home for a holiday period and maintaining their residence
where they study. Excess baggage costs may also be covered by FAA to
transport necessary course equipment for example, a music student has to
transport their musical instrument in order to complete their course of
study.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains links to providers and resources that can be
used as a guide in determining the cheapest and most practicable mode of
transport, nationally and for each state.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Reimbursing fares for the use of a private vehicle or taxi for Youth
Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
