
Assessing ABSTUDY home conditions for the away from home rate 010-02060130

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to determine if a student or
Australian Apprentice is eligible for the ABSTUDY away from home rate
due to home conditions.

Eligibility for away from home rate

Dependent ABSTUDY students and Australian Apprentices may be eligible
for the ABSTUDY away from home rate where the conditions at the
permanent home impede their educational progress or ability to complete
their apprenticeship. This includes conditions originating outside the
home.

How to claim away from home rate

Away from Home rate can be claimed for:

new customers:

-   for secondary students, via the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool, ABSTUDY Claim
    (SY019), or Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092)
-   for tertiary students and Australian Apprentices, online, via the
    Assisted Customer Claim, or ABSTUDY Claim (SY019)

existing customers, via a statement (verbal or written) indicating the
criteria under which they are seeking approval

Evidence may be required to support a student or Australian Apprentice
claim for the Away from Home rate under home Conditions.

Tertiary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some students were required to leave their on campus term
accommodation. Many students also transitioned to online study as
face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Students who were receiving the away from home rate, and temporarily
transitioned to online learning as a result of COVID-19, remain eligible
for the away from home rate. Tertiary students must return to
face-to-face study as soon as it becomes available to continue to be
eligible for the away from home rate.

Where a student had to move out of education provider accommodation
(such as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their
parents, will remain eligible for the away from home rate providing
they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

This includes students who:

-   had their accommodation arrangement cancelled by the education
    provider and have moved their belongings out of that accommodation
-   were approved for the Residential Cost Option (RCO)

Note: the away from home rate of ABSTUDY Living Allowance can be paid
for any period that the education provider does not charge a residential
fee, rather than the reduced rate of Living Allowance.

Relocation Scholarship

Dependent customers living away from home studying an approved
scholarship course may also be qualified to receive a Relocation
Scholarship, see Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility.

The Resources page contains examples of different home conditions and
the assessment of whether the away from home rate of ABSTUDY would be
approved in these cases.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

Assessing continuity of study for ABSTUDY away from home rate

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
