-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains ABSTUDY Additional Assistance. It is paid to
students and Australian Apprentices who are experiencing severe
financial difficulties meeting the costs associated with their education
or training.

Eligibility

The customer must:

-   meet the eligibility criteria for ABSTUDY Living Allowance, and
-   incur a financial cost of study/training which has caused the
    customer or the customer's family hardship which payment of ABSTUDY
    entitlement is not enough

Students who meet Independence criteria, Unreasonable to Live At Home
(UTLAH), or other criteria for students without parental support, or
disadvantaged students, may be eligible for Additional Assistance where
ABSTUDY entitlements are paid direct to a board provider. ABSTUDY Living
Allowance, Rent Assistance, and in some cases Remote Area Allowance, are
paid via ABSTUDY boarding instalment directly to the board provider
(boarding school or school term hostel). These entitlements normally
cover the period 1 January to 31 December of the study year. Therefore,
students may have no access to financial support during school vacations
as would normally be provided by parent(s)/guardian(s) or other family
members.

ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing Services will identify boarding students
who meet the Independence criteria for students without parental support
or are disadvantaged.

Eligibility for Additional Assistance (Emergency)

In the event of an emergency or disaster, a student or an Australian
Apprentice may be eligible for Additional Assistance if they:

-   qualify for Away from Home, or Away from Base entitlements, and
-   their participation in, or access to, education or training is
    adversely impacted, either directly or indirectly, by an emergency
    or disaster

Additional Assistance (non-student dependents)

Additional Assistance paid as Fares Allowance may be approved where
approved supervisor, family member or community member travellers
require a non-student dependent to accompany them on their travel
journey.

For eligibility assessment, see Non-student travellers for ABSTUDY.

Exclusions for Additional Assistance

Additional Assistance is not to be granted to subsidise the general
living costs of a family. It is expected that the Additional Assistance
provision will be used sparingly.

Claiming

Customers can lodge a claim verbally.

When lodging a claim due to emergency or disaster, it is acceptable for
the claim to be lodged by the:

-   Student/Apprentice
-   Education Provider
-   Residential Facility
-   Parent/Guardian

Rate

The rate payable will be set at whichever is the lesser of that amount
required to:

-   meet the cost of the particular factor associated with the student's
    study programme or Australian Apprentice's training which has
    contributed to the financial difficulties; or
-   overcome the hardship, i.e. address the imbalance between income and
    essential expenditure

Payment

Additional Assistance may be provided in the form of:

-   a regular supplement to an allowance the customer is entitled to
    (taxable), or
-   a once only payment which will overcome the hardship (non-taxable)

The Resources page contains Q999 text for grant and rejection letters
and example of emergency scenarios.

Contents

Completing an ABSTUDY form

Processing an ABSTUDY claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
