-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and code a Claim for Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040).

Requirement to lodge a claim

The applicant must lodge a claim:

-   in full for the first year of claiming AIC
-   by 1 March in the year following that for which assistance is
    sought, and
-   for each individual child

The applicant must reapply every year using the AIC End of Year process.

Claim processing

When an applicant lodges a claim for AIC, Service Officers must:

-   ensure a full assessment is undertaken
-   check the details held in the claim to see if the applicant would be
    entitled to a higher rate of payment or additional allowances

Rejection of AIC claims

An AIC claim will be rejected if the applicant and/or the student do not
meet either:

-   eligibility requirements
-   isolation conditions, or
-   an approved living arrangement qualification for payment of an AIC
    allowance

Automatic rejections

Most claim rejections occur automatically, after coding the claim
details. A letter will be sent to the applicant with the relevant
rejection reason. If the letter provides incorrect information, AIC
Smart Centre staff will suppress the letter and send the applicant a
Q679 AIC Rejection letter, or in some circumstances, a Q999 letter.

Manual rejections

Some claim rejections will need to be coded manually, for example,
failing to supply documents. When manually rejecting a claim, a Q679
Rejection letter is the main letter to be sent to the customer, with the
rejection reason(s) and their review and appeal rights. There are some
approved Q999 letters that may be issued. These are located on the
Letters and electronic messaging sub-site.

Unfavourable decisions

When making unfavourable decisions, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them an option to give more details, and
-   tell them their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains links to the Centrelink rate charts, state
government educational authorities and a table determining unique study
and living arrangements for AIC.

Related links

Age requirements for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Determining who can be the applicant for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Residence requirements for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Determining the Entitlement End date for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Distance
Education Allowance (DED)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Second Home
Allowance (SHA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Boarding
Allowance (BA/ABA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
