
Negotiating Job Plans for under 18 year old at risk job seekers 010-06090010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If you have concerns about a child's safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

This document explains the requirements and processes for negotiating
Job Plans with under 18 year old at risk job seekers.

Negotiating the Job Plan

Young people under the age of 18 years, who have not completed Year 12
(or equivalent) or a Certificate III or higher are considered to be
early school leavers. They need to undertake approved requirements
and/or job search and enter into a Job Plan with either Services
Australia or a Workforce Australia - Employment Services Provider to
satisfy their mutual obligation requirements:

-   Approved requirements must be for at least 25 hours per week
-   For any combination of approved requirements and job search, their
    provider will determine the number of job searches required in
    addition to their other requirements
-   If undertaking only job search, they must look for work of at least
    25 hours per week and the number of job searches will be determined
    by their provider

Generally, early school leavers under 18 years of age (but who are at
least 15) should be referred to Workforce Australia - Transition to Work
Services (TtW) and provider managed. TtW assists eligible young job
seekers into work, education, apprenticeships and traineeships. TtW
services are delivered by Employment Service Providers. They operate
separately to Workforce Australia Services, Disability Employment
Services (DES) and Community Development Program (CDP).

An exemption to study does not automatically mean the job seeker has an
exemption from their requirements. An exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements is assessed and coded separately by Services
Australia and are temporary.

The agency is responsible for negotiating the Job Plan for Centrelink
managed job seekers and providers negotiate the Job Plan for provider
managed job seekers. The Participation Summary screen displays who is
responsible for negotiating the Job Plan.

The Job Plan should be tailored to the job seeker's individual
circumstances and may include requirements such as undertaking study,
training, job search or other approved requirements.

If it is identified that a provider managed job seeker would be best
referred to an education program (such as Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE)), the Service Officer must consult the provider. If the
provider agrees, the Service Officer may refer the job seeker to the
appropriate program and the provider will update the job seeker's Job
Plan.

Some young people aged under 18 require support in making decisions that
will lead them along adequate pathways to independence. Services
Australia plays a crucial role in assisting these young people make the
right choices to achieve successful outcomes, such as sustainable
employment. Most young people are able to make this transition
successfully with some support from their family, key government and
non-government organisations, and the community.

Support programs

There continues to be a group of young people for whom the movement from
school to work is not easy, and a substantial amount of support is
required to assist them in addressing often complex barriers. These
barriers may include a lack of family support, a high level of family
conflict, substance abuse, unstable accommodation, mental illness, a
history of state care, or a history of truancy or offending behaviour.

At the job seeker's initial contact with Services Australia, the
Participation Interview will be applied. This will assist in determining
the level of assistance the job seeker requires and which referrals
should be made, including an immediate referral to a social worker where
the job seeker is in crisis. A referral to an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) may be required. The outcome of the Job Seeker
Snapshot or an ESAt allows the job seeker to receive tailored assistance
from the most appropriate employment services provider according to
their circumstances. The Job Seeker Snapshot is not required for job
seekers in Community Development Program (CDP) regions.

Where a job seeker advises of a change in circumstances, the Job Seeker
Snapshot should be conducted again. To remain eligible for payment, an
early school leaver job seeker must be prepared to negotiate and agree
to a Job Plan with either Services Australia or an Employment Services
Provider and to take all reasonable steps to comply with the terms of
the Job Plan they have signed.

Job Plan requirements

Centrelink managed job seekers must be undertaking activities in their
job plan that enable them to fully meet their mutual obligation
requirements. Provider managed job seekers must negotiate a plan with
their Employment Services Provider.

In accordance with Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
policy, Job Plan requirements should be quantifiable, specific and
achievable. Generally, mutual obligation requirements should reflect the
young person's educational attainment, experience, skills, (including
social and life skills) and their physical and psychological capacity.
Access to local training and other opportunities should also be
considered. An appropriate Job Plan is one which includes requirements
that reflect the complex needs of the young person. While there should
be a component of education or training, these requirements must be
achievable in the context of the young person's current circumstances.

Sometimes the involvement of third parties in the Job Plan negotiation
process is appropriate and will ensure the job seeker's plan is as
effective as possible, for example, vulnerable young people. The aim of
this interagency cooperation is to ensure that job seeker barriers to
study and training are identified and captured by the Job Seeker
Snapshot as well as being adequately addressed in a Job Plan.

Young people presenting with these circumstances should be identified as
being at high risk of not complying with their requirements and may need
additional assistance. It is important this is indicated on the job
seeker's record via a DOC using the 'atrisk' keyword and the
Circumstances Impacting Compliance.

Related links

Reviewing Job Plans for under 18 year old at risk job seekers

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Social Work Services

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Participation Interview

Eligibility and registration for employment assistance as a Vulnerable
Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student) (VY(S))

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
