
Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES 010-05010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures when a student may qualify for
payment of PES or ABSTUDY PES.

On this page:

PES types

Types of PES:

-   PES
-   ABSTUDY PES
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme PES. This only affects
    a very small number of students. Unlike other AIC payments, the
    parent/guardian is normally the applicant

Claiming PES or ABSTUDY PES

Students can claim:

PES by submitting:

-   an online claim, or
-   a Claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (SY004) form

ABSTUDY PES by contacting the Centrelink ABSTUDY line or by completing
one of the following forms:

-   Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020), or
-   Claim for ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award (SY021)

Once a customer lodges a claim for ABSTUDY by the relevant closing date,
they do not need to lodge another claim (even if they complete the wrong
ABSTUDY claim or their circumstances change). The customer must supply
the extra information relevant for the particular ABSTUDY Award or
allowance to be assessed. See Claiming ABSTUDY for examples of whether
or not a customer needs to lodge a new ABSTUDY claim.

Students claiming PES within 52 weeks of last receiving PES can submit:

-   an online claim
-   the SY004, or
-   the Information required for continuation of Pensioner Education
    Supplement or ABSTUDY (SY075M) form as an abridged claim for PES

Students claiming ABSTUDY PES, who were previously in receipt of ABSTUDY
in the past may not need to lodge a new claim. These claims follow the
same lodgement rules as all ABSTUDY claims. See Claiming ABSTUDY.

Current ABSTUDY customers (including Incidentals and part-time students)
do not need to lodge a claim for ABSTUDY PES. As the ABSTUDY customer is
only changing allowances under the ABSTUDY Scheme, the information
required to complete the transfer from ABY to EPA (ABSTUDY PES) is
available on their qualifying payment record.

PES schemes for Indigenous students

Indigenous students can choose whether to apply for PES or ABSTUDY PES.
Take care when offering customers a choice between the 2 schemes, as
there are some differences in the extra payments available:

-   Education Entry Payment (EdEP) for PES customers
-   Incidentals Allowance for ABSTUDY PES customers
-   Additional Incidentals Allowance for ABSTUDY PES customers
-   Away from Base Assistance for ABSTUDY PES customers
-   Residential Cost Option for ABSTUDY PES customers

There are also differences in the duration of assistance payable between
PES and ABSTUDY PES based on the amount of previous tertiary study
undertaken, whether it was full-time or not and whether the student has
a disability or not. Consider the individual student's circumstances and
provide sufficient information to the customer so they can make an
informed decision.

ABSTUDY PES customers are entitled to transfer between ABSTUDY PES and
PES to receive the EdEP. Customers who choose this option, can transfer
back to ABSTUDY PES once EdEP has been paid to maximise their
entitlement to the extra payments available as part of ABSTUDY PES. They
will not need to lodge a claim. See Processing transfers to ABSTUDY PES
from Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

The First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow will
automatically identify customers who may be eligible for PES. The FCSO
workflow will prompt the Service Officer to issue a an SY004 or SY020
form if the customer has identified as Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander.

FCSO does not currently include the PES online claim as an option. If a
customer is potentially eligible for PES, encourage them to claim
online. If they cannot or do not want to claim online, encourage them to
a claim verbally using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Only if the customer cannot, or does not want to, use the online claim
or ACC, issue the customer with a SY004 form.

Qualifying payments that attract PES and ABSTUDY PES

To receive a PES or ABSTUDY PES payment, students must be receiving a
qualifying income support payment. This must be verified before the PES
assessment proceeds. Customers must also satisfy minimum age and
residency requirements, and be undertaking or intend to undertake
qualifying study.

Note: Australian Apprenticeship customers are not entitled to PES.

See the Resources page for historical information about PES eligibility.

Residency and age requirements

Customers must satisfy minimum age and residency requirements. To
qualify for:

PES:

-   students must be Australian citizens or permanent residents, and
-   waiting periods apply to newly arrived residents, including New
    Zealand citizens

ABSTUDY PES, students must be an Australian citizen

Rate of PES

PES and ABSTUDY PES are not income or assets tested, and are not taxable
or indexed. PES and ABSTUDY PES are paid at a flat fortnightly rate of:

$62.40 for students who are:

-   undertaking 50% or more of the full-time study load for the course
    and in receipt of a qualifying income support payment or having
    other qualifying circumstances
-   receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP), JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
    or Youth Allowance (YA) with a partial capacity for work, an
    invalidity service pension or invalidity income support supplement
    under the Veterans' Entitlements Act who are undertaking more than
    25% of the full-time study load for the course

$31.20 for students who meet all of the following:

-   receiving a PES qualifying income support payment
-   have been granted a disability study load concession or a pensioner
    study load concession, and
-   have undertaken between 25% and 49.9% of the full-time study load
    for the course

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
PES claim forms.

Related links

Calculating the start day for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Claiming ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) PES

Initial contact with customers claiming under the Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Restoration of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES payments

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Qualifying payments for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY
PES

Processing transfers to ABSTUDY PES from Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Claiming ABSTUDY

Eligibility periods for full year courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and PES

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
