-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines ABSTUDY payments and services that may be
available for students or Australian Apprentices receiving other
Australian Government assistance, training or employer assistance to
undertake the course of study or Australian Apprenticeship.

Receiving other assistance to study

The effect on ABSTUDY eligibility depends on the type of assistance
received:

-   income support
-   other forms of Australian Government assistance to study
-   training assistance
-   scholarships

Receiving another form of assistance to study or undertake an Australian
Apprenticeship is taken as commencing on the earlier of:

-   The point when the student begins study under the programme, or
-   The date the agreement commences. ABSTUDY may be payable if the
    student is undertaking additional studies not related to the course
    for which the student is receiving other assistance to study

Income support and other forms of Australian Government Assistance to study

Students and Australian Apprentices are ineligible for ABSTUDY
assistance if they get another form of Australian Government income
support to study or undertake the Australian Apprenticeship. This
includes:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) (students)
-   Austudy
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
-   Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES)
-   Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training
    Scheme (MRCAETS)

Note: this does not apply to customers who apply for Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES). Some customers eligible for another source of income
support can also receive ABSTUDY PES to study at the same time.

If a customer or Australian Apprentice receives Australian Government
income support for reasons other than study, they remain eligible for
ABSTUDY, but are precluded from Living Allowance entitlement. This is
also the case for some other forms of Australian Government assistance
that are paid to a student for a different course of study, such as, the
Self Employment Assistance Allowance. This means customers receiving
another Centrelink payment or another form of Australian Government
assistance for a different course, may access the non-means tested
components of ABSTUDY for a course of study or an Australian
Apprenticeship. See ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance.

This does not impact customers who choose to cancel their income support
payment to claim ABSTUDY Living Allowance.

Students receiving a social security pension or a Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Service Pension or Veteran Payment are not
entitled to Living Allowance, but depending on their circumstances may
qualify for the ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement or Part-time
Award. However, a DVA Compensation Payment does not preclude Living
Allowance entitlement.

Training assistance

Generally, students receiving training assistance for formal study,
including assistance from an employer are not eligible for ABSTUDY.
Training assistance from an employer includes paid study leave or
payment of travel, meals and accommodation costs.

The exceptions are:

Australian Apprentices receiving training assistance for formal study if
they meet the criteria for Australian Apprentices under the Tertiary
Award

People doing a training program placement

People doing a school based traineeship or apprenticeship

For employees of organisations registered by the Australian Charities
and Not-for-profit Commission (ACNC) and/or the Office of the Registrar
of Indigenous Corporations (ORIC):

-   the value of fares, meals and accommodation is assessed on a dollar
    for dollar basis
-   employment income is assessed under the personal income test

Scholarships, cadetships or similar assistance from an employer are
assessed under the personal income test. Note: this does not include
government employees receiving scholarships from their agency to study

Indigenous Youth Mobility Pathways Project (IYMP) delivered by the
National Indigenous Australian Agency (NIAA) - No direct financial
support is provided, only supported accommodation. Note: the
accommodation support is assessed as duplicate assistance, therefore
will preclude eligibility to rent assistance

See the Resources page for links to the ACNC and ORIC websites and a
list of known cadetships and how they affect ABSTUDY eligibility.

Examples of training assistance include, but are not limited to:

Living Away From Home Allowance (LAFHA) for Australian Apprentices

Assistance from an employer for work or job-related training (through an
approved course) including:

-   paid study leave
-   payment of course fees/training costs, or
-   payment of travel, meals or accommodation costs associated with
    doing the course or training away from the home location

The following types of assistance do not preclude ABSTUDY eligibility,
but are assessed as income under the student income test:

-   School based traineeships or apprenticeships
-   Scholarships
-   Cadetships
-   Northern Territory Government Aboriginal Employment Program (AEP)
-   Part-time apprenticeship or traineeship
-   Full-time Australian Apprenticeship
-   Internships

Australian Apprentices receiving other assistance

Australian Apprentices receiving training assistance for formal study
may be eligible for ABSTUDY, if they meet the criteria under the
Tertiary Award for Australian Apprentices.

The following types of assistance available to Australian Apprentices
does not affect ABSTUDY eligibility:

-   Indigenous Australian Government Development Programme (IAGDP)
    jointly administered by the Department of Employment and Workplace
    Relations - participants are employed by Australian Government
    departments and agencies as Australian Apprentices. IAGDP
    participants can apply for the full range of ABSTUDY benefits
    available under the Tertiary Award. The Resources page contains a
    link to the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations website
    for more information about IAGDP
-   Indigenous Apprenticeships Programme (IAP) participants are employed
    by Services Australia and other Australian Government departments
    and agencies as Australian Apprentices. IAP participants can apply
    for the full range of ABSTUDY benefits available under the Tertiary
    Award

Cadetships

In general, students are eligible for ABSTUDY if they participate in a
scholarship, cadetship or internship program that includes a paid
placement with a government department that may also lead to paid
employment with a government department on completion.

Students are not eligible for ABSUTDY where a government department
offers a cadetship/scholarship to its employees which is not open to
people outside the organisation or public service. For example, the Sir
Roland Wilson or Pat Turner Scholarships for Australian Public Servants.

Scholarships

In general, receiving a scholarship does not preclude ABSTUDY
eligibility. Most scholarships are assessed as income under the personal
income test.

However, students who are employees of a government agency and are
awarded a scholarship by that agency to do secondary or tertiary level
studies are ineligible for ABSTUDY.

Note: a student is not considered an employee of a government agency if
they are an employee for work experience purposes.

State/Territory government assistance

Most state or territory governments provide assistance for school
students, for example school subsidy schemes. This can include
assistance for low income and isolated families with bursaries for
additional educational expenses like living away from home allowances.
This also includes payments made to the school or parent under the
Secondary Assistance Scheme. This assistance does not affect ABSTUDY
eligibility or entitlements.

The Resources page contains links to external websites and details of
known cadetships and how they affect ABSTUDY eligibility. It also
contains a link to the Services Australia website for information about
the Indigenous Apprenticeships Program (IAP) and contact details for
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC).

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Residence requirements for ABSTUDY

Aboriginality or Torres Strait Islander status for ABSTUDY purposes

Qualifying payments for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY
PES

Assessing scholarship income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
