
Eligibility for ABSTUDY 010-02030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the basic eligibility criteria to qualify for
ABSTUDY.

Overview

ABSTUDY is the Aboriginal Study Assistance Scheme for Australian
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders undertaking approved study. The
ABSTUDY scheme is administered and delivered by Services Australia and
is the responsibility of the Department of Social Services (DSS).

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria

To be eligible for any ABSTUDY assistance, a student or Australian
Apprentice must meet the primary eligibility criteria:

-   an Australian citizen, who normally lives in Australia, and
-   an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander, and
-   studying an approved course at an approved education institution, or
-   an Australian Apprentice, or
-   planning to study and undertaking an approved Testing and Assessment
    activity, and
-   not receiving or will not receive any other government assistance to
    study

If the applicant is aged 16-19 years, dependent, living at home and in
full-time secondary study, check if Family Tax Benefit (FTB) may be more
beneficial for the applicant's family.

From 1 January 2020, customers aged 16-19 years receiving a means tested
ABSTUDY payment (such as Living Allowance and/or School Fees Allowance
(Group 2)) can still be considered an FTB child if they are:

-   a full time secondary student
-   approved to live away from home to study, and
-   boarding to attend secondary school

Australian Apprentice

An Australian Apprentice will need a current Commonwealth Registration
number in relation to a full-time apprenticeship/traineeship or trainee
apprenticeship under the Australian Apprenticeships Scheme.

Note: the person does not need to provide proof of their status as an
Australian Apprentice. Services Australia will obtain the Australian
Apprenticeship details from the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations.

ABSTUDY allowances and benefits

There are seven Awards available under the ABSTUDY scheme. The
eligibility of a student or Australian Apprentice for a particular Award
will depend on their study, training and personal circumstances:

-   Schooling A Award (students only)
-   Schooling B Award (students only)
-   Tertiary Award (students and Australian Apprentices)
-   Part-time Award (students only)
-   Testing and Assessment Award (students only)
-   Masters and Doctorate Award (students only)
-   Student in Lawful Custody Award (students and Australian
    Apprentices)

Students and Australian Apprentices approved for an ABSTUDY award maybe
entitled to one or more of the ABSTUDY allowances. The Resources page
contains a table of allowance and benefits payable under specific
ABSTUDY awards.

Identifying the appropriate Award

A customer is not required to know which Award they may qualify for, but
they (or a person enquiring on their behalf) should be able to answer
basic eligibility questions such as their age and study details.

Service Officers should ask the applicant relevant eligibility questions
and work through the process to their answers.

Claiming ABSTUDY

For information relating to a student or Australian Apprentice claiming
ABSTUDY, see Claiming ABSTUDY.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
applicants wanting more information about ABSTUDY and a table of
allowance and benefits payable under specific ABSTUDY awards.

Contents

Age requirements for ABSTUDY

Residence requirements for ABSTUDY

Aboriginality or Torres Islander status for ABSTUDY purposes

Not qualified for ABSTUDY if receiving other assistance to study or as
an Australian Apprentice

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Tertiary Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Part-time Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Testing and Assessment Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Lawful Custody Award

Related links

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Claiming ABSTUDY

Determining who should be the ABSTUDY applicant

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
