
Travel at commencement and end of study period for ABSTUDY 010-02100110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances under which an ABSTUDY student
can be eligible for Fares Allowance (FAA) at the commencement and end of
their study period in a year.

Journey entitlement

An eligible full time or concessional study-load tertiary or secondary
student is entitled to 1 single journey between the permanent home and
the study location at the commencement of study in a year, and 1 single
journey at the end of study in a year. Students undertaking a course of
study of 1 year or longer in duration are entitled to assistance in each
year of the course.

Travel to a destination other than the permanent home or usual study
location may be available in certain circumstances.

Timeframe for journey to be undertaken

The journey undertaken to commence study is expected to take place
within a reasonable time prior to the course commencing. The journey
undertaken at the end of study is normally expected to be taken at the
time the student discontinues study in the course for the year, but no
later than 3 months after discontinuing study. Travel undertaken outside
of these periods may not attract FAA assistance.

Fares assistance for commencement and end of study is only available to
actually commence or cease participation in a course, and is not
available to be utilised for other travel purposes or at another time
during the period of study. Commencement travel cannot be taken after
commencement and end of study travel cannot be taken before ending.
Unused travel entitlements cannot be accumulated.

Note: some restrictions apply to eligibility for assistance to travel
interstate.

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to FAA for the Australian
Apprenticeship.

The Resources page contains examples related to determining eligibility
for commencement and end of study travel and a link to the ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance Claim (SY032).

Related links

Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
