
Change of circumstances for Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices 010-06100000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines changes of circumstances for Youth Allowance (YA)
students and Australian Apprentices.

On this Page:

Notifiable event

A change in the customer's circumstances which affects their
qualification or payability for payment is a notifiable event. In
addition to the common notifiable events, customers who are undertaking
study, training or an Australian Apprenticeship must notify Services
Australia within the 14 day notification period if any of the following
events occur, or are likely to occur:

-   starting or discontinuing a full-time course of study
-   not enrolling in a course as a continuing student by the end of the
    enrolment period
-   not beginning in the course on the first day it is offered
-   changing enrolment in the course
-   changing courses
-   commencing, suspending or ceasing an Australian Apprenticeship
-   going overseas for any purpose
-   returning to live in the parental home, or
-   commencing, varying or ceasing employment (regardless of the amount
    of Income Bank the customer has accumulated).

Notifying changes online

[] Customers may notify the change to their study details by updating
their details online if they are registered online and are
authenticated. If there is a change to the student's Participation
Status or Student End Date, the record will generate follow up action to
be undertaken by a Service Officer.

Customers registered online with a level 2 access or higher can view
their personal information including study details through the 'My
Profile' menu option in the Express Plus applications.

Customer going overseas

If a customer wishes to advise that they are going overseas, they should
contact Services Australia by phone or visit a service centre to provide
details of their overseas departure.

Change to Australian Apprenticeship

Customers who commence, suspend or cease their Australian Apprenticeship
should contact the agency using the appropriate Centrelink 13 number.
This phone number is located on the Phone us - Students & trainees,
Australian Apprenticeships on the Services Australia website.

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia website.

Contents

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Customer no longer an Australian Apprentice

Existing customer starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Youth Allowance (YA) Student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Youth Allowance (YA) customer leaving parental home

Returning to the parental home when independent or qualified for the
away from home rate of Youth Allowance (YA)

Parents moving in with ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance (YA) customer

Independent and dependent customers living together for ABSTUDY and
Youth Allowance

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer separates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
