
Assessing Form m (SY031) for ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim 010-02020090

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on processing the Additional
Incidentals Allowance Claim Form m (SY031).

Purpose of the Additional Incidentals Allowance

ABSTUDY students currently receiving Incidentals Allowance who require
financial assistance with additional essential costs for their course,
can apply for Additional Incidentals Allowance.

Financial assistance is for the costs involved with essential course
costs/items that all students in the course must incur. Costs/items in
excess of the Additional Incidentals prescribed amount (AIPA) may be
paid as Additional Incidentals Allowance. Course costs that are less
than this prescribed amount but in excess of the Incidentals Allowance
payable for the course are the responsibility of the student and are
called the student contribution.

Note: Additional Incidentals Allowance is only available to students who
are eligible under the ABSTUDY Tertiary Award and the ABSTUDY Masters
and Doctorate Award.

Payment threshold

When the claim is lodged, the cost of the essential course costs/items
listed will be totalled. If this amount is greater than the Additional
Incidentals prescribed amount,(AIPA) the excess over the prescribed
amount is the amount payable, to a maximum of $2,080.

Tuition or course fees charged by an education institution are not
included. This includes the flying time and associated fees charged by
institutions offering pilot (aviation) courses.

Lodgement

ABSTUDY claims and forms may be lodged in person at the nearest Service
Centre, or in remote areas, with a Centrelink field officer. Claims and
forms may also be posted using the appropriate reply paid envelope or to
the ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing team site. ABSTUDY processing has
been consolidated across sites nationally. Processing is now undertaken
in one of the ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing team sites.

The Resources page contains a link to the online version of the SY031.

Related links

ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance

Completing the ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim Form M
(SY031)

Rates and Thresholds

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
