-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in determining if a student
is eligible for independent status for ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance (YA)
based on being self-supporting through employment.

Self-supporting criteria

Customers, whose parental home is in a regional or remote area, are
considered independent if they meet either of the following
self-supporting criteria:

Since last leaving secondary school they have:

-   earned at least 75% of the National Training Wage schedule rate
    included in a modern award in any 14 month period, or
-   had part-time employment of at least 15 hours per week for at least
    2 years in a row at any time

As well as meeting one of the above criteria, the customer must meet all
of the following:

Be required to live away from home to study

They are undertaking a full-time or concessional study-load

The location of their family home (as determined by the Australian
Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS)), is in an area classified as:

-   Inner regional
-   Outer regional
-   Remote, or
-   Very Remote

Their combined parental income in the appropriate tax year is less than
$160,000, plus $10,000 for each additional child included in the Family
Unit Regional (FUR)

The FUR counts anyone aged under 22 who has a parent in common with the
YA or ABSTUDY customer. This is regardless of whether the child is
employed, unemployed, studying, or whether they live at home, away from
home or are overseas. This is for the purpose of calculating the
parental income threshold. However, the following exclusions apply if
they are:

-   in State care
-   receiving ABSTUDY, YA or Disability Support Pension (DSP) as
    independent because it is unreasonable for them to live at home
-   living away from the family home and is/was a member of a couple, or
-   living away from the family home and has/had a dependent child

Note: do not count the YA or ABSTUDY customer as an additional child.

If a student's family home is outside of Australia and not in one of the
qualifying areas, they do not qualify under this criterion.

There is also a safety net for disadvantaged customers. See Assessing
independence when a customer is self-supporting through full-time paid
employment.

COVID-19 concession period for YA and ABSTUDY customers

The COVID-19 concession period could apply between 25 March to 24
September 2020 (inclusive) to customers claiming independence under
workforce criteria between 1 January 2021 and 24 September 2022.

Students from regional and remote areas

Students from regional and remote areas claiming independence through
employment criterion have a parental income cut-off of $160,000 in the
appropriate tax year.

The threshold increases by $10,000 for each eligible additional child in
their family.

They can use parental income from 1 of 3 financial years where it is
more beneficial for them. This may be the financial year:

-   before they take a gap year (pre-gap tax year)
-   of their gap year (base tax year), or
-   following their gap year (post base year/current tax year)

Note: the 'pre-gap tax year' is the year before the qualifying 14-month
period began. If the student worked for more than 14-months, and has
multiple qualifying 14-month periods, there may be several 'pre-gap tax
years'. In these cases, use the most beneficial year.

Paid Employment

Paid employment includes periods:

-   of overseas employment
-   of paid leave
-   of unpaid leave due to employer shut down that are outside the
    control of the young person (for example, mandatory Christmas
    shutdown)
-   undertaking a full-time apprenticeship or traineeship
-   receiving workers compensation and the customer can demonstrate they
    are still connected to their employment
-   receiving Community Development Program (CDP) wages
-   receiving JobKeeper Payment (only to determine amount earnt not the
    number of hours worked)

Earned income

Includes income earned through self-employment, income earned while
overseas, fringe benefits, Defence Force Reserves, insurance payments
paid specifically to cover lost earnings, paid leave, scholarships, and
board and lodging paid in lieu of income from employment.

Income from Training Allowance such as the Skills for Education program
cannot be included as earned income.

Income or employment status must be verified through payslips, group
certificates or other employer statements unless the online claim has
automatically determined that verification is not required.

Income earned while overseas

Where the customer has received overseas income, the foreign income must
be converted to Australian Dollars (AUD). The exchange rate for each of
the months worked, must be applied when converting to AUD.

Permanent independence

Independence under this self-supporting criterion is mostly
non-reviewable, even if any of the following changes of circumstances
occurs after independence is granted:

-   the person returns to secondary school
-   the person ceases to be a full-time or concessional study-load
    student or Australian Apprentice
-   the person's family home moves from an area considered to be Inner
    regional, Outer regional, Remote or Very Remote to an area that does
    not meet this requirement
-   an update to the Remoteness Structure results in their family home
    being in an area no longer considered to be Inner regional, Outer
    regional, Remote or Very Remote
-   the person's combined taxable parental income increases above the
    threshold in a subsequent tax year
-   the person returns to the family home

However, if a customer is granted self-supporting independent status
based on an estimate of combined parental income below the threshold and
verification shows that the actual combined parental income was above
the threshold, revoke the independent status from the date of the Tax
Notice of Assessment (plus 14 days for notification).

Collection of independence information in the YA or ABSTUDY online claim

Customers who complete a YA (student) or ABSTUDY claim indicating they
are independent under the self-supporting criteria, will be asked to
provide past employment information (including employer's name, hours
worked and income earned). Where the system determines the
self-supporting eligibility requirements:

have been met:

-   The Next Steps page of their online claim will request the parent(s)
    to lodge a completed Parent(s)/Guardian(s) additional details for
    Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY customers (A2115) form via the Advise
    Parental Income online service. See Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s)
    details for the Base Tax Year and Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

have not been met:

-   The Next Steps page of their online claim will request the parent(s)
    to lodge a completed Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details - for the BASE
    Tax Year and CURRENT Tax Year for dependent Youth Allowance or
    ABSTUDY Customers (MOD JY) form via the Advise Parental Income
    online service. See Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the
    Base Tax Year and Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Evidence requirements

Customers currently receiving a student payment, must provide evidence
such as payslips or payroll reports to complete an independence
assessment under this criterion.

Customers completing a YA or ABSTUDY online claim may not need to
provide evidence.

The customer's online claim responses will determine whether evidence
needs to be provided. If evidence:

is requested, Service Officers must review the evidence provided and
determine if the customer is independent

is not required:

-   the student will be advised to retain evidence of their employment
    history for 2 years. Services Australia may request this information
    if conducting a self-supporting independence review after the claim
    is processed
-   Service Officers can use the information collected in the claim to
    assess independence

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website for
the Student Regional Area Search tool, and an attachment to determine
the longitude and latitude of a customer's address. It also contains
examples of self-supporting though employment, the Claim for Youth
Allowance form (SY001) and the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019).

Related links

The Parental Means Test

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

ABSTUDY customer is independent through workforce participation

Assessing independence when a customer is self-supporting through
full-time paid employment

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Assessing independence when a customer has, or has had, a dependent
child

Assessing independence when a customer is an orphan

Assessing independence when a customer is a refugee

Assessing independence when a customer is in State care

Assessing independence when a customer's parents cannot exercise
responsibilities

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Reviews of independence for Youth Allowance

Foreign income and assets (dept local)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
