-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains ABSTUDY Living Allowance. It is available for
students and Australian Apprentices to help in meeting day-to-day living
costs.

Eligibility

The customer must meet the eligibility criteria for one of the following
Awards:

-   Schooling B Award
-   Tertiary Award
-   Masters and Doctorate Award

Australian Apprentices can only qualify under the Tertiary Award.

A customer cannot receive Living Allowance and other Australian
Government income support payments at the same time.

Claiming

ABSTUDY Living Allowance entitlement is automatically calculated and
paid as part of a customer's new claim for ABSTUDY.

Students or Australian Apprentices can submit:

an online claim (tertiary students and Australian Apprentices only)

an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) (tertiary students and Australian
Apprentices only)

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool (secondary students only), or

a paper form:

-   Claim for ABSTUDY form (SY019)
-   ABSTUDY - Additional information form (SY023)
-   Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas form (SY092)

Customers who lodge any claim for ABSTUDY by the relevant closing date,
do not need to lodge a separate claim to be assessed for Living
Allowance. See Claiming ABSTUDY for examples of when an ABSTUDY claim is
or is not required.

Rate

ABSTUDY payment rates depend on factors including whether a student or
Australian Apprentice is:

-   dependent or independent
-   living at or away from home
-   in state care
-   subject to the personal, partner or parental income and assets tests
-   taking up the Residential Costs Option

See ABSTUDY - Living Allowance Rate and thresholds.

Payment

The payment is calculated on a daily rate and made fortnightly in
arrears.

This payment method may change, depending on whether the customer is:

boarding at a boarding school including an approved ABSTUDY homestay
arrangement or at a hostel that is a signatory to the Standard Hostels
Agreement

-   Living Allowance is calculated on a daily rate. Payments are made in
    a combination of ABSTUDY boarding instalments and fortnightly in
    arrears, depending on the student's entitlement and the board amount
    charged by the school/hostel

boarding at a hostel that is not signatory to the Standard Hostels
Agreement

-   Living Allowance is calculated on a daily rate. Payments are made
    fortnightly in arrears to the hostel, and in some circumstances also
    to the payee depending on the student's entitlement and the board
    amount charged by the hostel

boarding in a private boarding arrangement

-   A student is considered to board in a private board arrangement if a
    provider other than a boarding school or hostel, provides the
    student with board and lodgings during the school term. Payments are
    made fortnightly in arrears and can be directed to the private board
    provider where requested by the parent/guardian, and in some
    circumstances the payee. This will also depend on the student's
    entitlement and the board amount charged.

payee for Living Allowance

-   See the Resources page which outlines correct entitlements for the
    payee of Living Allowance

eligible for Living Allowance but chooses not to receive it

-   They will remain eligible for ABSTUDY, and other allowances or
    benefits under the ABSTUDY Award they have been granted

The Resources page outlines correct entitlements for the payee of Living
Allowance.

Related links

Claiming ABSTUDY

Processing an ABSTUDY claim

Payment of Away from Home rate for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

ABSTUDY payments and rates

Payments for students under 18 years paid to student, parent or a third
party

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
