
Assessing study load requirements 010-07010060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how study load requirements are assessed for
student payments administered by the Services Australia.

Study load detail

A student's study load determines whether they can qualify for a student
payment. If they do not meet the study load requirements as outlined in
the relevant activity test for each student payment, they cannot be paid
as a student.

Requirements

Generally, with some exceptions, students must be studying full time and
must maintain 75% of a full time study load to receive Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy, ABSTUDY or Pensioner Education Supplement (PES). For
students receiving 1 of these payments and undertaking tertiary and
secondary non-school courses, a decrease in study load may mean they are
no longer eligible for a student payment. It is therefore very important
for staff to know how to assess these requirements and how to determine
the study load that is being undertaken.

Enrolled and undertaking study

Students must be undertaking the study they are enrolled in, for it to
contribute towards the study load for their current course. This means
that subjects or units students do not undertake because they have
received recognition of prior learning for previous similar subjects or
units, will not be included in the assessment of their current study
load.

Cross-institutional study

Generally, a student must be enrolled full time in a single course at 1
education institution to be eligible for a student payment. There are
however limited circumstances where a student may be enrolled in 2
separate courses (and at 2 different education institutions) and still
be eligible for a student payment. See Effect on student payments of
enrolment in more than one course or at more than one educational
institution.

Distance education

If a student is enrolled in distance education (such as external or
online studies) the assessment of study load is conducted the same as
students who attend their education institute. The eligibility
requirements for student payments are the same irrespective of whether a
student is studying through distance education or on campus.

Distance education is very flexible and students are able to arrange
their study patterns to suit their personal needs, with no academic
penalty for not completing work. However, students receiving YA,
Austudy, ABSTUDY or Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) need to comply
with the study requirements relevant to their payment.

Compulsory practical placement

Where a student is required to undertake a compulsory practical
placement as part of their course, Youth Allowance, Austudy, ABSTUDY or
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) may continue to be paid in some
circumstances.

If the placement is being completed within Australia, the student must
maintain a 75% of a full-time study load to continue to receive Youth
Allowance, Austudy or ABSTUDY. Advise the student to check with their
education institution whether their placement attracts a credit
weighting, and whether they are still enrolled full-time during the
placement period.

A student who travels overseas to undertake a work placement will remain
eligible for payment providing:

-   they are a continuing student immediately prior to departing
    Australia, and
-   their placement forms part of their full-time Australian course

Students impacted by Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the 2020/2021 academic year

Due to COVID-19, some students were temporarily unable to study or
reduced their study load below full-time. Impacts for students include:

-   a sudden transition away from face-to-face learning to online
    learning
-   closure of student accommodation
-   cancellation of some units of study
-   delays in commencing practical placements

Some students will contact to advise a delay in their practical
placement. These students may not know when their placement will begin
or end. Service Officers:

-   can use estimated dates provided by the customer in these
    circumstances
-   do not have to request documentation from an education provider to
    confirm placement dates. See below for other evidence requirements
-   should tell customers to update their course details when they know
    more specific details
-   are to escalate to level 2 if practical placement will be completed
    after the course has ceased

Activity Test and Study Requirements

Students unable to study, or with a reduced study load, meet their study
requirements or activity test if they:

had an approved reason, and

remained enrolled in their course (this includes taking an approved
leave of absence), and

returned, or intended to return to full-time studies or an approved
concessional study load in the:

-   next available study period, or
-   earliest possibility of full-time study

cannot return to full time study as they are in the final study period
of their course

Approved reasons for reduction in study load

Approved reasons include:

-   the student moved from face-to-face to online study, and had a lack
    of available resources. For example internet access, PC/laptop or
    specialist equipment
-   the student dropped units of study because they failed or would have
    failed because of transitioning away from face-to-face learning
-   education provider cancelled subjects or units, or
-   rescheduling of compulsory practical placement

Do not update the Education Course Details (EDC) screen unless the
student needs to extend their course and study end dates.

For a student with study circumstances impacted by COVID-19, record
details in a DOC. Include:

why the customer is temporarily unable to study or reduced their study
load

if the student has the intention to return to full time study or
approved concessional study load:

-   in the next available study period, or
-   the earliest possible instance full time study becomes available to
    them again

if the student cannot return to full time study, as they are in the
final study period of their course

A student does not have an approved reason if they decided to:

-   end their study, or
-   reduce their study load because their education provider waived a
    financial or academic penalty

Evidence requirements

Student's with a reduced study load due to COVID-19, need to provide
evidence from their education provider. This evidence must state they
have a reduced study load as a direct result of COVID-19.

Do not request evidence from an education provider if practical
placement is delayed due to COVID-19 and the start or end date for
placement is unknown.

Update the EDC screen with estimated dates provided by the student.

Students who are not enrolled full-time

A student who does not meet the full-time study load requirements may
still be eligible for assistance if they qualify for a study load
concession, see Step 4 in the Full time study load table. ABSTUDY
students who do not meet the study load requirements for a full-time
student or concessional study load may qualify for assistance under the
ABSTUDY Part Time Award. The study load requirements for a full-time
student or concessional study load also do not apply to assistance under
the ABSTUDY Lawful Custody Award.

YA students who are unable to study full-time due to:

-   a temporary incapacity may be able to have their study load and
    satisfactory progress assessed on a pro-rata basis, see Youth
    Allowance (student) or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated
-   the death of their partner may have their allowable time extended,
    see Activity test exemptions for Youth Allowance (student) customers
    when their partner dies

For ABSTUDY students who have a temporary incapacity, see Payment of
ABSTUDY when a student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated.

Commonwealth Supported Place (CSP) courses

A CSP means that the enrolment in that course is subsidised by the
Australian Government. CSPs are available at all public universities and
some private higher education providers. See the Study Assist website
for more information.

Aggregation of study load

See Aggregation of study load for rules.

Factors that may affect the assessment of study load

The following factors may influence how the agency assesses a student's
study load:

-   Vocational education and training courses at TAFE
-   Whether a course is a Commonwealth supported place course and
    determining the Equivalent Full Time Study load (EFTSL) from the
    amount of Student Contribution the study attracts
-   The aggregation of study load rules
-   Incorrect Equivalent Full Time Study Load (EFTSL) weightings
-   Practical training blocks
-   Non-Commonwealth Supported courses where the institution specifies a
    normal study load
-   Non-Commonwealth Supported courses where the institution does NOT
    specify a normal study load
-   Self-paced courses
-   Competency Based Training (CBT)/open learning
-   Open Training and Education Network (OTEN) modules
-   Open Training Institute TAFE modules
-   Concurrent open learning and conventional study
-   Course not usually classified as full-time
-   Secondary and primary schools study load
-   Special schools
-   Study load for school students with disabilities or other health
    conditions
-   Secondary students attending non-school institutions or studying by
    distance education (formerly known as correspondence) at an
    institution other than a secondary school
-   Differing definitions of full-time/part-time

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains examples of student Contribution
minimisation, differing definitions of full-time/part-time and a table
with the list of TAFE full-time hours by State.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Satisfying the activity test for Austudy

Aggregation of study load

Assessing qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Satisfying the activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) by undertaking
full-time study

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Assessing the disability study load concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing the pensioner study load concession for ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Part-time Award

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for 66% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Activity test exemptions for Youth Allowance (student) customers when
their partner dies

Review of decision

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Using Centrelink self service

Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities
Australia

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
