[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines the Student Financial Supplement Scheme and all
outstanding Financial Supplement Loans.

Government intent

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) was a voluntary loan
scheme which gave eligible tertiary students the option of borrowing
money to help cover their expenses while they studied. The voluntary
loan was known as a 'Financial Supplement loan (FSL)'.

Students may have been eligible for FSL as a Category 1 student or as a
Category 2 student.

Category 1 student

To be eligible for FSL as a Category 1 student, the student needed to be
a tertiary student who qualified and was payable for one of the
following primary benefit payments:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Austudy
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) PES
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (students)

Note: PES has formally been known as Family and Community Services
(FaHCSIA) PES and Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
Relations (DEEWR) PES.

A Category 1 student traded in $1 of their primary benefit for every $2
of FSL received. For example, if a student traded in $2000 of their
primary benefit, they would have received $4000 of FSL for the year.

The student could have elected to trade in all or part of their basic
benefit. However the minimum FSL available was $500 (requiring a trade
in of $250) and the maximum FSL available was $7000 (requiring a trade
in of $3500). Only the student’s basic benefit could be traded in.
Add-on payments such as Rent Assistance (RA) could not be traded in.

Note: the amount the student could trade in was based on the amount of
payment they would receive under the qualifying payment for the period
that they were eligible in the calendar year. If the student would
receive less than $250 for this period, then they would not have enough
to trade in for the minimum loan of $500 and would not receive an offer.

Category 2 student

A Category 2 Financial Supplement loan (FSL) was available to dependent
tertiary students who were not eligible for ABSTUDY Living Allowance
(Basic Payment) or Youth Allowance (YA), but would have been eligible if
not for the Parental Means Test. To be eligible for the loan, the
adjusted family income had to be below the Category 2 threshold. The
trade in rules do not apply to Category 2 students as there was no basic
benefit/living allowance payment to trade in. The minimum loan amount
was $500 and the maximum loan amount was $2000. If a student was
receiving a Category 2 loan, their parents could not claim Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) for them.

Note: secondary level students could not receive FSL. This was
irrespective of their age or whether they were undertaking their study
at a Technical and Further Education (TAFE) college.

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by Centrelink (now Services Australia) until the end of the
contract period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan
was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system.

Note: the final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
the Centrelink system. This does not mean that the loan has been zeroed
off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO for
recovery through the taxation system.

Contents

Rates of Financial Supplement loan (FSL)

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) roles and responsibilities

Repayment of Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) loans

Review of decisions for Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) payments made
under the Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

Related links

Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) prior to transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) prior to
transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer
to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Reissuing annual Financial Supplement loan (FSL) statements

Accessing details of Financial Supplement loans (FSLs)

Effect of death of customer on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after
transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Dealing with disputed Financial Supplement loan (FSL) repayments

Excess repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
