
Assessing the pensioner study load concession for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-05090010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess the pensioner study load concession
for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

On this Page:

Eligible payments for students and study load requirements

A student will normally only be eligible for one of the Services
Australia administered payments for students if they are studying at
least 75% of the accredited full-time study load. However, in certain
circumstances they may be paid as a full-time student even though they
are studying less than the required minimum 75%. These students are said
to be subject to a study load concession. The pensioner study load
concession is one such concession.

Not all ABSTUDY PES customers will be entitled to the Pensioner study
load concession. Some customers are required to be full-time students in
order to qualify for ABSTUDY PES. The following procedure outlines the
circumstances in which a customer can qualify for the ABSTUDY PES.

Eligibility requirements for the Pensioner study load concession

To be eligible for the pensioner study load concession the student needs
to be studying more than 25% of the accredited full-time study load and
be receiving one of the following payments:

-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) with a Partial
    Capacity to work
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   JSP or YA Principal carer (single)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Invalidity Service Pension
-   DVA Carer Service Pension
-   Special Benefit (SpB) - and is a sole parent
-   Widow Allowance (WA), where the customer has a dependent child under
    16 years old
-   Defence Widow Pension, where the customer has a dependent child
    under 16 years old
-   War Widow Pension, where the customer has a dependent child under 16
    years old

Note: customers receiving Partner Service Pension where the partner is
in receipt of a DVA Invalidity Service Pension are required to be
studying at least 75% of a full-time study load in order to qualify for
ABSTUDY PES.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Related links

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and ABSTUDY PES

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Cancellation of, or changes to, qualifying payment for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or Assistance for Isolated
Children PES

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Tertiary Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

Claiming ABSTUDY

Assessing ABSTUDY claims

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Assessing the disability study load concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
