
Initial contact with customers claiming under the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 010-03010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the initial steps to take when a customer makes
contact regarding the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Availability and purpose of AIC

AIC is available for primary, secondary and certain tertiary students
who are unable to attend an appropriate state school because of
geographic isolation or special health-related or educational needs.

The purpose of AIC is to provide assistance to geographically isolated
families in recognition that families living in areas without access to
appropriate schools incur extra education costs.

The applicable allowance for a student will normally reflect the
student's living arrangements while they are studying. If the student:

-   boards away from home - Boarding Allowance (BA)
-   lives in a second home - Second Home Allowance (SHA)
-   lives at home while studying by distance education - Distance
    Education Allowance (DED)
-   needs to board for short periods during the year - short-term
    Boarding Allowance
-   is undertaking primary level study and boards away from home, lives
    in a second home or lives at home while studying by distance
    education but receives Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting
    Payment (PP) (single) - Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Lodging claim forms

Customers (usually the parent or guardian of the student) can [] submit
their documents online, send the forms directly to Services Australia
postal (reply paid) address, by fax or lodge them at any service centre.

Claims should be lodged with the required supporting documentation as
listed in the Notes of the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children
(SY040) form as soon as possible before the closing date. The Resources
page contains a link to the form.

Claim closing date

Prior to 14 October 2021, to qualify for payment for the year of study,
a claim must be lodged by 31 December of that year. Claims received
after 31 December will not be approved for payment of AIC.

From 14 October 2021, to qualify for payment for the year of study, a
claim must be lodged by 1 March in the year following that for which
assistance is sought. Claims received after 1 March in the year
following that for which assistance is sought, will not be approved for
payment of AIC, unless claimants meet the Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers provisions.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website,
links to relevant AIC forms and contact details for ABSTUDY/Austudy.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Claiming Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Assessing and coding claims for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
