
Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base activities 010-02070010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if an activity can be approved
for ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance.

On this Page:

Purpose of Away from Base assistance

Away from Base assistance is intended to cover the:

-   student's travel costs to attend the activity, and
-   reasonable costs of accommodation and meals while away from the
    normal place of residence

An activity is normally only approved if an education institution
organised a residential expenses package to provide food and
accommodation. However, where it is unreasonable, impractical or not
cost-effective for a residential expenses package to be arranged, Travel
Allowance can be approved.

Assistance can be approved for education institution representatives to
deliver an activity at the student's home location. This must be more
cost effective than students travelling to the institution. Situations
may exist where an education institution representative and students may
be approved for the same activity.

Away from Base assistance is not available for activities that are part
of an Australian Apprenticeship. However, where an Australian Apprentice
is required to live away from their permanent home in order to attend a
study component of the Australian Apprenticeship, they may be entitled
to the away from home rate of Living Allowance for that period.

Testing and assessment activity

A testing and assessment activity is conducted by a tertiary education
institution. It interviews, tests, assesses or otherwise determines
suitability of an applicant for entry into a course of study. It can
also be held to determine the suitability of a participant to access the
Indigenous Youth Mobility Programme (IYMP).

Testing and assessment activities for entry into secondary level courses
cannot be approved for Away from Base assistance.

An enabling course at a university can be approved where it is an
alternative entry to a mainstream higher education course. It must also
be essential a student does a preliminary assessment before admission
into the enabling course.

Assistance for entry into an Australian Apprenticeship cannot be
approved. However, a current Australian Apprentice may be approved for
assistance for a testing/assessment activity for a course of study that
is not part of the Australian Apprenticeship.

Placement

A placement is a tertiary course activity involving a student completing
practical training in a work environment as part of their course. This
includes activities such as a Diploma of Education student undertaking
the mandatory teaching practicum in a school.

It is expected placements would be obtained within the local community
where the student is studying. ABSTUDY assistance to undertake the
activity is therefore not required. Only in exceptional circumstances
would an activity be approved for a placement at a location other than
the study location.

Field trip

A field trip is a tertiary course activity involving a group of, or a
single student/s travelling from their normal place of study to one or
more locations. It provides practical experiences or activities
necessary to successfully complete the minimum requirements of the
course.

Secondary non-schooling courses do not qualify for Away from Base
assistance for field trips.

Residential schools activity

Residential schools are secondary and tertiary course activities. They
provide a group of external students studying through distance education
the opportunity to:

-   attend face-to-face lectures
-   attend tutorials on campus, and
-   access all campus facilities

Away from Base assistance is only approved where the residential school
is a compulsory and assessable component of the course.

Approval requirements

Approval of an activity does not automatically approve a student to
attend the activity. A student must establish their eligibility to
attend an ABSTUDY Away from Base activity.

Generally, students receiving training assistance from an employer are
not eligible for ABSTUDY. This includes payment of travel, meals and
accommodation costs. See Not qualified for ABSTUDY if receiving other
assistance to study or as an Australian Apprentice.

Away from Base assistance is only available for activities conducted
within Australia.

Besides a testing and assessment activity, an Away from Base activity
will only be approved if:

-   it is an integral academic component of a course
-   it is necessary for a student to undertake and complete this
    component in order to meet the minimum requirements for successful
    completion of the course
-   the costs of student participation in the placement are not approved
    for assistance under the Indigenous Advancement Strategy (IAS)
-   where there are non-Indigenous students undertaking the course, they
    are expected to cover their own costs for the same placement
    activity
-   it meets reasonable costs, and
-   any previous advances for Away from Base activities have been
    acquitted

Assistance from the Indigenous Advancement Strategy (IAS)

Not approved for ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance:

-   courses receiving assistance from the National Indigenous
    Australians Agency (NIAA) under the IAS Away from Base element to
    fund costs of student participation
-   students enrolled in these courses must apply to the education
    provider for this assistance

Note: the IAS Away from Base element does not fund the cost of student
participation in testing and assessment activities. Therefore, if IAS
funding applies to participation in the actual course, assistance is
available to attend a testing and assessment activity. See Away from
Base assistance for ABSTUDY for the current list of IAS funded
mixed-mode courses.

Limits apply

Some limits on Away from Base activities apply.

Limits apply to interstate travel for Away from Base activities. For
example, students studying a secondary school certificate or enabling
level course, may only travel interstate in certain circumstances. See
Interstate travel for ABSTUDY for more information.

Applying for Away from Base assistance

An education institution conducting an activity is required to lodge an
ABSTUDY Submission for away from base activity funding form (SY034). The
submission must provide all the details of the activity in order for an
approval to occur.

A student arranging their own activity is not required to lodge an
SY034. However, they must provide a letter from the institution
confirming:

-   the date and period of the activity
-   that the activity is a necessary component of the course
-   that the student’s attendance is compulsory
-   the details of any assistance provided by any third party for the
    student to attend the activity

Note: students claiming Away from Base assistance under the Lawful
Custody Award must also have permission from the correctional provider
to attend the activity.

Away from Base claims must be lodged by the ABSTUDY closing date. See
Closing date for ABSTUDY claims.

Variations to submissions after approval

Following submission approval, requests from education institutions to
vary any aspect of the original submission, for example changes to
activity dates or change of accommodation provider, must be made in
writing.

Students who request to vary an approved activity, for example changes
to activity dates, must provide a statement from the education
institution confirming the changes requested.

Variations can only be approved if the changes meet the conditions for
approval of the Away from Base activity.

The Resources page contains examples about approval of Away from Base
activities for ABSTUDY, links to the ABSTUDY Submission for away from
base activity funding form (SY034) and to the National Course Approvals
sub-site.

Related links

Away from Base assistance for ABSTUDY

Assessing student eligibility to attend an approved ABSTUDY Away from
Base activity

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Testing and Assessment Award

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
