-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing a claim for ABSTUDY
Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award and Masters and Doctorate Award.

Claim processing

ABSTUDY processing is undertaken in ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing
Teams. See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries for
more information.

Requirement to lodge a claim

Customers' meeting the ABSTUDY eligibility criteria and one of the
following, should lodge a claim for ABSTUDY:

-   An applicant wishing to claim ABSTUDY Schooling B Award on behalf of
    a secondary student who is under 16 and living away from home
-   A secondary or tertiary student who is 16 years or over or claiming
    independence and wants to claim the means tested components of
    ABSTUDY Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award or Masters and Doctorate
    Award
-   An Australian Apprentice claiming the means tested components of
    ABSTUDY Tertiary Award. See Claiming ABSTUDY

Claims for ABSTUDY lodged by the relevant closing date, do not require
lodgement of another claim:

-   if the wrong ABSTUDY claim was completed, or
-   circumstances have changed

Customers' may need to supply additional information relevant to the
ABSTUDY Award or allowance to be assessed.

See the Resources page of Claiming ABSTUDY for examples and a table
listing scenarios for whether a customer needs to lodge a new ABSTUDY
claim.

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool

ABSTUDY applicants can provide details verbally to a Services Australia
Service Officer, in an assisted claiming process, instead of completing
a paper claim form. A verbal declaration from the customer that the
information is true and correct replaces the requirement to return a
signed Customer Declaration Form (CDF). Applicants who do not accept or
have not been offered a verbal declaration will be required to return a
signed CDF.

Parents do not need to provide their signatures nor their details on the
Parent or Guardian details - for the BASE tax year and CURRENT tax year
for dependent Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY customers form (MOD JY) or CDF
(where a CDF is required) if:

-   a dependent ABSTUDY customer received Youth Allowance (YA) in the
    same year, and
-   the parental means details were provided for their YA claim

Claim lodgement

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any of
the following options:

Phone - claims can be lodged by phone using Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) or the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool (except claims for Lawful Custody
Award and Testing and Assessment Award)

[] Online

-   Australian Apprentice and Tertiary student claims can be lodged
    online. See Claiming ABSTUDY
-   Customers can upload paper claims (where an online claim option is
    not yet available) and supporting documents online. The Resources
    page contains information about how to lodge documents online
-   Registered customers can upload their claim form and/or supporting
    documents online. The Resources page contains information about how
    to lodge documents online

Fax - the date the fax is received is considered the date of receipt for
processing purposes

Post - using the appropriate reply paid envelope to the ABSTUDY Smart
Centre Processing Team

In person - at the nearest service centre, or in remote areas, with a
Centrelink Field Officer

Australian Apprentices

[] Customers who wish to apply for ABSTUDY as a full time Australian
Apprentice can claim online via their online account or via the Assisted
Customer Claim.

Where an Australian Apprentice indicates that they will be undertaking a
full-time Australian Apprenticeship, Services Australia will obtain the
Australian Apprenticeship details from the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations.

If there is a gap between ceasing study and commencing the Australian
Apprenticeship, and the customer wishes to access income support for
this gap, they may need to claim Youth Allowance (YA) or JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) as a job seeker.

Secondary students

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is the primary payment option for students aged
16-19 years in full-time secondary study. However in some circumstances
it may be more beneficial for the student to claim ABSTUDY.

Where applicable, discuss the option of claiming or remaining on FTB
with the applicant and parent(s)/guardian(s). Parent(s)/guardian(s) can
compare payment options via the Payment and Services Finder. See []
Online estimator options.

Job seeker transferring to ABSTUDY

When a customer is transferring from a current job seeker payment to
ABSTUDY, additional procedures may need to be followed before assessing
ABSTUDY, see:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to full-time study, or
-   Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning
    to full-time study

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Eligibility for EdEP must be checked as part of the ABSTUDY new claim
process.

The Resources page contains links to the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019), the
Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092) and a link to the Submitting your
Centrelink documents online website page.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Claiming ABSTUDY

Issuing appropriate modules and additional forms for students and
Australian Apprentices

Accepting and checking ABSTUDY claims and forms

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092)

Assessing a claim for an ABSTUDY secondary boarder

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Tertiary Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Using the Desktop Fax workflow to fax forms and modules

Coding ABSTUDY education details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
