
ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) at home rate (Group 1) 010-02050100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when School Fees allowance (SFA) at home rate
(also known as Group 1) is available for students and how the payment is
processed.

Intent of SFA

SFA assists students and their parent(s)/guardian(s) to meet the costs
of school fees levied by the approved education provider. Home schooled
and distance education students also qualify for SFA (Group 1). Even
though they do not physically attend a school, education providers may
levy fees. This meets SFA (Group 1) requirements.

Eligibility requirements for SFA (Group 1)

SFA (Group 1) is paid as part of the Schooling A Award. Schooling A
Award customers who are eligible for SFA (Group 1) are also eligible for
School Term Allowance.

SFA (Group 1) is not payable for secondary studies through a tertiary
institution. The student must be enrolled in and attending studies at a
secondary school (or primary school where eligible under the Schooling A
Award).

For students aged16 or over and living at home, school fees are met from
their ABSTUDY Living Allowance entitlement.

The applicant for Schooling A Award is the student's:

-   parent/guardian, or
-   foster carer, where the student is in State Care

A Schooling A Award student turning 16 during the year can still access
SFA (Group 1), including those students turning 16 before school starts.
The rate is affected by the date of their birthday. If their birthday
is:

-   before 1July in the year of study, the rate is 50% of entitlement
-   after 1 July in the year of study, the rate is 100% of entitlement

The system automatically calculates the rate.

Income support payments ceasing

SFA (Group 1) remains payable when:

-   the applicant was qualified for Schooling A allowances, and
-   loses eligibility because the income support payments stop, (or
    their Health Care Card expires) before the student starts secondary
    studies

SFA (Group 1) is not payable when the applicant does not have care of
the student when they start their studies.

School fee inclusions

For the purposes of SFA (Group 1), school fees include:

fees associated with school subjects, including:

-   charges for consumable materials
-   charges for sporting activities where sport is taken as a school
    subject and a subject fee is levied

general purpose fees for services and amenities

tuition fees

items such as school magazines, locker hire, book hire, laptop hire,
tablet and examinations

School fee exclusions

School fees do not include:

-   charges for the issue of stationery, or the use or purchase of
    school clothing, including sports clothing or special clothing. For
    example, aprons for Home Economics or Manual Arts
-   charges to cover incidental expenses incurred by a student during
    term. For example, purchases from a school shop
-   charges for laundry/purchase of linen
-   levies on behalf of a Parents' and Citizens' Association or similar
    organisation
-   contributions (whether or not compulsory and/or refundable) to
    school building funds
-   charges for insurance cover for school-related activities
-   non-compulsory fees, for example, a voluntary contribution
-   costs associated with purchasing equipment such as computers or
    musical instruments

How SFA (Group 1) is paid

SFA (Group 1) is usually paid direct to the school, or to the applicant
if requested.

If the SFA (Group 1) is paid to a school, no debt is raised on the
school if it:

-   does not charge a compulsory fee to all students, or
-   charges no fee

The school will have costs associated with each student, even if they do
not charge parents an amount for school fees.

Services Australia pays the full amount to a school. The school is
expected to spend any excess school fees paid by ABSTUDY on Indigenous
education.

SFA (Group 1) paid to the school on behalf of a student

If the SFA (Group 1) is paid to a school for a student who:

did not start their study, the school will be refund the payment to
Services Australia

started study, but later attends another school, no further SFA
(Group 1) can be paid for the period for which payment has already been
made:

-   Some states or territories allow individual schools to negotiate a
    transfer of a pro-rata SFA (Group 1) between the schools. This is a
    voluntary arrangement between the schools involved
-   Services Australia has no authority over schools to pass on SFA
    (Group 1) and should not offer any advice

Where the SFA (Group 1) has not yet been paid, the applicant can request
the SFA (Group 1) be forwarded to either the previous or current school.

SFA (Group 1) paid to the applicant

SFA (Group 1) can be paid to the applicant. Evidence of payment of
school fees must be provided. The payment cannot be made to a third
party who paid the fees. Receipts, for example, need to be in the
applicant's name.

If SFA (Group 1) has been paid to the applicant, and the student does
not start study for the year, the applicant must refund the full amount
to Services Australia.

Coding issue

A problem exists for customers who are turning 16 between 1 January and
the first SFA (Group 1) payment date in late January.

The SFA (Group 1) payment is not released for new ABSTUDY Schooling A
customers or continuing students. See the Process page for further
information about a workaround.

The Resources page contains a scenario where a student turns 16 before
school commences in Term 1 and a link to mySupport.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A Award

ABSTUDY School Term Allowance

Rates and thresholds

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

How to code and action a manual review

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
