
Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-04060020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess FAA for students receiving YA,
Austudy or PES.

Eligibility for FAA

FAA is payable to eligible tertiary students who have to live away from
their permanent home to study (including external students undertaking a
compulsory on site component of their course), and their permanent home
is in Australia.

FAA is payable to tertiary students eligible for YA, Austudy or PES as a
tertiary student who are:

dependent and receiving the Away from Home rate of YA

independent, and required to live away from their partner because they
are studying

required to live away from their dependent children because they are
studying

required to live away from home, and

-   have become independent through work or age, and
-   were dependent and living away from home in the study year before
    becoming independent

studying an approved distance or online course at an Australian
institution in Australia and have to travel to the institution for a
compulsory residential component of the course

Single independent students without dependent children are generally not
eligible for FAA (except for the compulsory on site component of an
external course). This is because their permanent home is wherever they
are living at the time. Other than for short periods, they cannot be
considered to be living away from the permanent home.

FAA is not payable:

-   if the customer is away from their institution for a practical part
    of the course, for example, field excursions, practical teaching
    sessions or hospital residency
-   to an Australian Apprentice
-   to students who travel overseas to undertake approved study
-   to students for daily travel to and from their institution
-   for travel for a reunion with family if this occurs at a place other
    than the student's permanent home
-   to students on a medical exemption when the trip is made (even if
    they remain enrolled, they are not undertaking full-time study), or
-   to students serving a waiting period or non-payment period at the
    time of the journey

YA students who become independent during study year

There are special provisions for a YA student who has become independent
during the current year of study, either through:

-   turning 22 years of age, or
-   being self-supporting through paid employment

These students remain eligible for FAA for that study as long as they
were eligible for FAA prior to achieving independence.

Number of trips payable under FAA

If the student is living away from home to study, before making a trip
to their permanent home they must be receiving a qualifying payment for
a period of:

-   Less than 3 months (or less than 6 months if before 1 January 2021),
    to be entitled to a return trip from their permanent home to the
    institution at the start and finish of the course of study
-   3 months or more in a study year (or 6 months or more if before 1
    January 2021), to be entitled to a return trip from their permanent
    home to the institution to cover the start and end of studies for
    the academic year. They are also entitled to one additional return
    trip during the year if, prior to undertaking the return journey,
    they have been receiving a qualifying payment as a tertiary student
    for a total of 3 months (whether continuous or not), commencing from
    1 January in the study year
    Note: 'study year' means the period in which one complete year of an
    approved tertiary course starts and finishes

FAA can be approved and undertaken by a student prior to the
commencement of their course, as long as the YA, Austudy or PES is
approved for the course in which the travel is required. The customer
does not need to wait until their student payment is granted to
undertake the travel.

External students are entitled to one return journey during the study
year between the educational institution and home to attend the
institution for a period of time as a compulsory on site component of
the course.

Amount of FAA payable

The amount of FAA paid depends on the mode of transport available to the
student; generally, it is paid for the cheapest type of public transport
available, and at a concessional rate if the student is eligible. If a
customer chooses to travel by a more expensive means and does not meet
one of the exemptions shown below, then they will still be paid for the
cheapest mode of transport regardless of their cost. Students can be
paid for the next cheapest mode of travel if:

-   they are unable through illness or incapacity to travel by a cheaper
    mode of travel
-   a journey by bus would exceed 18 hours, including waiting time
    between connections
-   a journey by train would exceed 36 hours including waiting time
    between connections

Determining if a mode of transport is practicable

Determining whether the cost of a mode of transport is reasonable
depends on the circumstances.

FAA will cover reasonable costs of transport by a private vehicle if:

-   the student needs to transport living necessities or personal
    belongings from their family or permanent home in order to undertake
    study (such as essential kitchenware and bedding), and
-   it is not practicable (able to be used) to transport the items by
    public transport. For example, due to strict luggage limits or if
    the amount of luggage is difficult to manoeuvre

As each journey is assessed separately, travel by private vehicle:

-   may be considered reasonable for some journeys, for example where
    the student has a large amount of essential luggage to transport,
    but
-   may not be considered reasonable for journeys along the same route
    for the same student if the student is not required to transport
    essential luggage

Additional costs payable under FAA

In addition to the cheapest mode of public transport, the student can
claim:

-   the cost of a sleeping berth of second class rail travel if it is
    not possible for the journey to be made by day
-   using a taxi or private car which is paid based on a kilometre rate
    and type of vehicle used, if there is no public transport available
-   an economy air fare if the customer would face rail travel longer
    than 36 hours, or it is not possible to travel by other means of
    public transport
-   compulsory booking fees
-   taxes
-   credit card fees (if booking online by credit card), and
-   travel agent booking fees

Additional costs not payable under FAA

The following travel costs would not be covered by FAA:

-   airport parking fees
-   manual check-in fees
-   SMS itinerary costs
-   travel insurance
-   entertainment bundles
-   seat allocation

Economy airfare

There are different levels of 'economy' airfares. For example, saver
lite, saver and flexi fares. However, for FAA any class of economy
airfare may be reimbursed.

FAA is reimbursed at the cheapest, most practicable, mode of public
transport. Therefore, the Service Officer would choose the cheapest fare
that provides one economy seat plus one piece of baggage.

While it is not possible to obtain historical fare prices (QBT does not
keep a list of past fares), if an applicant is claiming reimbursement
for a flight already taken, it would be reasonable for the Service
Officer to obtain the best fare of the day over a 5 business day period
commencing 7 days after date claim is being processed, to obtain an
average to use.

Additional luggage costs

FAA can generally be paid to students to cover the costs of one standard
piece of checked in luggage.

If an airline charges extra for one piece of luggage, FAA may be paid
for this luggage. This applies whether the person has pre-booked the
fare and luggage together, or the luggage is purchased at the time of
check-in.

In some cases, additional luggage costs may be covered by FAA if the
cost of the excess baggage for a flight is required to transport living
necessities or personal belongings, such as essential kitchenware. While
it would be reasonable to expect a student may require excess baggage if
they are moving to a premises for the first time, it would not be
reasonable for excess baggage to be booked if they are returning home
for a holiday period and maintaining their residence where they study.
Excess baggage costs may also be covered by FAA to transport necessary
course equipment. For example, a music student has to transport their
musical instrument as it is required for their course of study.

Claim lodgement time limits

To claim for reimbursement, customers need to lodge their form prior to
1 April in the year following the year of study. FAA can be paid in
advance of travel in certain circumstances.

Claims for pre-booked FAA should generally be lodged at least 7 days in
advance of the planned journey to allow Services Australia to book the
student's travel. However, subject to availability, Services Australia
will attempt to fulfil any travel requests lodged within 7 days of
travel.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

FAA processing arrangements

Fares Allowance claims are processed only by Fares Allowance Skilled
Student Processing Staff.

General enquiries can be answered at the first point of contact.

The Resources page contains examples, approved free text and links to
the Services Australia website and forms.

Related links

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
