
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines five different payments made by Services
Australia specifically to students. They are Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy, ABSTUDY, Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES). While each payment type has its own specific
rules about study/course requirements, there are similarities.

Requirements for full-time students to receive specific payments

For customers to be regarded as full-time students for the purposes of
qualifying for one of the payments for full-time students administered
by Services Australia, they must be undertaking an approved course of
study. For a course to be approved, both the course content and the
institution providing the course must meet certain requirements. These
requirements are determined by the relevant State or Territory
authorities. A general requirement for the approval of a course is that
it leads to some sort of academic award, such as a Certificate IV,
Diploma or Bachelor. A person who is undertaking non-award study would
generally not be eligible for payment as a full-time student, but there
are exceptions to this rule.

Time frames and study loads

The time allowed for a course is based on the

normal duration of that course (sometimes called minimum time). The time
allowed is also dependent on the type of payment the student is
receiving. Study load concessions may further extend the duration for
which payment can be made. The student may be allowed some additional
time to complete a course. This is known as allowable or reasonable
time.

A person's study load is the amount of study they are currently
undertaking and is used to determine whether a person is undertaking
enough study to qualify for a payment for students.

Levels of study

With such a large variety of courses at a range of institutions, it is
not possible to make individual comparisons between all of them.
Instead, they are categorised by 'level of study'. There are five levels
of study and all courses within the one level are considered to be
roughly equivalent.

The five levels of study include:

-   Level A
-   Level B
-   Level C
-   Level D
-   Level M

Not all Masters Courses are approved for income support payments.
However, all students undertaking Masters Courses on the approved course
list are considered to be undertaking approved study for the purposes of
YA, Austudy and PES.

Startup Year Courses are only approved for income support payments where
the student is enrolled and has been selected for a STARTUP-HELP loan by
their higher education provider. See Startup Year Courses for more
information.

Startup Year Courses are only approved for income support payments where
the student is enrolled and has been selected for a STARTUP-HELP loan by
their higher education provider. See Startup Year Courses for more
information.

Short courses

Some courses are regarded as short courses. Generally, qualification for
payment starts on the first day of the course and ceases on the last
day. Payments do not continue for the gap between ceasing a short course
and commencing another course (regardless of the length of the second
course) except in the case where the course is articulated with other
short courses. See Approved short courses and student payment
eligibility.

In certain circumstances ABSTUDY customers can be eligible for payment
between short courses during a year or over the long vacation.

Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study is not required for
students commencing a new course or making an initial claim for AIC,
Austudy, or YA. The proof of enrolment (POE) requirement for ABSTUDY and
PES still applies in limited circumstances.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Contents

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Defining level of study for special schools

Defining levels of tertiary study

Aggregation of study load

Allowable non-award study for Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Allowable non-award study for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing study load requirements

Approved short courses and student payment eligibility

Effect of late starting courses of study on continuing payments for
ABSTUDY

Eligibility periods for full year courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and PES

Effect of articulated short courses of study on continuing payment

Approved distance education/external study

Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities
Australia

Effect on student payments of enrolment in more than one course or at
more than one educational institution

Effect of school-base apprenticeships on student payments

Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study

Startup Year Courses

Related links

Study requirements for ABSTUDY

Study requirements for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Activity test for Austudy

Qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Undertaking full-time study requirements for Youth Allowance (YA)
students

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
