-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA) may be payable
for non-student travellers.

Types of non-student traveller

Under certain circumstances, it may be necessary or desirable for a
person other than the student to travel for study related purposes.

There are 5 types of non-student travellers. They are:

-   dependants
-   family or community members
-   supervisors
-   travelling companions (including a service animal)
-   education institution representatives

Together with a student approved for ABSTUDY FAA, the 5 non-student
travellers are referred to as approved travellers. See the Process page
to determine eligibility for ABSTUDY FAA for a non-student traveller.

Only approved travellers can make a travel request for a dependent
child, for example, a parent or guardian is requesting their dependent
child travel with them.

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to FAA for the Australian
Apprenticeship.

Extreme circumstances

If a case arises where there are extreme circumstances requiring higher
level consideration, for example, the issue is politically sensitive
and/or has escalated because of media and/or Member of Parliament (MP)
involvement, then the circumstances of the case should be referred to
the ABSTUDY Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Spare seats on the charter

Where ABSTUDY charter travel has been arranged by Services Australia for
approved ABSTUDY traveller/s, there are sometimes spare seats on the
charter. Services Australia cannot enter any discussion on the
management and utility of these spare seats and can only provide travel
services to people who have a direct entitlement to FAA under the
ABSTUDY Policy.

The Resources page contains scenarios relating to the approval of
non-student travellers and a link to the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
(SY032).

Related links

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

Determining the appropriate mode of transport for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
