-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the closing date for ABSTUDY claims.

Closing dates

Closing dates for ABSTUDY claims vary between students and Australian
Apprentices and the type of assistance claimed. See the Process page for
full details.

Date of claim lodgement

The date of claim lodgement for:

-   claims lodged online or via Assisted Customer Claim - the date the
    claim was successfully submitted
-   verbal claims recorded via the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool - the date the
    ABSTUDY Claiming Tool was completed and accepted
-   paper claims - the date the claim was received by Services Australia
    including its agents

Incorrect or inappropriate claim

Where an applicant has lodged an incorrect or inappropriate claim for
another payment (for example, Youth Allowance, Austudy or Assistance for
Isolated Children) by the relevant closing date for the payment being
claimed, the customer may be considered to have lodged an ABSTUDY claim
on that date.

Extension of closing date

An extension to the ABSTUDY closing date is available for all ABSTUDY
payments. Customers experiencing vulnerability or those with a medical
condition or special circumstances may be granted an extension of time
to lodge their claim.

Where a student ABSTUDY claim is lodged outside the relevant closing
date due to circumstances beyond the applicant's control, they may still
receive their full entitlement. The student must provide their claim as
soon as possible and a written statement explaining the reason for late
lodgement. Evidence may be requested to prove the circumstances.

Lodging additional information

There is no closing date for acceptance of additional information. If an
applicant lodges a claim before the relevant closing date, and further
information is required, the student or Australian Apprentice may be
entitled to payment for the full period of the course regardless of when
the additional information is supplied.

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

ABSTUDY PES closing dates differ to ABSTUDY closing dates. See Initial
contact with students claiming ABSTUDY PES for further information.

Moving from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) to ABSTUDY

An ABSTUDY claim must be lodged by 31 December in the year FTB ceased to
ensure there is no gap in payments. See Study requirements for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years or over.

The Resources page contains a link to the Open Universities Australia
website. This site provides details of the study periods.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Claiming ABSTUDY

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and ABSTUDY PES

Assessing ABSTUDY claims

Calculating the start date for ABSTUDY

Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities
Australia

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
