
Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) students 010-06070000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the activity test requirements for YA customers
who are students undertaking full-time study.

Activity test

YA may be paid to customers who are 'undertaking full-time study' if
they are 16 to 24 years of age.

Some customers aged 15, or 25 or over, may also be eligible for YA.

Secondary students 16-17 years of age

Dependent young people, aged 16 or17 years, who are in full-time
secondary study and not approved to live away from home will only
qualify for YA if they were receiving YA before starting their course.
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is the primary payment for these customers, and
they cannot be paid YA unless it is determined that the young person is
not benefiting from FTB that is being paid to their parent/guardian. See
Determining minimum and maximum age for YA.

When a full-time student turns 18 years of age, or completes year 12 or
equivalent, they may test their eligibility for YA. However, FTB may be
more beneficial in some circumstances. Parents or guardians can compare
their potential YA or FTB rate for their family circumstances using the
Payment and Service Finder available on the Resources page.

Full-time study

YA students must be undertaking full-time or an approved concessional
study load in an approved course, at an approved education provider, and
satisfy the relevant progress rules.

A student is considered to be undertaking full-time study if they are:

-   currently enrolled in an approved course, or
-   meet the continuing/intending student rules, and
-   undertaking (or will be undertaking) at least 75% of the normal
    amount of full-time study in that course. Certain students may be
    considered to be full-time if they have been approved for a
    concessional study load of 66% and are undertaking at least that
    amount of study. For more information, see Assessing study load
    requirements

A customer employed full-time as an apprentice or trainee cannot be
considered to be satisfying the activity test as a student. A full-time
Australian Apprentice may be eligible for YA as an Australian Apprentice
if they have a current Commonwealth Registration Number. An Australian
Apprentice is not subject to the YA activity test.

Continuing and intending students

When determining if a YA student is satisfying the activity test,
consideration should be given to whether the customer is a
continuing/intending student. This may influence what date the customer
is eligible to receive a student payment from, and whether they continue
to be paid YA between study periods. The rules for continuing/intending
students vary between different student payments administered by the
agency.

Returning to study

Students returning to study from a period of work, unemployment or any
other activity, do not satisfy the activity test as full-time students
until their course commences, unless they are considered a
continuing/intending student.

Customers 22 or older who are not continuing students do not qualify for
YA until their course commences. These customers should be invited to
claim alternate income support payments, for example JobSeeker Payment
(JSP).

Students 21 or under may satisfy the YA activity test by doing other YA
approved activities until the course commences. Customers claiming YA as
a job seeker who are under 22 and have not completed Year 12 (or
equivalent) or a Certificate III or higher, must undertake approved
activities and/or job search to satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements.

-   If undertaking approved activities, it must be for at least 25 hours
    per week.
-   If undertaking any combination of approved activities and job
    search, their provider will determine the number of job search
    required in addition to their other activities.
-   If undertaking only job search they must look for work of at least
    25 hours per week and the number of job search will be determined by
    their provider.

If a YA claimant is enrolled in a course that would qualify under the
rules for YA as a full-time student, and they have provided their course
details in their claim, then payment as a student should be considered
in the first instance.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

YDS is paid to full-time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt
of YA and ABSTUDY who are 21 years of age and under and have been
assessed by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) as having a partial
capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week.

Concessional study load

If the customer is undertaking between 66% and 75% of the 'normal amount
of full-time study' they may still satisfy the activity test in
accordance with the concessional study load for Youth Allowance.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains a link to the approved Masters courses list
and the Payment and Service Finder.

Contents

Satisfying the activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) by undertaking
full-time study

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) tertiary
students

Satisfying the activity test for customers who are intending to study
for Youth Allowance (YA)

Home schooling arrangements for Youth Allowance (YA), Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Activity test exemptions for Youth Allowance (student) customers when
their partner dies

Related links

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
