-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance. It is
paid to Tertiary or Masters and Doctorate ABSTUDY students who incur
high levels of essential course costs. These costs must be incurred by
all students in the course. Australian Apprentices are not entitled to
Additional Incidentals Allowance.

Eligibility

The student must:

meet the eligibility criteria for one of the following ABSTUDY Awards:

-   Tertiary Award
-   Masters and Doctorate Award

commence in the course, and

incur essential course costs that exceed the Additional Incidentals
prescribed amount

ABSTUDY students currently receiving Incidentals Allowance under the
Tertiary or Masters and Doctorate Award who require financial assistance
with additional essential costs for their course, can apply for
Additional Incidentals Allowance.

Claiming

The student must:

lodge an ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim Form M (SY031)

detail the cost of each item of essential course costs (including
necessary items that have not yet been purchased)

provide proof of expenditure (for example, receipts) that covers the
bulk of essential course costs
Students must keep receipts for all their course expenditure so Services
Australia can assess their entitlement for Additional Incidentals
Allowance
Receipts must show:

-   the business name
-   each item purchased
-   date and
-   amount of each item

provide a quote for items being claimed that are yet to be purchased
Quotes must show:

-   the name of the business
-   the date the quote was supplied
-   a description of the items

The Head of School/Faculty must verify that the incidentals being
claimed are an essential requirement for all students undertaking the
course.

There is no limit on the number of Additional Incidentals Allowance
claims a student can make for a course (or courses) in a year. However,
the total payment of Additional Incidentals Allowance payment cannot
exceed the maximum per calendar year.

A customer who undertakes more than one course in a year can qualify for
Additional Incidentals Allowance for each course, however the student's
essential course costs must exceed the relevant Additional Incidentals
prescribed amount for each course, prior to the student qualifying for
payment of an amount of Additional Incidentals Allowance.

Rate

The payment is the difference between the cost of the essential course
costs/items and the Additional Incidentals prescribed amount, where the
essential course costs/items are greater. The amount payable is up to a
maximum of $2,080.00. See the Resources page on Assessing Form m (SY031)
for ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim for examples of how
to complete calculations.

Payment

Additional Incidentals Allowance:

-   is paid directly to the customer
-   is not means tested and is non-taxable

The Resources page contains a link to the ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals
Allowance Claim Form M (SY031).

Related links

A-B Rates and Thresholds

Completing an ABSTUDY form

Assessing Form m (SY031) ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
