
Aggregation of study load 010-22033035

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how study load requirements are assessed for
student payments administered by the Services Australia.

Aggregation

Educational institutions break up academic years into shorter study
periods such as semesters, trimesters, terms, etc. If a student is
enrolled in and undertaking 75% (or concessional percentage) of the
normal amount of full-time study in a shorter study period then they
would meet the study load requirement for the study period.

However, if their study load in a shorter study period is less than the
required amount they may be able to add the study loads of more than one
shorter study period together. This is known as aggregation of study
load.

Students can use aggregation of study load if:

-   the student is able to enrol over the entire aggregation period at
    the start of the period
-   the study load over the aggregation period is 75% (or concessional
    percentage) of the normal amount of full-time study, and
-   the shorter periods that make up the aggregation period are
    consecutive

There is no requirement for evidence for an aggregation assessment in a
new claim or claim re-assessment if the student advises:

-   they are enrolled over the academic year, and
-   their study add up to at least 75% of the Equivalent Full Time Study
    Load (EFTSL) over the academic year

All other aggregation assessments require current date evidence
confirming the student’s total EFTSL over the entire aggregated
enrolment period. Suitable evidence may include:

-   Proof of Enrolment documents
-   Academic transcripts, or
-   Letters from the education provider

Impact of aggregation on satisfactory progress

Where study loads for study periods are added together for the purpose
of satisfying full-time study load requirements, these periods are to be
counted as full-time when assessing satisfactory progress.

For example, student is part-time (0.250 EFTSL) in semester one and
full-time (0.500 EFTSL) in semester two. Aggregation assessment is
completed and the customer is paid as a full-time student for both
semesters. This equals 0.750 EFSTL, allowing the customer to meet the
satisfactory progress rules as they have been undertaking an aggregated
full time study load over the year.

The Resources page contains aggregation of study examples.

Related links

Coding new study details

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing study load requirements

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing study load requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
