
Payment on Advice for ABSTUDY away from home rate 010-02060050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to help when processing the delivery
of ABSTUDY away from home allowances paid as boarding instalments to
schools and boarding institutions, including hostels and residential
colleges.

ABSTUDY boarding instalment payments

ABSTUDY secondary school students boarding at a school, in an approved
ABSTUDY Homestay arrangement, or at a hostel, which is a signatory to
the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement must have their payments
delivered to the school or hostel.

ABSTUDY payments to boarding institutions are delivered as 2 boarding
instalments in each school term. Payments to students in private board
arrangements are delivered fortnightly in arrears.

Payment on Advice is the term used for the process that requires schools
and boarding institutions to advise Services Australia of the
commencement dates in a term for ABSTUDY away from home students in
order to receive the first ABSTUDY boarding instalment payment in a
school term. Payment of the second instalment in a term is automatic for
eligible students and does not use a Payment on Advice process. Payment
on Advice is a debt prevention process that ensures accuracy of payment
to schools and boarding institutions and dramatically reduces instances
of overpayments.

Payment on Advice is unavailable for students who are not paid via the
ABSTUDY boarding instalment method, for example students in private
board arrangements and students boarding at hostels not signatory to the
ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement. See Payment of Away from Home rate
for ABSTUDY.

Payment on Advice impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some boarding providers closed and others had reduced capacity due
to social distancing requirements within the board facility. The Payment
on Advice process did not take place in Term 2, 3 or 4 2020 due to
COVID-19.

Payment on Advice request

A Payment on Advice request is sent to the school or boarding
institution (based on where the customer's payment is paid) in the
second week of each school term. The request contains a One Time Access
Code (OTAC) for schools/boarding institutions to log into the Education
Institutions eService and provide term commencement dates for ABSTUDY
students. In the eService, schools/boarding institutions can view each
of their estimated ABSTUDY boarding instalment payments for the term for
students and the delivery dates for these entitlements.

A student processed as eligible for away from home rate after the
production of the Payment on Advice request for the term (but prior to
the default pay date on the fourth Thursday), will need to have their
commencement status checked manually with the school or boarding
institution.

Intention of Payment on Advice

Payment on Advice is intended only to be the process of delivering the
payment, rather than the actual assessment of away from home rate or the
coding of away from home rate. However, upon receipt of advice from a
school/boarding institution of student commencement status, a
reassessment of a student's eligibility or entitlement may need to be
undertaken prior to the actual release or cancellation of payment.

Group Deduction Notice

When the payment is issued, the school/boarding institution will be
advised of the payment via their regular Group Deduction Notice (GDN).
To view or reissue the GDN refer to Centrepay Business interactions.

[] School/boarding institutions registered for online services will be
able to view their GDN online. For further information see Centrepay
Business interactions.

The Resources page contains a copy of the OTAC letter a link to the
Education Institutions eService and POA OTAC release dates.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement

Calculating the commencement date of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Payment to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
