
Completing Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) online reviews 010-21032517

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Tertiary Access Payments (TAP)
review, Manual Follow Up (MFU) and grant.

Payment of TAP

Generally customers are not paid the TAP immediately upon assessment of
their claim.

When a TAP claim is processed prior to or within 42 days of the course
start date, assess the claim to a Registered, or Pending (PND) status.
Payments are only made once the customer circumstances are confirmed
after the relevant assessment dates via a TAP review. This is to confirm
they are still eligible for the payment.

Customers whose family home is classified:

-   as inner regional will get one review
-   as outer regional, remote or very remote will get two reviews, one
    for each instalment

Customers who lodge a claim 42 days, or more, after commencing study
will not receive the first review. Customers will only be sent the
second review if they are from an outer regional or remote area and
lodge the claim before their second assessment date.

TAP reviews

Customers will be sent a letter, requesting them to complete a Tertiary
Access Payment review via their online services, within 28 days of the
letter being issued.

A notification will be issued after 21 day from the original TAP review
letter issued, reminding the customer to complete the review. The
customer will be asked to confirm or update their study details, and
provide documents to verify their circumstances.

TAP online review

The customer should be encouraged to complete the TAP online review, by
selecting the Academic Reassessment task, from their online services
home page.

The customer will be asked to provide documents depending on their
circumstances. The customer can submit the review without uploading the
requested documents, however the activity will be placed on hold until:

-   the documents are uploaded, or
-   at day 29, if the documents are not uploaded within 28 days

If the customer fails to respond to their review within 42 days, the
review will mature and automatically reject the payment POE - Proof of
Enrolment not supplied, or cancel POE if they have already received the
first instalment.

Verification documents

As part of the online review, customers need to provide evidence of
their circumstances. Customers will either be asked to provide:

-   enrolment evidence issued on or after their first or second
    assessment date which shows the Education Provider customer’s name
    and study load
-   a Centrelink medical certificate (SU415/SU683)/medical letter
    confirming temporary incapacity where the student’s study load has
    changed due to medical reasons
-   a letter from the education provider, where the student is
    undertaking a 66% concessional study

Proof of enrolment

The format of POE documents varies from one education provider to
another.

Acceptable POE documents must clearly identify:

-   customer’s name
-   education provider
-   units the customer is enrolled in or confirmation of full time
    enrolment
-   the Study Period, and
-   the document is dated after the relevant assessment date

The Resources page contains examples of acceptable and not acceptable
proof of enrolment documents.

Relocation from Family Home Address

As part of the first assessment online review, customers will be asked
to confirm their address details, as they must have moved from their
family home address to be eligible for TAP. Customers must provide
either a:

-   term address,
-   temporary address, or
-   home address that differs from the Family home address provided on
    their original claim

Change in circumstances TAP Manual Follow Up (MFU)

Where the system, or a Service Officer, makes a change to the TAP course
recorded on the Education Details (EDC) screen, an MFU is created for
review.

The MFU displays in Process Direct as TAP reviews -TAP Study update, and
is created to make sure any change in study is re-assessed for the
purposes of TAP.

These work items are allocated to TAP trained Service Officers who need
to check that the student remains eligible for the TAP.

The Resources page contains intranet links and examples of acceptable
and not acceptable proof of enrolment documents.

Related links

Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assessing and finalising claims for the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
