-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines circumstances when ABSTUDY Allowances may be
payable for primary level study.

ABSTUDY not payable for primary level study

Except in specific circumstances, ABSTUDY assistance is not payable for
primary level study.

Level of study for Schooling A Award and Schooling B Award

If the customer is applying for:

Schooling A Award, they must be studying at either a:

-   full-time secondary level, or
-   full-time primary level and be aged 14 years at 1 January in the
    year the application for payment is being made

Schooling B Award, they must be studying at either a:

-   full-time secondary level, or
-   full-time primary level and be aged 16 years or older, or aged 15
    years or older and be in state care

Level of study difference between states/territories

From 1 January 2022, year 7 is considered secondary study across all
states and territories.

South Australia transitioned across to delivering year 7 at secondary
level in a staggered approach over 2019, 2020 and 2021. As of 1 January
2022, all year 7 level study in South Australia transitioned to
secondary level.

Prior to 1 January 2022, Year 7 in South Australia is recognised as
either primary or secondary level, dependent upon the education
provider.

The list of South Australian education providers delivering Year 7 at
secondary level is on the National Course Approvals sub-site.

Level of study and living circumstances (at home/away from home)

Circumstances will vary for customers applying for ABSTUDY to study
primary or secondary level.

Lives at home to attend Year 7

Those customers who live at home (or do not qualify for the away from
home rate) to attend Year 7 as:

secondary level, can attract Schooling A benefits (if otherwise
eligible)

primary level, are not eligible for ABSTUDY unless they are:

-   14 years or older in the year of study they will attract Schooling A
    benefits, or
-   16 years or older, or in state care and 15 years or older, they will
    attract Schooling B allowances

Some students who meet either of the above categories may have elected
to stay at home to attend a non-local government school even though they
satisfy one of the following away from home provisions:

-   travel time and access
-   limited local school facilities

In these circumstances, the non-government school can qualify to have
School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2) paid to them on behalf of the
student.

It is common in rural or remote areas for students not to have access to
a government school offering the appropriate year of study. These
students may have access to a non-government school, which they attend
while living at home.

Lives away from home to do secondary level

Customers who live away from home to do secondary level study but their
appropriate level of schooling at their permanent home is:

-   secondary - may qualify for ABSTUDY away from home benefits under
    the Schooling B Award, if they meet an away from home provision
-   primary - should only attract Schooling A benefits (if otherwise
    eligible), unless they meet the requirements listed in Item 2 in the
    Process table

Lives away from home to do primary level

Customers who live away from home to do primary level, regardless if
they have a permanent home within reasonable travel time of a school or
not, will not be eligible for ABSTUDY unless they:

-   qualify for ABSTUDY away from home rate, and are 16 years or older,
    or 15 and in state care, or
-   have already completed the final year of primary school and intend
    to study secondary level at the new school, but the new school has
    assessed the student lacks the necessary skills to study at
    secondary level. The student must meet all the requirements as a
    student who is repeating the final year of primary school at another
    location. See Item 1 in the Process table for Living Away from Home
    Allowance for students who repeat the final year of primary level
    study at another location

The Resources page contains examples of students who apply for ABSTUDY
to live away from home to do primary level study and a link to the
National Course Approvals sub-site.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
