-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how students and Australian Apprentices (or a
person on their behalf) can make a claim for ABSTUDY and the process for
reviewing claims.

Claiming ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY is available to eligible Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
students and Australian Apprentices. Applicants wanting to claim ABSTUDY
must submit a completed ABSTUDY claim.

Claims for ABSTUDY can be lodged by:

-   students
-   full-time Australian Apprentices
-   parents or guardians
-   institutions, or
-   interim applicants

The correct applicant must lodge an ABSTUDY claim, see Determining who
should be the ABSTUDY applicant.

Claiming requirements

Early claims can be lodged for ABSTUDY.

ABSTUDY claims must be lodged by the relevant closing date.

There is no requirement for the applicant to be in Australia on the day
they make a claim.

It is not always necessary for a customer to lodge an ABSTUDY claim. For
further information on when an ABSTUDY claim is required, see the
Process page.

Interim claim

An interim claim can be used when a student, or the person who would
normally apply on behalf of the student cannot due to exceptional
circumstances such as serious illness, floods or remote locality. See
ABSTUDY interim claim.

Completing the paper claim

Points to note in completing the claim:

-   The claim must be completed in blue or black pen
-   All relevant questions on the claim form should be answered. Many
    questions only require a 'Yes' or 'No' tick
-   For an interim claim, the minimum information acceptable is both the
    student and parent/guardian details

If helping customers and interim applicants to complete a claim form, do
not underline or make any comments on the claim that is to be signed by
a customer or interim applicant and lodged with Centrelink. Always use a
separate sheet of paper to capture any notations or explanations to
questions and attach this to the claim.

Identity confirmation

Identity Confirmation does not need to be met for all ABSTUDY payment
types. Additional procedures exclusive to ABSTUDY apply in some
circumstances.

Lodgement

ABSTUDY paper claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any
of the following options:

-   [A self service option is available for customers: Placed under
    section headings or general content where self service options are
    available.] Online using the Upload documents service
-   Fax - see Processing Service details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   Post via a reply paid envelope or by posting to Services Australia.
    See Processing Service details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   In person at a service centre, or in remote areas, with a Centrelink
    field officer

Accepting claim forms and supporting documents

Service Officers must accept all versions of ABSTUDY paper claim forms,
including older versions.

When claims, forms or documents are received, check they are complete
and scan to the customer's record.

Documents meeting the scannable document exceptions will be recorded in
a DOC. It will show:

-   where and when the document was received,
-   the action taken and
-   where it was sent

Withdrawn claims

A withdrawn claim is treated as though no claim was received.

If a customer contacts regarding a withdrawn claim advise that a new
claim is required. The Resources page contains an example of this
situation.

ABSTUDY processing

ABSTUDY Smart Centre processing teams are responsible for the processing
of ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents. Look up local Processing
Service details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES. See Processing
arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
forms, mySupport, contact details, examples showing when a new claim for
ABSTUDY is or is not required, and information about documents that may
be required to support ABSTUDY claims.

Contents

ABSTUDY interim claim

Issuing appropriate modules and additional forms for students and
Australian Apprentices

Determining who should be the ABSTUDY applicant

Aboriginality or Torres Strait Islander status for ABSTUDY

Not qualified for ABSTUDY if receiving other assistance to study or as
an Australian Apprentice

Tax File Number (TFN) for ABSTUDY

Calculating the start date for ABSTUDY

Eligibility periods for full year courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and PES

Closing date for ABSTUDY claims

Existing customer starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Processing an ABSTUDY claim

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Related links

Assessing ABSTUDY claims

Early claims

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Assessing a Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020)

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Assessing the ABSTUDY Change of Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053)

Review of ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
decisions

Payment of tuition fees or Student Contribution for ABSTUDY Masters and
Doctorate study

ABSTUDY Thesis Allowance

ABSTUDY Relocation Allowance

Processing a claim after the death of a customer

Rates and Thresholds

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY Tertiary Students

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

ABSTUDY Living Allowance

Completing an ABSTUDY form

Progress of claim - ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
