
View or update Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy student and Australian Apprentice online claim 010-04010050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers can assist customers view or
update their online claims.

The view and update option

[] The 'View or update your online claim' option online allows eligible
customers to view and update their new claim details.

Customers who need to complete income and asset details as part of their
claim can provide the information online in a tailored workflow
replacing the existing Module IA - Income and Assets (Mod IA) form.

To be eligible to use the service, the customer must have registered
online.

Supplying further information or documentation

Students and Australian Apprentices claiming Youth Allowance or Austudy
are required to:

-   complete the online claim question sets, and
-   provide all required documents before they can submit their claim

Customers registered with an active self service registration can supply
further information or documents required for their claim online using
[] Upload documents service. If an uploaded document fits into scannable
document exceptions category, it should not be used for processing
purposes.

Customers can also use the View or update your online claim facility to
cancel or withdraw their claim.

Assisted Customer Claim

If a customer asks for help to view or update their claim, the Service
Officer can view the claim using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Health Care Cards

Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices will be
automatically issued a Health Care Card (HCC) from 1 January 2019. There
will no longer be questions at the end of the online claim asking
whether the customer wants to claim an immediate Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC) or have their eligibility assessed after 8 weeks of payment
for a LIC.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website and
the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) contact information.

Related links

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Upload documents service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
