
Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Distance Education Allowance (DED) 010-03040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for Distance Education
Allowance (DED) under the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.
DED is payable for students in an approved course of study by distance
education methods or another acceptable arrangement.

Course eligibility

To be eligible for DED, general AIC Scheme eligibility criteria must be
met, and:

-   the student must be studying through an approved distance education
    provider, or
-   in an acceptable alternative arrangement

DED is the applicable allowance where a student undertaking study by
distance education methods must periodically attend a residential school
or a short 'mini' school as part of their course.

AIC Pensioner Education Supplement is the appropriate payment if the
student receives:

Disability Support Pension or Parenting Payment Single, and:

-   is undertaking primary or equivalent ungraded study, and
-   meets the eligibility criteria for DED

Acceptable study locations

Normally, a student would need to be enrolled in their course at an
approved distance education provider (such as a distance education
school or school of the air) and undertaking their studies at home. See
the Process page for further information.

Study at Homeland Learning Centres

Homeland Learning Centres (HLC) - (outstation schools) are:

Northern Territory (NT) Government recognised annexes of NT Government
remote community schools (sometimes known as 'hub' schools or Community
Education Centres 'CECs')

located in the area around a remote community, and

with the support of the remote community school:

-   provides primary and secondary education to students of Indigenous
    families living outside the main community in traditional homelands
    or an outstation
-   some HLCs may not provide secondary level study or provide the same
    range of grades for primary and/or secondary level study

HLCs are not approved institutions but are administered by remote
community schools or 'hub' schools. For the payment of DED HLCs are
'acceptable study locations' in the AIC Scheme Guidelines for payment of
DED.

Students are eligible for AIC on the basis their local government
schools and remote community schools or 'hub' schools, are:

-   all classified as limited program schools by the NT Government, and
-   not 'appropriate state schools' under AIC policy

This means students are considered geographically isolated, regardless
of the:

-   proximity (or distance) of the homeland, or outstation location to
    the remote community school, or
-   availability of transport to the school

DED is payable if the student attends an HLC and they and their AIC
applicant (that is parent, guardian or carer) live on the homeland or
outstation location.

DED is not payable for a student:

-   attending the main remote community (hub/CEC) school or where the
    student and/or their parent/guardian/carer(s) live in the main
    remote community
-   living on the homeland or outstation location who travels to the
    main community to attend the remote community school (for example
    because the HLC does not provide their level of study or grade), or
-   living in the main community who travels to the homeland or
    outstation location to attend a HLC

It is not uncommon for a student to be attending an HLC and living in
the homeland location with a carer such as a grandparent or other
relative, who receives Family Tax Benefit for the student, while the
student's parent(s) live in the main community. In this case, if the
carer has principal care of the student, they can be an approved
applicant and receive DED for the student.

Where an applicant wants their DED to be paid to the school it should go
to an HLC account set up by the administering remote community school,
not any other account.

Note: Income Management - AIC applicants whose DED payments for a
student attending a NT HLC, are not directed to the school (that is the
applicant receives the DED), may be subject to Income Management. If an
AIC applicant on a Centrelink or Veterans' Affairs income support
payment receives DED for a student attending a HLC and has not directed
the payments to the school, they may qualify under one or more of the
Income Management measures because of their individual circumstances.

Where income management is applied, the portion of DED that is income
managed is pooled with the income managed portion of their other
Centrelink payment(s). This is paid to meet living expenses (known as
priority needs) that are determined by the applicant in consultation
with a Service Officer. The AIC Smart Centre teams have no role in the
administration of Income Management in respect of AIC applicants and AIC
payments.

Part-time distance education study - eligibility

Distance Education Allowance (DED) is normally paid for full-time study
but in some cases it can be paid on a pro-rata basis where a student is
undertaking a combination of face-to-face and distance education. These
dual study arrangements for students are usually for either
socialisation reasons or under a plan for a gradual return to full-time
school attendance.

Pro-rata payment can be made where a student is studying some
lessons/subjects/hours/days in face-to-face schooling and:

-   is a student with a special need that has been assessed as needing
    to study from home but is not enrolled at a distance education
    school on a full-time basis (even taking into account any
    disability)
-   is undertaking home schooling/education, or undertaking work set by
    the school to do at home, for less than 4 school days a week

The assumption is the relevant state/territory education authorities
(through the distance education school or home education/schooling
authority) are aware of the dual study arrangement and either agree
with, or have no objection to, the student also attending the school.
See the State/Territory Department of Education approval table on the
Resources page for details.

Part-time distance education study - evidence requirements

Even though the applicant may have advised the distance education study,
home schooling/education or other approved home-based study (for example
work set by school to do at home) is part-time, the student's study load
needs to be ascertained along with student's parallel face-to-face
school attendance or enrolment. This is to confirm the study is
part-time but also to determine the percentage study load so the correct
pro-rata rate of DED is paid.

The school enrolment/attendance (for face-to-face study) for some
distance education or home schooled students may be at such a low level
that it may not affect their eligibility for the normal (full-time) rate
of DED. For example, if the local school enrolment/attendance is low
enough to mean the student is undertaking the home-based study component
for at least 4 days in the school week or the distance education school
advises the student's enrolment is (still) full-time, the full-time rate
of DED is payable.

Depending on how the home based and face-to-face study loads are
identified and measured, the number of school days, hours, subjects or
lessons needs to be ascertained from information provided by the
applicant (that is from the claim or subsequent contact) and from the
relevant school(s) or state or territory home schooling/education
authority responsible for the study. The period (start and end dates) of
the study combinations is also needed. From this verification, the
percentage study loads can be determined.

Where the study arrangements are complex and do not fit into the
categories or scenarios in these procedures, advice should be sought
from the AIC Level 2 helpdesk. Where the amount of study at home and
school varies from week to week, it will be necessary to assess and pay
any DED a term in arrears. See the table on the Resources page for
further information.

Other student assistance options

The limited program school status of Northern Territory (and South
Australia and Western Australia) government remote community schools
provides assistance options for other methods of study for students
whose homes are in a homeland or outstation location or in a remote
Indigenous community.

Students studying at primary or secondary level and enrolled though a
school of distance education or school of the air may be eligible for
AIC DED. Students studying at primary or secondary level who are
boarding away from home may be eligible for AIC Boarding Allowances,
although those at secondary level may attract a higher level and greater
range of assistance from ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance. ABSTUDY may also
assist secondary students (and primary level students if they are aged
13 or over at 1 January of the year of study) attending a remote
community school.

See:

-   Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
    Boarding Allowance (BA/ABA)
-   ABSTUDY School Term allowance
-   ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) at home rate (Group 1)
-   ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

The Resources page contains a link to the AIC Level 2 helpdesk contact
details and varying tables to assist with calculating home based study
percentages, state/territory Department of Education approvals, pro-rata
calculation examples and home schooling age and registration rules. Also
Homeland Learning Centre coding information.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

A-B payment rates and thresholds

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Boarding
Allowance (BA/ABA)

Eligibility for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Second Home Allowance
(SHA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
