
Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance 010-02070050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for approving ABSTUDY Away from Base
assistance.

Away from Base assistance available

Away from Base assistance is intended to cover the student's travel
costs to attend an approved activity and the reasonable costs of meals
and accommodation while away from the normal place of residence.

Assistance available for a student undertaking an approved Away from
Base activity includes:

Fares Allowance, see Away from Base travel for ABSTUDY

meals and accommodation, paid via either

-   a residential expenses package, or
-   travel allowance, and

non-income tested Living Allowance, where the student's regular source
of income is lost whilst attending the activity

To be eligible for a residential expenses package or travel allowance,
the student would require overnight accommodation to stay away from the
permanent home or term address.

Meals and accommodation

Whilst residential expenses and travel allowance are available for the
same purpose, they are paid for different circumstances.

Residential expenses

Residential expenses meet the actual cost of meals and accommodation
incurred. It is paid to the education provider or service provider who
arranged the package. The package includes accommodation and meals at a
reasonable price for each student per day. There is no restriction on
where meals are provided or that they have to be part of the
'accommodation' package. Meals included in the submission at various
service providers, can be included if they are 'organised' by the
education provider, for each student, and are reasonably priced.

Meal allowance

Where a residential expenses package cannot be arranged to include all
meals during an activity, meal allowance is payable on behalf of each
student for any meal not included in the package. This is paid in a lump
sum (in conjunction with the residential expenses package) to the
education provider for distribution to students.

Participant chooses not to use residential expenses package

Students in an Away from Base activity who choose not to use the
approved residential expenses package are not entitled to access travel
allowance for that activity. They are still eligible to access any meal
allowance that is payable to all participants where meals are not
included in the residential expenses package.

Travel allowance

Normally an activity must include a residential expenses package for
funding of meal and accommodation costs. Travel allowance can be
approved when a residential package cannot be arranged by the education
provider or service provider for an Away from Base activity in
circumstances where it is:

-   unreasonable
-   impractical
-   not cost effective

For example, when the activity is a placement, travel allowance can be
approved for meals and accommodation costs if it is unreasonable to
arrange a residential expenses package for an individual student.

In all instances, payment of a residential expenses package for meals
and accommodation is to be considered prior to payment of travel
allowance for an activity.

Travel allowance can be paid to either the student directly, or to the
education provider conducting the activity for distribution to a group
of students.

Rate of travel allowance

Travel allowance is a calculated amount regardless of the actual cost
incurred by the student.

The rate of travel allowance for the purposes of Away from Base
assistance is linked to the locality of the activity. The Resources page
contains links to these rates.

Travel allowance will be paid at full rate for a period of up to 21
consecutive days, after which 50% of the rate is payable. Travel
allowance is not payable (at either half or full rate) for more than 3
months in total in a calendar year. These provisions apply regardless of
the length of a course.

Travel allowance must be acquitted after the activity has been
completed. The education provider must confirm the student undertook the
activity.

Non-income tested Living Allowance

Living Allowance assists students who lose their regular source of
income while undertaking an approved Away from Base activity.

Eligibility for, and the rate of Living Allowance, will not be subject
to any means testing.

Rate of Living Allowance

Students who attend an approved Away from Base activity and receive a
reduced rate of a student payment (ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance) due to
means testing (student, parental or partner) and lose their normal
source of income, will have their entitlement increased to the maximum
rate payable under ABSTUDY.

Living Allowance is calculated according to the maximum rate available
for the student's age and status.

Duration of Living Allowance

Living Allowance is only paid for the actual days of the activity for
which the usual source of income is lost. Any period of lost income that
does not coincide with the activity (or reasonable travelling days
necessary to attend the activity) is not replaced with Living Allowance.

Payment of Away from Base assistance

Away from Base assistance can only be paid for students who have been
assessed as eligible to attend an approved ABSTUDY Away from Base
activity.

Paid in advance or reimbursement

Assistance for the activity can be paid in:

-   advance, or
-   as reimbursement

A claim for Away from Base assistance, as either an advance or a
reimbursement, must be received by the Away from Base submission closing
date.

Fares allowance can be authorised in advance or reimbursed after the
journey has occurred. Fares Allowance can be arranged separately to the
meals and accommodation component of the activity where requested.

Payment in advance

Payment in advance for approved away from base activities normally
occurs for each activity individually. However, qualifying institutions
can apply and be approved for bulk funding of all residential school
activities for a year, payable in a lump sum at the beginning of a
semester.

Where the education provider or student requests the payment in advance,
this needs to be arranged early to allow any necessary elements of the
activity to be secured prior to the activity commencing.

Advance payments are required to be acquitted based on the actual
numbers of qualifying participants, the period and the location(s) once
the activity has been completed.

Payment to the education provider or the students will not be made if
there are outstanding acquittals from previous away from base
activities.

Approval-in-principle

Claimants are encouraged to lodge a submission for funding 6 weeks
before the start date of the activity. Regardless of whether the full
details are known or not (for example, number of students participating,
number of nights' accommodation) in order to receive
approval-in-principle.

Unless approval-in-principle is provided prior to the commencement of
the activity, the education provider or student run the risk that
expenses partially or fully may not be covered by the payment. The
education provider or student will be liable for any shortfall in the
costs of the activity.

Reimbursement

A claim for reimbursement of a residential expenses package must include
original paid receipts and accounts verifying expenses after the
activity has occurred and upon receipt of acquittal documentation.

A claim for reimbursement of travel allowance will require confirmation
from the education provider that participants undertook the activity,
including dates and location(s) of the activity.

Payee

-   Fares Allowance - paid as a reimbursement to the education provider,
    service provider or student who arranged and paid for the travel
-   Residential expenses - paid to the education or service provider
-   Meal Allowance - paid to the education provider as a lump sum (in
    conjunction with the residential expenses package) when meals are
    not included in the residential package
-   Travel allowance - paid to the student or education provider
-   Non-income tested Living Allowance - paid to the student

How payment is made

Payment of Fares Allowance, meals and accommodation is made using the
Travel Management Application (TMA) in Process Direct. See Coding Fares
Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base entitlements for
ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

Non-income tested Living Allowance cannot be paid via the Centrelink
system. The calculated amount of Living Allowance is paid via the
ESSentials Payment System.

The Resources page contains examples related to eligibility for
Residential expense packages and the approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base
allowances, Australian Taxation Office (ATO) travel allowance
information and links to travel allowance rates on the ATO website. It
also contains a link to the ABSTUDY Submission for Away from Base
activity funding form (SY034), the CEPS Third party payment form and a
travel allowance calculator.

Related links

Away from Base assistance for ABSTUDY

Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base activities

Assessing student eligibility to attend an approved ABSTUDY Away from
Base activity

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Acquittal of funding for ABSTUDY Away from Base allowances

Away from Base travel for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Submission for Away from Base Activity Funding
(SY034)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
