-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the treatment of previous study for YA (Student).

Previous study impact on YA

YA (Student) is not automatically paid for longer than the normal length
of a course of study. The period for which it is paid can be affected by
previous study (even if a person has not received YA for the previous
study).

If a student wants to do more than one course at the same level,
conditions may apply depending on whether the student has:

-   completed a previous course
-   withdrawn from a previous course, or
-   failed their first and second course

To remain eligible for YA, a student must be making satisfactory
progress in their current course.

Note: failure in a course is when a student is precluded by the
institution from completing the course for any reason.

Withdrew from program without incurring an academic penalty

A student may start study but not complete it. Where a student withdraws
from a program of study the educational institution must decide how to
assess the incomplete study. A student who withdraws early in the
program or without a valid reason will usually be regarded as having
failed the program. On the other hand, a student who withdraws late with
an acceptable reason will not usually incur an academic penalty.

If a student withdraws without academic penalty then the educational
provider:

-   has determined that the student had a valid reason to do so
-   regards the student as not having undertaken the study

Services Australia regards it in the same way, and this study is
disregarded even though payments may have been made to the student.

Note: it is only the actual subjects from which the student withdrew
without penalty that are disregarded, not the entire semester or study
program.

Previous study may be disregarded in special circumstances

Previous study is assessed to determine satisfactory progress and may be
disregarded if the student has been affected by special circumstances
beyond their control. Students who wish to have previous study
disregarded due to special or exceptional circumstances will need to
provide documentary evidence (as appropriate) to support their case.
This applies to failed subjects or units and it is a requirement to
complete them to pass the course. See Resources for examples.

See Requesting information (CLK) to request evidence of the special
circumstance.

Previous study at same level - secondary students

Previous attempts at secondary level courses (except Year 12) does not
affect a YA student being eligible for YA. Full-time secondary students
can have many attempts at secondary level studies. For example, a
student can repeat Year 11 as many times as they need and still satisfy
the full-time study requirements for Youth Allowance. Study attempted
previously is therefore disregarded. Restrictions on the assessment of
satisfactory progress may apply for students who are attempting Year 12
for a third time.

Previous study at same level - tertiary students

Previous study in a completed course at the same level as the current
course is not counted in relation to satisfactory progress for tertiary
students. However, there are specific rules that apply to students
undertaking a course following a failure in or withdrawal from a
previous course at the same level.

If a student has:

-   failed their first course and wants to undertake study in another
    course (the second course) of the same tertiary level, study from
    the first course is disregarded if the second course will be
    completed within the allowable time for that course. If the second
    course will not be completed within the allowable time the student
    will need to enter into an Activity Agreement unless the student
    failed the first course for reasons beyond their control
-   failed to successfully complete their second course, study may only
    be disregarded if they failed due to reasons beyond their control
-   withdrawn from their first or subsequent course at the same level,
    they will be required to enter into a Student Activity Agreement,
    unless there were special circumstances beyond their control that
    caused them to withdraw. Where special circumstances applied, the
    previous study can be disregarded
-   withdrawn from their first course and wants to study a second course
    at the same level where the duration is less than 1 year, can be
    paid if the course will improve their employment prospects

The allowable time for a student whose previous course is disregarded,
or who enters into a YA activity agreement, is the normal duration of
the new course plus a further semester.

Note: the second course cannot be the same course the customer was
enrolled in. However, it can be the same degree at a different
institution. This is because courses at specific institutions must be
treated separately and not as the same course of study.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains examples of disregarding previous study due
to special circumstances.

Related links

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) tertiary
students

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Negotiating an Activity Agreement for Youth Allowance (YA) students
returning to study after discontinuing a previous course

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers returning to part-time study

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
