
Changing study or training details for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 010-03050000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relevant to Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme students who change their study or training
details. It assists Service Officers in the AIC Smart Centres coding
these changes, and if the change will affect the student's entitlement
to the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Changes to study

To qualify for payment under the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme, a student must be undertaking full-time study in an approved
course.

The student may change their course details throughout the year for a
variety of reasons including changing course, changing institution,
altering the course start or end date, studying overseas (if the
overseas study is part of the current course then course details don't
change), changing their study load or study mode.

If an AIC Scheme student ceases full time study the AIC applicant must
notify Services Australia. A debt may be generated for students who fail
to notify cessation of studies.

Note: full-time study for AIC will vary from child to child based on
their circumstances. Children without special needs will generally be
expected to study at 100% of the full-time workload. However, a child
who studying because of special needs may only be capable of studying at
a lesser percentage of the normal full-time workload. If the
school/education institution determines that this is full-time for that
student, then this is considered full-time for AIC.

Check applicant details at every contact

Every applicant's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the applicant has
authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not need to be
confirmed.

Contents

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Effect of end of course on payments for students

Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Student studying outside Australia

Related links

Approved studies for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Change of circumstances for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme applicants

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
