
Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy 010-04050050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of eligibility for the 25%
concessional study load. This concession applies to Austudy students who
have a substantial physical, psychiatric or intellectual disability.

Definition of full-time

The Austudy activity test requires that a customer is enrolled in and
undertaking an approved course of study at an approved educational
institution on a full-time basis. 'Full-time' is defined as at least 75%
of the normal study load in the course. However, a concession to this
study load requirement may be approved in some circumstances.

Study load concession

There are two levels of study load concession for Austudy with two
different sets of eligibility criteria. They are:

-   a 25% concessional study load
-   a 66% concessional study load

Secondary and tertiary students who have a substantial physical,
psychiatric or intellectual disability and are unable to study full-time
as a result of this disability, can undertake between 25% and 74% of the
normal full-time study load for the course and still qualify for
Austudy.

The 25% study load concession is granted with respect to a specific
course at a specific time. Some courses are less demanding than others
and so a student may be able to undertake a full study load in one
course but not in another. The customer's level of disability may also
vary with time. Therefore, previous approval or rejection of this
concession must not be considered to be permanent approval or rejection.

Note: the 25% concessional study-load does not apply to YA recipients.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Satisfying the activity test for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing study load requirements

Eligibility for Austudy

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
