
Lodgement of Youth Allowance (YA) (student) and Australian Apprentice claims 010-06020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how students and Australian Apprentices should
lodge a claim for Youth Allowance (YA), and the associated common paper
forms.

Lodgement of YA claim for students and Australian Apprentices

[] Students and Australian Apprentices wishing to apply for YA are
required to claim online unless:

-   self-service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by NNU),
    or
-   the Service Officer determines the transaction is not appropriate to
    be self-managed by the customer in that instance, or
-   the customer indicates they are unable to claim as they are in a
    remote area

In these situations, Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) should be used by a
Service Officer to record the customer's details and register a new
claim. When a customer lodges a claim for YA as a student or Australian
Apprentice a Service Officer will assess the customer's eligibility.

Online claims

[] To lodge a YA claim online, customers must be registered with a
Centrelink online account. Once registered, to start an online claim for
YA they need to:

-   sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account
-   ensure their personal details are correct and select the My profile
    link to make updates if necessary
-   select the Make a claim link on the homepage, or the Apply for a
    Payment or Concession Card > Make a claim menu option

Customers must provide all required documents and verify their identity
(if there is no Identify Confirmation (ICI) recorded) to be able to
submit their claim. Exceptions will be made for some vulnerable
customers.

Supplementary forms

Depending on the circumstances of the customer, the forms that may be
required to support a claim include:

-   Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and Current Tax
    Year (Mod JY)
-   Parent(s)/Guardian(s) Additional Details (A2115)
-   Study Details (Mod St)
-   Partner Details (Mod P)
-   Real Estate Details (Mod R)
-   Business Details (Mod F)
-   Private Trust (Mod PT)
-   Private Company (Mod PC)
-   Special Disability Trust (Mod SDT)
-   Employment Separation Certificate (SU001)
-   Seasonal, Contract and Intermittent Work form (SU496)
-   Compensation and Damages (Mod C)
-   Tax File Number Application or Enquiry form (NAT1432)
-   Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at home' Statement
    by Parent(s)/Guardian(s) (SY016)

Completing forms online

[] Customers who submit their claim via Online services may be able to
submit some forms online instead of completing a paper form. For more
information, see Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian
Apprentices online claims and Assisted Customer Claims.

Where Services Australia needs to collect parental income information,
parent(s) or guardian(s) can use the Advise Parental Income online
service instead of completing a:

-   Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details - for the BASE Tax Year and CURRENT
    Tax Year for Dependent Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY Customers (Mod
    JY),or
-   Parent(s)/Guardian(s) additional details for Youth Allowance or
    ABSTUDY customers (A2115)

See Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY) for more information.

Lodging documentation for a claim

For the agency to assess a YA claim, customers must provide all
documents listed on the Next Steps page. If a customer requires
assistance providing documents for their claim see Documents required
for Centrelink new claims.

Paper claim

A Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001) form may be used to claim YA where
an online claim transaction is not appropriate.

This includes where the customer is unable to submit a claim using their
online account and Assisted Customer Claim cannot be used.

Health Care Card

From 1 January 2019, Youth Allowance students and Australian Apprentices
are automatically issued with a Health Care Card (HCC) if they are
deemed eligible for YA. If a student needs access to an immediate Low
Income Heath Care Card (LIC), they can submit a claim prior to receiving
their HCC, see Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

When a YA student or Australian Apprentice claim is not required

YA jobseekers/apprentices returning to full-time study:

Current YA job seekers or Australian Apprentices returning to full-time
study are not required to lodge a claim for YA. See Youth Allowance (YA)
job seeker or Australian Apprentice (apprentice or trainee) returning to
full-time study.

YA jobseekers/full-time students commencing an Australian
Apprenticeship:

Current YA job seekers or full-time students who are commencing an
Australian Apprenticeship are not required to lodge a claim for YA.
Services Australia will obtain the Australian Apprenticeship details
from the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations. If there is a
gap between ceasing study and commencing the Australian Apprenticeship,
and the customer wishes to access income support for this gap, they may
be eligible to remain on YA as a job seeker if aged 21 and under, or
will need to claim JobSeeker Payment (JSP) as a job seeker if they are
aged 22 or over. See Existing customer starts an Australian
Apprenticeship.

Contents

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Lodgement of unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) statements for Youth
Allowance (YA) and Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assessing Youth Allowance (YA) (trainees) claims and forms

Related links

Assessing ABSTUDY claims

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for
Austudy

Common modules and forms

Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)

Health Care Card (HCC)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and/or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Apply for a Payment or concession card options online

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
