
Vacation travel for tertiary or secondary non-schooling courses of more than one semester for ABSTUDY 010-02100120

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances under which an ABSTUDY tertiary
or secondary non-schooling student can be eligible for Fares Allowance
(FAA) for vacation travel during the study year.

On this Page:

Eligibility

An eligible full-time tertiary or secondary non-schooling student
enrolled in a course of more than 1 semester is entitled to 1 single
return journey between the permanent home and the study location to be
reunited with their family.

The student must:

-   be eligible for Fares Allowance (FAA), and
-   be undertaking tertiary or secondary non-school studies, and
-   be living away from the permanent home for a period of greater than
    1 semester, and
-   not previously utilised FAA for dependents to travel to the study
    location

Travel to a destination other than the permanent home or usual study
location may be available in certain circumstances.

Note: some restrictions apply to eligibility for assistance to travel
interstate.

Timing of travel

This journey may be taken at any time after commencement in the course
and prior to discontinuing the course during a year of study.
Entitlement is not affected if a student later discontinues in a course
prior to the end of the study year.

Vacation travel

A tertiary or secondary non-schooling student undertaking a course of
study of more than 1 semester in duration is entitled to 1 return
journey for vacation travel in each year of the course.

A tertiary or secondary non-schooling student who is enrolled in a
course of 1 semester or less has no entitlement to FAA for a return
journey between the permanent home and the study location for vacation
travel.

A tertiary or secondary non-schooling student who qualifies for, and
utilises, FAA for dependents to travel to the study location has no
entitlement to vacation travel.

Unused vacation travel entitlements cannot be accumulated.

Australian Apprentice not entitled to FAA

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to FAA for the Australian
Apprenticeship.

The Resources page contains examples related to FAA entitlement to
vacation travel and a link to ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032).

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Non-student travellers for ABSTUDY

Fares Allowance (FAA) authorised in advance of travel for ABSTUDY

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Determining the appropriate mode of transport for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Interstate travel for ABSTUDY

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
