
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for staff responsible for coding a
claim, or a review of the away from home rate for dependent ABSTUDY
customers.

Applying for the away from home rate

ABSTUDY claimants can apply for away from home rate in the initial claim
by:

-   online claim (tertiary students and Australian Apprentices only)
-   Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) (tertiary students and Australian
    Apprentices only), or
-   completing the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019)

Customers can also apply for the away from home rate while in receipt of
ABSTUDY allowances by providing details of the home and/or study
circumstances in a statement (verbal or written).

Cessation of the away from home rate

If a customer ceases to qualify for the ABSTUDY away from home rate, see
Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate.

Coding requirements

Record details of payment of the away from home rate on the customer's
Services Australia record. Include:

-   the criteria for away from home rate approval
-   the customer's living arrangements
-   the payee
-   any board and school fee charges

Recording all of the above correctly, will result in the correct rate of
payment and correct payee. The full assessment and coding for ABSTUDY
entitlements is covered separately.

Claim lodged for the purpose of attending an interview

Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel is available if:

-   the student is intending to study in an approved tertiary course of
    at least one year's duration at the study location, and
-   has completed secondary studies in the previous year

In order to claim this type of travel, a full ABSTUDY assessment is
required for the period the student is intending to study.

Relocation Scholarships

Dependent students living away from home studying an approved
scholarship course may also be qualified to receive Relocation
Scholarship. See Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility.

Note: assess ABSTUDY Students in state care (not receiving Foster Care
Allowance) the same way as ABSTUDY dependent students who are living
away from home for the purposes of Relocation Scholarship.

Related links

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

Completing an ABSTUDY form

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092)

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Processing an ABSTUDY claim

ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement

Calculating commencement date of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Remote Area Allowance (RAA)

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

Rent Assistance (RA)

Payment rates and thresholds

Payment of Residential Costs Option (RCO) for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Creating and updating Organisation records for ABSTUDY and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) purposes

Processing end of course reviews for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and PES students

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
