-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the negotiation of Activity Agreements for Youth
Allowance (YA) secondary students with unapproved absences.

Unapproved absences

Full-time student Activity Agreements are designed to reaffirm a
student's commitment to full-time study. A YA secondary student who has
excess unapproved absences from school, has been suspended for more than
30 days, or has not commenced appropriate studies may be required to
enter into a student Activity Agreement.

Attendance checks

Customer Compliance Division teams conduct attendance checks for
secondary school students each term in the school year. If it is found
that a YA student has accrued more than 5 unapproved absences in a term,
the Compliance team may arrange for an interview to be booked at the
student's local Service Centre.

When an Activity Agreement is required

YA recipients in full-time study may be required to enter a student
Activity Agreement in the following circumstances:

-   if the customer is a secondary school student and has unapproved
    absences of more than 5 days per term for the first time
-   if the customer has withdrawn from a course before completion and
    wishes to undertake another course at the same level, (unless there
    were exceptional circumstances or the course duration is 12 months
    or less)
-   if the customer has previously indicated an intention to commence
    studies and did not do so

Generating an activity agreement

When it is deemed that a student Activity Agreement is required for
these students, Service Officers should complete and issue the SY102
(Youth Allowance secondary student - Activity Agreement).The topic on
Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) contains further
information and a link to the form.

Note: the SY102 must be opened in the Internet Explorer browser to allow
staff to prefill details before printing.

System information

Centrelink systems contain a workflow called 'Student Activity
Agreement' which is completed with basic information about a student
Activity Agreement. This screen creates a DOC that can be used to:

-   add a new student Activity Agreement record
-   update an existing student Activity Agreement record
-   delete an existing student Activity Agreement record

Note: the system does not trigger any action, have any impact on
payments or generate a printed full Activity Agreement. Staff must
manually complete and issue the SY102.Once completed and signed, the
Activity Agreement should be scanned onto the customer's record.

The Resources page contains a link to Smart Centre Processing details
for Compliance Reviews, and a scenario about negotiating an Activity
Agreement for a student who has had unapproved absences.

Related links

Undertaking full-time study requirements for Youth Allowance (YA)
students

Participation and serious failures for students, trainees and Australian
Apprentices

Determining whether a participation failure is applicable for students
and trainees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
