-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details of Orientation and Special Purpose Visit
travel for ABSTUDY.

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

Orientation or Special Purpose Visit travel is available to assist
eligible ABSTUDY students who have been

-   approved to live away from home, or
-   under certain circumstances are intending to board away from home,
    and
-   are moving to, or visiting their new boarding or term location for
    the first time

Orientation travel is also available to assist eligible students
intending to study in an approved tertiary course of at least one year's
duration.

Travel assistance in the form of FAA may be given to the student and/or
the following people for the entry, orientation or adjustment of the
student so that the boarding/away from home placement may be effective:

-   family member
-   community member with significant ties to the student
-   an education institution representative traveller

If a student or approved non-student traveller has incurred
accommodation and meal costs during their stay, these costs may also be
met.

FAA for the journey can be authorised in advance or reimbursed after the
journey has taken place.

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to FAA for the Australian
Apprenticeship.

The Resources page contains a link to the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
form (SY032).

Eligibility criteria for Orientation travel

Students who are eligible for FAA may have access to Orientation travel
if:

a secondary school or boarding facility requires prospective students to
attend interviews or other selection procedures prior to acceptance

an existing student is required to attend interviews or other selection
procedures for a different school or boarding facility, and the travel
is from the current term address location

the student is going away to board for the first time and is from:

-   a remote Aboriginal community, or
-   a town in a remote location and it is likely that the student would
    experience serious problems of adjustment

the student is intending to study in an approved tertiary course where

-   the course is at least one year's duration at the study location,
    and
-   the student has completed secondary studies in the previous year

Note: students intending to board away from home for the first time, may
not have had their secondary school or boarding enrolment confirmed.
Students who meet the conditions for approval to live away from home can
access Orientation travel in preparation for Year 7. They must advise
their study details as soon as possible, otherwise their ABSTUDY may be
rejected after 14 days of the interview taking place.

Eligibility criteria for Special Purpose Visit (SPV) travel

Students who are eligible for FAA may have access to SPV travel if one
of the following applies:

the student in a boarding placement is experiencing serious problems of
adjustment or similar circumstances and a visit (sometimes known as
pastoral care) is expected to stabilise the situation

the student will be participating in graduation or NAIDOC Week events

the student will be participating in other school events, such as (but
not limited to), a school play, award ceremony, teacher/parent interview
or sporting event

the student has completed secondary studies:

-   for which they received ABSTUDY Away from Home assistance, and
-   they require Fares Allowance to attend a graduation event

Where the above criteria is met, the student is entitled to a return
journey for a reasonable number of approved travellers, between the
approved traveller’s home community and the term address location for
each event.

Limits to Orientation and SPV travel

There are no limits on Orientation travel.

For SPV Travel, a maximum of 3 events per calendar year can be approved.
For these events, students are entitled to a reasonable number of
approved travellers to attend the event.

The following travel events do not contribute to the SPV 3 event limits:

-   Graduation
-   NAIDOC Week
-   Serious problems of adjustment or similar circumstances

For these events, students are entitled to a reasonable number of
approved travellers to attend the event.

The Resources page contains a link to the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
form (SY032).

Related links

Additional costs associated with travel for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
