
Student intending to undertake a course at Honours level 010-07010190

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures to define Honours study and assist
with determining if the customer can be granted, or continue to receive
one of the Services Australia administered payments for students based
on the Honours course.

Extension of minimum time

For the purposes of minimum time, Honours study extends the minimum time
for completing a Bachelor course by one year. Therefore, a student who
is currently receiving payment to undertake a Bachelor course will
continue to be eligible for a Services Australia administered payment
for students for their Honours year.

Standalone Honours year

A standalone Honours year is where a student is undertaking Honours
level study:

-   immediately after a prerequisite course but at a different education
    provider, or
-   after a break in study from a prerequisite course

Note: this definition of a standalone Honours year may differ from what
is described in the education provider’s handbook.

See the Resources page for a scenario regarding standalone Honours year.

Intending students

Entry into Honours is dependent on completing the Bachelor course to a
sufficiently high standard, as determined by the university or faculty
in question. Students who intend to undertake Honours will not be
certain of entry until the final results of their Bachelor degree course
are known.

Students can continue to receive payment for the vacation period if they
are intending to go on to do Honours in the following academic year.

New claim required

If the customer is not currently receiving a Services Australia
administered payment for students, they are required to lodge a new
claim.

Age requirements

Honours is considered part of the Bachelor degree, therefore the same
course, when determining age requirements for Youth Allowance. See
Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA).

The Resources page contains scenarios relating to Honours study.

Related links

Student to job seeker transfers

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Determining progress and duration of assistance for ABSTUDY

Defining levels of tertiary study

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
