
Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian Apprentices 010-06030000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students
and Australian Apprentices.

Youth Allowance

YA is an income support payment for students and Australian Apprentices
aged 16 to 24 years. YA is also available to eligible job seekers
generally aged 16 to 21 years, (including those who are incapacitated),
young people applying for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(YA) (Provisional), pending the determination of their claim and
trainees. Some full-time students and Australian Apprentices continue to
qualify for YA after they turn 25.

Services Australia administers and delivers YA on behalf of the
Department of Social Services (DSS). For YA students and Australian
Apprentices, particular attention must be paid to verifying the
customer's age, Australian residency status and that they are
undertaking an approved course at an approved education institution or
they are registered as an Australian Apprentice.

Dependent children aged 16-17 years

Dependent children aged 16-17 years who are in full time secondary study
will only qualify for YA if they:

-   were receiving YA just before starting a full-time secondary course
-   are a full-time student who meets the independence criteria for YA
-   are a full-time student who is eligible for the away from home rate
    of YA, or
-   are not benefiting from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) that is being paid
    to the young person's parents (as determined by a Services Australia
    social worker)

Note: customers claiming they are not benefiting from FTB payments made
to their parents will need to lodge a statement outlining the reasons
for this. Details of the statement are to be placed as a DOC with the
claim, and unless the FTB recipient has agreed that the child is not
benefiting from the FTB payments, a Service Officer consultation with a
social worker is required to assist with the determination.

For parent(s) of children aged 16-17 in full-time secondary study and
living at home, Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A is the primary payment.

Qualifying for YA criteria

To qualify for YA as a student or Australian Apprentice, a customer must
meet the following criteria:

-   be between the minimum and maximum ages of YA student and Australian
    Apprentice
-   satisfy the residence requirements for YA, and
-   be able to satisfy the activity test as it relates to students, or
-   be an Australian Apprentice undertaking a full-time Australian
    Apprenticeship and have a current Commonwealth Registration Number.
    They do not have to satisfy the activity test

Australian Apprentices

In order to qualify for YA as an Australian Apprentice, a person must
have a current (not suspended) Commonwealth Registration Number under
the scheme 'Australian Apprenticeships'.

Australian Apprentices must be undertaking their Australian
Apprenticeship full-time to qualify for payments as an apprentice. A
customer undertaking a part-time apprenticeship may still be eligible
for assistance as a student if they are studying an approved course and
undertaking an approved study load for the relevant payment.

The person does not need to provide proof of their status as an
Australian Apprentice. Services Australia will obtain the Australian
Apprenticeship details from the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations.

YA is not payable for any periods for which the Australian Apprentice
has been paid the Living Away From Home Allowance (LAFHA).

Youth Disability Supplement

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is paid to full-time students and
Australian Apprentices in receipt of YA if the customer is 21 years of
age and under and has been assessed by an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt) as having a partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per
week.

Note: if a dependent customer qualifies for YA their actual rate of
payment may be affected by the parental means test or the personal
income test. If the customer is independent, their actual rate of
payment may be affected by the personal income test and partner income
test (if partnered).

Contents

Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and/or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Related links

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) trainees

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices with a
disability, illness or injury

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional)

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (jobseeker)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
