-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains ABSTUDY School Term Allowance. It is paid to help
with the cost of equipping the student for school, for example,
uniforms, textbooks and materials.

Eligibility

To be eligible for School Term Allowance, the student must be in receipt
of the Schooling A Award criteria and meet one of the following:

The applicant or the applicant's partner meet one of the following:

-   in receipt of an income support payment
-   in receipt of Farm Household Allowance
-   in receipt of Self-Employment Assistance (formerly, the New
    Enterprise Incentive Scheme)
-   holders of a current Health Care Card (HCC) or a Low Income Health
    Care Card (LIC), including a HCC issued on the basis of receipt of
    maximum rate Family Tax Benefit Part A
-   in receipt of ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   taken to be receiving their Income support payment during an
    employment income nil rate period

The student meets all of the following:

-   in State care
-   under the minimum school leaving age for their State or Territory
-   does not meet the criteria for Away from Home entitlements

The student would, except for reasons of age, qualify for Independent
status as an orphan, a student whose parents cannot exercise parental
responsibilities, or on the basis that it is Unreasonable to Live at
Home

If the applicant holds a LIC, HCC or Foster Child HCC and any of the
following applies, an ABSTUDY student is not entitled to School Term
Allowance:

-   for a period after the expiry date on the card
-   where an applicant holds a HCC because they receive a social
    security Mobility Allowance (MOB) or Carer Allowance (in respect of
    a disabled child)
-   where a Foster Child HCC (FST) has been issued to an applicant in
    respect of another child in their care, that is, not the ABSTUDY
    student
-   if they are not in receipt of an income support payment, and hold
    only a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) or a Commonwealth Seniors
    Health Card (CSHC)

Attendance requirements

For each term the applicant is claiming for, the student must also meet
the following criteria:

-   for Term 1, the student is enrolled in and attending a secondary
    school (or equivalent)
-   for Terms 2, 3 or 4, the student is enrolled in and attending
    secondary school (or equivalent). The attendance requirements is for
    at least 85 per cent of each school term, prior to the term they are
    claiming for

The qualification requirements for School Term Allowance are assessed
against the relevant term entitlement period. Therefore, it is possible
a student who loses qualification for School Term Allowance prior to the
actual commencement of a school term in a State or Territory, but within
the term entitlement period, may still be eligible for payment of the
term School Term Allowance payment for that term.

ABSTUDY students who are enrolled in study that does not have formal
attendance requirements, for example:

-   Home Schooling
-   Distance Education, or
-   Undertaking secondary schooling at a vocational education and
    training institution

Are considered to have met the 85 per cent attendance requirement where
the education authority appropriate to their method of study that is, a
state or territory education authority, a distance education provider or
vocational education and training provider certify they have met the
requirements of the course for the previous term.

Note: students undertaking Home Schooling in NSW, TAS, or WA are
required to confirm a current registration in order to meet the 85%
attendance requirement for payment of ABSTUDY School Term Allowance in
the relevant term.

If parents contact Services Australia with attendance queries, refer
them to the child's educational institution. The agency has no
involvement in individual school policy regarding attendance.

Claiming

Applicants can claim via:

-   the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool or
-   complete the Claim form: ABSTUDY Schooling A (SY018)

Rate

ABSTUDY School term allowance - four instalments

Changes to a student's circumstances throughout a term may affect the
rate of School Term Allowance paid in respect of that term. The
Resources page of Processing ABSTUDY School Term Allowance payments has
examples.

Payment

School Term Allowance is paid each term to the applicant
(parent/guardian/carer). There are different school term dates for each
State.

The School Term Allowance payment for Term 1 is paid automatically for
eligible, enrolled students where a claim has been lodged. Subsequent
term payments can be paid after Centrelink receives evidence that
attendance of 85 per cent or more has been achieved by the student in
the previous school term.

School Term Allowance is not taxable and is not indexed.

The Resources page contains some School Term Allowance questions and
answers, the School Term Allowance release dates and a link to the
ABSTUDY School Term Allowance payment rates.

Related links

Processing ABSTUDY School Term Allowance payments

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Completing an ABSTUDY form

Processing an ABSTUDY claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
