
Accessing Universities 010-01030010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page contains information about the ways that a customer can access
information about universities in Australia. Some links on this page are
unavailable to external audiences.

On this Page:

Information categories

This information is categorised under the following headings

-   Educational institution information
-   Education handbooks
-   State/Territory Government education departments
-   Career information
-   Student Contribution which will be payable for a Commonwealth
    Supported Course
-   Access and Equity programs
-   Distance education and open learning
-   Approved Course status

Educational institution information

Educational institution information can be found on several Internet
sites:

-   Links to Australian university websites are accessible through the
    Services Australia intranet link to the National Course Approvals
    sub-site. This link is not available to the public.
-   Find undergraduate and postgraduate courses on Course Seeker
-   Find information about government assistance for tertiary study on
    StudyAssist
-   Bridging, prevocational and preparatory courses are available
    through many tertiary institutions. Customers should refer to
    relevant handbook or directory or inquire directly to the admissions
    office of the institution for more information

Education handbooks

All further education handbooks are accessible by contacting the
educational institution directly or by visiting their website.

State/Territory Government education departments

State/Territory Government education department websites provide links
to further education institutions in their State/Territory as well as
other useful information for students (e.g. career information)

ACT Education Directorate

Department of Education NSW

Department of Education NT

Department of Education Training QLD

Department for Education SA

Department of Education TAS

Department of Education and Training VIC

Department of Education WA

Career information

Australian Jobs has career information and includes sections on job
descriptions, personal requirements, education and training, employment
opportunities and other useful information.

Myfuture is a free online career information service that assists with
career planning, career pathways and work transitions.

Student Contribution for a Commonwealth Supported Course

For information about the Student Contribution, which will be payable
for a Commonwealth Supported Course, see StudyAssist - Information for
students about higher education in Australia.

Access and Equity programs

Various education institutions offer Access and Equity Programs for
special needs/disadvantaged students. This includes courses, programs
and services for special needs or disadvantaged students including
Aboriginal students, disabled students and women. Customers should refer
to the relevant handbook/directory or enquire directly through the
Admissions Office of the relevant education institution for more
information.

Distance education and open learning

Information about distance education and open learning can be found
through the State/Territory education departments listed above.

Approved Course status

Approved Course Status can be confirmed through Service Centres, which
have access to Approved Course listings. See Approved courses of study
for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
