
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-05000000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

On this Page:

Government Intent

PES description

Content

Related links

Government Intent

PES is provided to assist eligible customers with the ongoing costs
associated with study to improve their future employment prospects.

PES description

PES is paid in addition to the customer's regular income support
payment.

To be eligible for PES, a customer must be in receipt of a qualifying
income support payment and undertaking an approved course of study at an
approved institution. The approved course of study needs to be at least
25 per cent of a full-time study load.

There is no maximum age limit for PES. Customers must be at least 16
years of age or have reached the minimum school leaving age and be
independent.

PES is a non-taxable, non-income and asset tested payment.

Customers must remain eligible for their income support payment to
remain qualified for PES.

The rate of payment per fortnight will vary depending on the customer's
study load and the qualifying income support payment they receive.

ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for Isolated Children PES payments are also
available to students who qualify for assistance under either the
ABSTUDY or Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) schemes.

Content

Claiming ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) PES

Claiming Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) claims

Assessing Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) claims

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Rates of Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Rates of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Study requirements for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Changing study/training details for Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES), ABSTUDY PES or AIC PES customers

Qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Change of circumstances for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES),
ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) cancellations, suspensions and restorations

Related links

Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) students

Cancellation of, or changes to, qualifying payment for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or Assistance for Isolated
Children PES

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
