-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist with the completion of the
ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032) form.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA) is payable for eligible ABSTUDY customers
who have to live away from their permanent home to study or are
participating in an approved Away From Base activity.

Fares Allowance may be reimbursed on submission of an ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance claim (SY032) from:

-   a student incurring expenses for their own travel
-   a parent/guardian or third party incurring expenses for themselves
    and/or a student/s; or
-   an education institution or third party organisation incurring
    expenses for students or non-student travellers

Note: if a claimant incorrectly submits a Claim for Fares Allowance
Tertiary student only form (SY005), this form can be accepted and
processed for an ABSTUDY fare reimbursement.

The applicant may be eligible for reimbursement of travel,
accommodation, meals and transfers for all travel undertaken. Travel
must not have been organised directly with a travel carrier or travel
agent on the provision that ABSTUDY will reimburse these costs. Travel
costs must have been paid for by the applicant for FAA reimbursement to
be approved.

Amount of ABSTUDY FAA

The amount of FAA payable depends on the mode of transport to which the
customer is assessed as being entitled. Generally it is the cheapest and
most practical mode of transport available, and what is reasonable in
the circumstances. This is regardless of the mode of travel actually
used by the customer, including the route that they take to travel back
to their permanent home or their term address. Entitlement is assessed
at a concessional rate if the customer is eligible for that concession,
whether or not a concessional fare was used.

Additional costs associated with travel, such as transport terminal
transfer, excess baggage and overnight accommodation may also be
reimbursed after the travel has been undertaken. However, costs incurred
for taking an indirect route or for breaking the journey unnecessarily
are not included.

Timeframe to lodge form

The form is used to claim for reimbursement of the cost of journey/s
that a customer has already completed. Customers need to lodge an
ABSTUDY Fares Allowance claim (SY032) by the relevant closing dates.
Exceptional circumstances can be considered for the late claims.

Points to note in completing the claim

All relevant questions on the claim should be answered

The claim must be signed by the claimant

The form must be filled out in pen

A separate sheet can be attached to the claim form if reimbursement is
for:

-   More than one student or non-student traveller; or
-   If the applicant is applying for reimbursement of more than two
    journeys

Evidence of travel such as tickets, tax invoices and receipts will need
to be provided for all travellers. Note: travel quotes or purchase
orders are not considered proof of payment and travel completed. There
is also space on the form to explain why such evidence cannot be
provided

If Fares Allowance reimbursement is for multiple travellers then an
invoice detailing student name(s), dates and destination of the journey,
as well as the reason for travel (for example, start of study) and the
mode of transport used for transporting students must be submitted with
the claim.

When helping customers complete a claim form, Service Officers must not
make any notations, underline or make comments of any sort on a claim
form that is to be signed by the claimant and lodged with Services
Australia. Instead, any notations or explanations to questions on a
claim form should be made on a separate sheet of paper and attached to
the customer’s claim form.

Australian Apprentice or Trainee

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to Fares Allowance for the
Australian Apprenticeship.

The Resources page contains a link to Online forms.

Related links

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Non-student travellers for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
