
Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study 010-07010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the various Services Australia administered
payments for students that may not be paid for an indefinite period.

Duration of payment and the normal length of the course

The duration of payment is directly related to the length of the course
that is currently being undertaken. Therefore, it is important to
determine the normal length of a particular course. The normal length of
a course is also known as minimum time (that is, the minimum time in
which the course would be expected to be completed).

The student may be allowed some additional time to complete a course,
and this is known as allowable or reasonable time. Normal or minimum
time to complete a course must be ascertained first in order to
determine allowable/reasonable time for the course.

Educational Institution requirements and timeframes

The normal (minimum) duration of the course is often identified by the
educational institution's handbook, website or other written
documentation (for example, 'a two year diploma in Marketing', 'the
University offers this course over four years', etc.).

Some educational institutions (particularly Technical and Further
Education (TAFE institutions and private providers) do not identify the
minimum duration of a course but will articulate the minimum
requirements for completion (for example, Certificate IV in Accounting
requires the completion of 620 hours' worth of study at NSW TAFE). This
completion requirement can be extrapolated to work out the minimum
duration by dividing the total completion hours by the normal amount of
full time study. The normal amount of full time study for TAFE courses
is articulated in extra of Assessing study load requirements. For face
to face students, the resulting number of weeks is then divided by the
number of study periods for the course to give the total number of study
periods required for completion of the course in minimum time. For
distance education students the number of weeks would be calculated. The
calculation results should be rounded up to the nearest whole study
period for face-to-face students and the nearest week for distance
education students.

Minimum timeframes

Minimum time is the length of time a student undertaking the standard
full-time study load for a course would normally take to complete that
course.

Note: minimum time is not the shortest period in which a student can
finish a course; it is the standard period to complete it. A student may
choose to undertake a greater than normal study load and so complete the
course earlier but the majority of students follow the standard study
load.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact a customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the Approved Courses and
Educational Institution page.

Related links

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

Disregarding previous study for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) tertiary
students

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Review of decision

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
