
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines activity test requirements for YA trainees.

YA trainee

A YA trainee is defined as a person who is taking part in a course of
study that is not an approved course for ABSTUDY, Austudy, Pensioner
Education Scheme (PES) or YA (student).

YA part-time trainees are considered job seekers. They may have their
study approved as an approved activity under the activity test.

Full-time apprentice

A customer who is a full-time Australian Apprentice (apprentice or
trainee) may be entitled to YA, ABSTUDY or Austudy. These customers are
not required to meet the activity test. However, their Commonwealth
registration number must remain current.

A trainee or apprentice is not eligible for JobSeeker Payment (JSP), YA
or Austudy when all of the following apply. They:

-   do not meet the definition of a fulltime Australian Apprentice
-   are employed on a full-time basis under an industrial instrument and
-   have a training agreement (such as traineeship) with a training
    authority of a State or Territory

This is because they cannot satisfy the activity test.

Part-time YA trainees

Part-time YA trainees may satisfy the activity test by combining job
search with other activities. These may include but are not limited to
short courses, English learning programs or a combination of approved
activities.

Some trainees will only be required to look for part-time or temporary
work while undertaking training.

Full-time YA trainees

If a trainee is participating in full-time approved activities, they are
deemed to satisfy the activity test for the duration of the activity.

Education and training courses

Education and training courses are those courses that are offered by any
training provider, whether public or private, which are beneficial to a
customer's prospects of seeking, obtaining and retaining employment.

Approval level

Services Australia delegates at APS Level 3 and above level can approve
these courses as 'approved activities' for individual job seekers.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Contents

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Applying the activity test/participation requirements during a Liquid
Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Approved courses for Centrelink Administered Payments for Students

Mutual obligation requirements during an Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
