
Allowable non-award study for Youth Allowance (YA) 010-06070030

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia will pay financial
assistance for study only to those customers who are enrolled in and
undertaking an approved course of study.

Approval of a course

A general requirement for the approval of a course is that it leads to
some sort of award (e.g. Certificate, Diploma, Bachelor, etc.). A person
who is undertaking non-award study would, therefore, not normally be
eligible for one of the student payments delivered by Services
Australia.

For a course to be approved, both the course content and the institution
providing the course, must meet certain requirements. These requirements
are determined by the relevant State or Territory authorities.

YA to be paid under certain conditions

One of the exceptions to the non-award study rule is to allow YA to be
paid under certain conditions.

This may occur when a higher education institution has allowed a student
to be enrolled on a non-award basis in subjects that are normally part
of an approved course.

This situation may arise:

-   due to a technicality within the institution that means the
    student’s formal enrolment is deferred,

or

-   where the student is guaranteed a later course enrolment (with the
    current study credited towards their degree) upon successful
    completion of the study

In either case the studies may be counted as part of the YA study load
and can count towards satisfying the activity test. The student would
need to provide evidence of the situation. This would be in the form of
a statement from the educational institution.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Centrelink administered payments for
students

Assessing study load requirements

Satisfying the activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) full time students

Allowable non-award study for Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
