
ABSTUDY unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) 010-02040050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines how to determine if a student or Australian
Apprentice can be considered independent for ABSTUDY because it is
unreasonable for them to live at home. For students claiming TAP,
eligibility under UTLAH provisions exempts them from providing parental
income.

Child safe framework

Child safety is everyone's business. Services Australia sets out
specific steps that must be taken. This is in line with a zero tolerance
approach to harm of children.

If a staff member in the course of their duties observes behaviour which
raises concerns about a child's safety:

-   An immediate social work referral must be made where a child or
    young person is at risk of harm due to abuse, neglect or exposure to
    family and domestic violence. Wherever possible this should be a
    warm Social Work Referral
-   If a warm referral is not possible and the young person discloses
    they are in immediate danger or at serious risk of harm, a referral
    to police or the child welfare agency in their state/territory
    should be discussed with them

A delegated officer can make a Release of Information in the Public
Interest request to the police or child welfare agency. This can occur
without the child or young person's consent where there is a belief
providing the information will lessen the threat to their health, life
or welfare. See Risk identification and management of threats to the
safety or welfare of a child.

Independence criteria

Students and Australian Apprentices applying for ABSTUDY may be
considered independent if it is unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH).
For further information on determining eligibility for independence on
the grounds of UTLAH, see the Process page.

This category of independence is reviewable. The student or Australian
Apprentice may no longer be considered independent if their
circumstances change. Students and Australian Apprentices must notify
any changes to their circumstances within 14 days of the change.

Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) customers

A UTLAH assessment is required for TAP claimants of any age, in
circumstances where they cannot live at home due to extreme
circumstances, including:

-   extreme family breakdown or other similar exceptional circumstances
-   where it would be unreasonable to expect the person to do so as
    there would be a serious risk to their physical or mental well-being
    due to violence. This includes family violence, child abuse, sexual
    abuse, neglect or other similar unreasonable circumstances, or
-   where their parents are unable to provide the young person with a
    home because they lack stable accommodation.

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Income Management

Students and Australian Apprentices living in a location offering the
VWPR measure of Income Management are automatically triggered if they
are 16 years of age or over and receiving the unreasonable to live at
home independent rate of:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP), or
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance

They remain on Income Management while in receipt of the automatic
trigger. Once becoming independent due to age, qualification ceases for
the VWPR measure.

For more information, see Eligibility for Income Management under the
VWPR measure.

The Resources page contains links to forms and Office Locator. The
References page contains links to the ABSTUDY Policy Manual and TAP
Program Guidelines for VET and NUHEP students.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Reviews of independence for ABSTUDY

Rates and Thresholds

Unsupported under 16 year olds to be immediately referred to a Services
Australia social worker

Social work services

Indigenous homelessness

Review of ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
decisions

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Assessing and finalising claims for the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) measure

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
