
ABSTUDY Graduation travel 010-02100170

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances under which an ABSTUDY student
may be eligible for Fares Allowance (FAA) to allow them to return to the
study location to attend the graduation ceremony for their completed
course.

On this Page:

Eligibility for ABSTUDY graduation travel

Graduation ceremonies for completed tertiary courses often take place
several weeks to several months after course completion. Students who
live a substantial distance from the educational institution will
usually have returned home in this time.

To be eligible for FAA to attend a graduation ceremony the student must
have:

completed:

-   a tertiary course of 2 years full-time duration (or the equivalent
    part-time study)
-   a postgraduate degree, or
-   an honours degree, and

received ABSTUDY assistance to complete their course, and were approved
for:

-   FAA to undertake the course away from their permanent home (that is,
    eligible for Commencement and End of study travel)
-   FAA for Away From Base residential schools (funded by ABSTUDY) as
    part of undertaking the course by a combination of distance
    education and face-to-face teaching, or
-   travel assistance to undertake their course through a combination of
    distance education and face-to-face mixed-mode study (such as Away
    From Base residential schools funded by the Indigenous Education
    Training Programme (IEP))

Ineligibility for graduation travel

Graduation travel is not available to students who received FAA only for
field trips and placements (that is they did not receive FAA to travel
from home to the institution). It is also not available for a student
who was isolated from their study location, but was not approved for FAA
as there was no requirement to attend the institution to undertake the
course.

Graduation travel is not available for a course of less than 2 years
full time duration (other than a postgraduate course) for which a
student took 2 years or longer to complete due to issues such as
failures, undertaking additional subjects or due to reduced workloads.

Entitlement

The FAA entitlement is for the actual cost of one return trip (within
Australia) by the appropriate mode of transport between the student’s
permanent home and the location of the graduation ceremony. FAA is paid
at no more than the equivalent rate to which the student was entitled to
during the course of study.

There is no entitlement to meals or accommodation allowances except
where the appropriate mode of transport means the journey must be
broken.

The education institution that delivered the course must confirm that
the student is graduating from their completed course of study.

Students may have a choice of which graduation ceremony to attend. There
is no ABSTUDY requirement for the student to choose a particular date
(for example first available).

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to Fares Allowance for the
Australian Apprenticeship.

Claiming graduation travel

Graduation travel claims must be submitted within 3 months of travelling
by completing an FAA claim form. FAA may also be authorised in advance
of travel if the student prefers.

The Resources page contains scenarios relating to eligibility for FAA
for graduation travel.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Travel at commencement and end of study period for ABSTUDY

Fares Allowance (FAA) authorised in advance of travel for ABSTUDY

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

Determining the appropriate mode of transport for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
