
Compassionate travel for ABSTUDY 010-02100140

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA) is available
to students to return from their term address to their permanent home
for compassionate reasons.

Eligibility for compassionate travel

The student must:

-   be full-time (including those with concessional study load), and
-   have approval for FAA, and
-   meet 1 of the circumstances justifying travel for compassionate
    reasons, or
-   be an excluded ABSTUDY student who meets certain criteria (see
    below)

Students whose ABSTUDY is suspended do not have access to FAA.

Travel for dependants

Where a student has received FAA for a dependent (or dependents) to
travel with them to the study location, the dependent is also eligible
for compassionate travel where it is necessary for them to return home
with the student.

Excluded ABSTUDY students

Compassionate travel for an excluded student to return to their
permanent home can be granted if the school confirms all of the
following:

-   The ABSTUDY student is considered to be at harm to themselves or
    others as defined in the respective state/territory requirements
-   The school has followed necessary steps outlined in the
    state/territory legislative requirements, including contacting
    parent(s)/guardian(s) and the respective authorities, like the
    Police, Department of Child Safety/Children Services
-   The school has discussed alternative local solutions with the
    parent(s)/guardian(s), like relocating the student to family in the
    local area who can accommodate and enrol the student at another
    school
-   No other source of funding is available, including
    parent(s)/guardian(s) or school, and
-   The school confirms these steps have been taken

Education institutions applying for travel for an excluded student must
complete the ABSTUDY expulsion checklist. See Resources for the
checklist.

Secondary school boarding students who discontinue study during a school
term, cease to be eligible for the away from home rate from the date
they discontinue study. Where compassionate travel is approved for an
excluded secondary school boarding student, the ABSTUDY rate must be
reassessed.

Note: excluded students who are required to travel home under
supervision, may have a supervisor travel with them. This can be a
parent/guardian or representative from the educational institution.
People taking this type of travel will be approved as supervisor
travellers under non-student travellers.

Approval details

For each approved compassionate travel claim, the student or other
approved traveller is allowed a return trip between their permanent home
and the student's term address.

Travel to a destination other than the permanent home or usual study
location may be available in some circumstances. See Determining the
appropriate travel destination for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA).

There is a maximum of 2 return trips allowed per student per year. A
family or community member may use 1 of these trips to visit the student
at the term address.

Note: there are no limits for trips for excluded students. Trips for
excluded students are not included in the limit of 2 return trips for
compassionate travel.

Assistance for non-students

FAA may also be available to allow someone other than the student to
travel to accompany a sick student or to visit them. A family member or
community member with significant ties to the student may use 1 of the
student's maximum 2 trips for the year to make a compassionate journey
on behalf of a sick or injured student.

Evidence

Documentary evidence may be needed to support the request for
compassionate travel. This evidence may be statements from schools,
doctors, hospitals or community authorities confirming the circumstances
requiring the student's return home. An FAA request for compassionate
travel, based on a need to attend a cultural activity (except funerals),
will require a statement from the Chairperson, or person responsible for
cultural matters in the student's home community, confirming the student
must attend a cultural activity.

If the Service Officer is satisfied the reason for the compassionate
travel request is genuine and getting documentary evidence before
assessment would delay the student's travel, FAA may be approved and
documentary evidence provided after the journey. If the evidence has
been requested by Services Australia, but not provided, an overpayment
for the cost of FAA may be raised.

Possible restrictions

Students attending Away From Base activities are not eligible for FAA
for compassionate reasons. If they are entitled to a trip home at the
end of the activity, they may access FAA for this trip before the
activity end date.

Australian Apprentices are not entitled to FAA for Australian
Apprenticeships.

The Resources page contains the ABSTUDY expulsion checklist, links to
the Indigenous Funeral Notices homepage and examples of FAA for
compassionate reasons.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
