
Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian Apprentices 010-01010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in identifying the most
appropriate payments and services for customers undertaking study or
training.

Student and Australian Apprentice entitlements

A student or Australian Apprentice may be entitled to certain payments
depending on their circumstances.

Factors that are considered include whether the student or Australian
Apprentice:

-   is already in receipt of an income support payment
-   has dependent children
-   earns an income
-   is enrolled in an approved course of study at an approved
    institution
-   is studying part time or full time or is eligible for a study
    concession load
-   is a part time or full time Australian Apprentice

Note: an Australian Apprentice is a person who has a current
Commonwealth Registration Number under the scheme known as Australian
Apprenticeships. Part time Australian Apprentices may still be eligible
for income support or ABSTUDY as a full time student, if they are also
studying full time in an approved course. ABSTUDY students may also be
eligible for a Part time Award if they are studying part time.

The requirements and benefits of each payment must be explained so the
customer can make an informed choice as to which payment would be more
advantageous to them.

Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

The TAP assists eligible students with the cost of relocating to
undertake tertiary study immediately following the completion of year 12
(or equivalent). Students must be relocating from their family home,
which is in:

-   an outer regional area
-   a remote area, or
-   a very remote areas

The TAP is a payment of $5000 paid in two instalments in the first year
of study.

Students can lodge TAP claims:

-   from 1 January to 31 December in the calendar year they commence
    their tertiary course, and
-   only after they have completed their year 12 or equivalent study

Where a special circumstance exists, students may be able to lodge after
this date.

Students studying through a university must check their eligibility and
apply through their education provider. Only students studying through a
Vocational Education and Training provider (VET) or a non-university
higher education provider are eligible to apply through Services
Australia. This includes students enrolled in the following Vocational
Education and Training (VET) course through a university:

-   Certificate IV
-   VET Diploma (this does not include Higher Education Diploma's that
    attract FEE HELP)
-   Advance Diploma

See Tertiary Access Payment (TAP).

Assistance for Isolated Children

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) is usually paid to a parent on
behalf of the customer. It can assist families with students in the
following circumstances:

-   Study via distance education or home schooling, attend a Northern
    Territory Homeland Learning Centre or undertake other approved study
-   Board away from home at a boarding institution (that is, boarding
    school or hostel) or in private board arrangement
-   Live in a second home maintained by the family to access local
    schooling, and the family is isolated from the nearest available
    government school
-   Because the student has special needs

AIC does not provide assistance for students who live at home and travel
to school each day.

AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) can be paid for students who
are in the circumstances above and are receiving certain social security
pensions. With the exception of AIC PES, AIC cannot be paid for a
student who receives another Australian Government income support or
similar payment. For example, Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY, or a
Veterans' Children Education Scheme payment (VCES). Receipt of some
Australian Government payments on behalf of a student doesn't affect
eligibility, for example Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Carer Allowance.

Some state and territory governments provide assistance for isolated
students. This also does not affect AIC eligibility.

AIC is generally paid for primary and secondary students, and can be
paid for tertiary students who are below the minimum school leaving age
for their state or territory and participating in training such as a
TAFE or vocational education and training course instead of school.

Factors to consider when applying for AIC include:

An applicant can receive AIC and FTB at the same time for the same
student

If the student is aged 16 years or over, AIC may be more beneficial when
received in conjunction with FTB than receiving:

-   YA/ABSTUDY at the away from home rate plus Rent Assistance if the
    Parental Means Test is applied, or
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP), Parenting Payment Single (PPS) or
    Carer Payment (CP) plus PES

AIC can be paid until the student turns 19 years of age (or 21 in
special circumstances), whereas DSP, PPS or CAR plus PES can be paid for
older students

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for students

FTB is the primary payment for full time secondary students 16-19 years
of age.

However, in some circumstances it may be more beneficial for some
secondary students to claim YA or ABSTUDY.

This may include circumstances where the student is living away from
home to undertake full time studies.

Students 16 years of age or over who have completed their final year of
secondary study or have left school without completing Year 12 (or
equivalent) qualification will no longer meet the definition of an FTB
child.

Most students can compare their potential YA/ABSTUDY or FTB rate using
the [] online estimators.

Adult Migrant Education Program (AMEP) and student payments

The intention of AMEP is to assist migrant customers to improve their
English language skills and a customer should in the majority of cases,
be referred to AMEP. However, in limited situations where a customer is
doing AMEP, they may be eligible for a student payment (AMEP as an
approved course). AMEP is not considered an equivalent qualification for
FTB student eligibility.

Jobactive assistance

Generally, students are not eligible for job seeker registration and
access to jobactive assistance, but they can access the job search
facilities in their local Services Australia office. This includes
students on a semester break but excludes students between secondary and
tertiary studies. For more information, see Eligibility to access
employment assistance services through jobactive.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is available to recipients of
Disability Support Pension under 22 years of age and YA and ABSTUDY
recipients under 22 years of age who have been assessed as having a
partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week through an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA).

Mobility Allowance

Mobility Allowance is available to persons 16 years of age and older who
are in the labour market and cannot use public transport without
substantial assistance because of their disability. Those in the labour
market include workers, voluntary workers, students or job seekers.

The Resources page contains a link to the Payment and Service Finder on
the Services Australia website.

Contents

Issuing appropriate modules and additional forms for students and
Australian Apprentices

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices with a
disability, illness or injury

Transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) (student) from another
payment

Related links

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Payment rates and thresholds

Online estimator options

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Payment and Service Finder

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
