
Youth Allowance (YA) student reaches the allowable time in their current course 010-06090040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about when Youth Allowance (YA)
students who have reached their allowable time in a course still require
assistance to complete this course.

Students requiring assistance when their allowable time is reached

When a Youth Allowance (student) reaches their allowable time in their
current course, their payment will be cancelled.

If these customers wish to test their eligibility for a job seeker
payment, they must:

-   be referred to an Employment Services Provider (for example,
    jobactive), and
-   meet their mutual obligation requirements

If they are continuing to study, their study must be:

-   approved by their provider, and
-   recorded in a Job Plan

These customers may benefit from discussions with their Employment
Services Provider before making changes to their study.

Job Seekers aged under 22

Job seekers under 22 years of age are normally referred to an employment
services provider.

Students under 22 years of age who have reached the allowable time for
their course may test their eligibility for YA as a jobseeker. They:

-   must meet mutual obligation requirements by undertaking job search,
    and
-   may have full-time or part-time study included as an approved
    activity in their Job Plan, in limited circumstances

Job seekers under 22 years of age who have not completed Year 12 (or
equivalent) or Certificate III or higher are identified as Early School
Leavers. They must be referred to an Employment Services Provider.
Completion of Year 12 (or equivalent), or Certificate III or higher must
be verified by Services Australia.

Job seekers aged 22 and over

Job seekers aged 22 and over cease to be eligible for YA. They may test
their eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP). They:

-   must meet mutual obligation requirements, and
-   may have full-time or part-time study included as an approved
    activity in their Job Plan by their Employment Services Provider

Activities in a Job Plan

The Job Plan negotiated with their provider must include the:

-   approved activities that the job seeker has agreed to, and
-   time period that the job seeker will require to finish the course,
    if the approved activity is study

Related links

Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Negotiating Job Plans

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Student to jobseeker transfers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
