
Processing ABSTUDY claims in Process Direct 010-02020150

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and record ABSTUDY claims in
Process Direct. This includes online claims and Assisted Customer Claims
for Australian Apprentices, and for tertiary students claiming ABSTUDY.

Submitting claims and documentation

Customers can make a claim for ABSTUDY by [] submitting an online claim,
over the phone with a Service Officer using Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC), or by lodging the relevant paper claim form.

An early claim can be lodged for ABSTUDY. An intent to claim can be made
by vulnerable customers. From 1 July 2018, eligible customers may
receive payments from the date they submit a complete claim unless they
are a vulnerable customer. Customers may be entitled to an extension to
lodge their claim due to a medical condition or special circumstances.

ABSTUDY claims must be lodged by the relevant closing date.

An [] ABSTUDY online claim or ACC cannot be submitted until all required
documents are provided. Note: exceptions will be made for vulnerable
customers. Required tasks are listed at Next Steps in the claim. The
status of tasks can be checked and updated in Process Direct before
processing the claim.

If a customer provides documentation separately to support their claim,
scan the documents and run the Request and Manage Customer Task guided
procedure in Customer First. Scanning is not required for Identity
Confirmation documents.

When a paper claim form is lodged, it is scanned to the customer's
record and processed in Customer First.

Claim assessment process

Process Direct is used to review the ABSTUDY claim information and to
process the claim once all required information is available.

Process Direct:

-   is used to check and record claim progress
-   contains information provided by the customer online or recorded
    using ACC
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   data loads online claim and ACC information into an ABSTUDY claim
    activity
-   contains functions required to process claims such as the ability to
    view scans, make referrals and request information from the customer
-   includes staff tasks that must be completed before the claim can be
    finalised

The Resources page contains standard text for the Family Tax Benefit
Q888 letter.

Related links

ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Identity Confirmation

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Living Allowance for ABSTUDY

Claiming ABSTUDY

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
