
Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth Allowance (YA) 010-06020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processing of student and Australian
Apprentice claims for YA. YA can be paid to customers 16 to 24 years of
age if they are currently undertaking or intending to undertake an
approved course of education or study, or undertaking a full time
Australian Apprenticeship.

Claiming YA

Claims for YA can be lodged using:

-   [] Customer online accounts
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   a Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001) form

Note: customers should only be provided with paper claims if the online
claim transaction is not appropriate and Assisted Customer Claim cannot
be used.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed using criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process YA student claims automatically if they meet
these criteria:

-   Identity is confirmed
-   Residency requirements met
-   Tax file number recorded
-   Employment status requirements met
-   No change in known relationship details
-   No change in known children details
-   Parental Income requirements met
-   Independence requirements met
-   The customer does not identify as having a disability, a medical
    condition which impacts their ability to study or is in a
    bereavement period
-   Study details are able to be confirmed
-   Accommodation requirements are met

If a claim meets the criteria for an automated assessment, DOCs or
Display Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created
these.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Rejecting YA claims

An applicant who has lodged a claim for YA may not be eligible for
payment because they do not meet the basic qualification, payability or
customer obligation provisions for payment. Sometimes, applicants may
lodge an inappropriate or incorrect claim.

In all these circumstances, claims must be rejected. Different
procedures apply if the customer withdraws their claim.

Note: this procedure does not apply to claims where an unreasonable to
live at home (UTLAH) assessment is in place. See below.

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) claims

UTLAH assessments may be:

-   conducted by a Services Australia social worker
-   completed by the Over 18 UTLAH (O18) team, or
-   automatically re-applied by the system

If a UTLAH assessment is in progress, do not reject the claim FSD
(failed to supply documents). If it is not already held, place the claim
on hold pending the outcome of the UTLAH assessment.

Young person previously a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child

When an FTB child submits a YA claim, FTB auto-cancels for the young
person. This occurs from either 1 January (if the customer has nominated
that as a start date), or the earliest deemed date of qualification for
YA.

If YA is later granted with an earlier start date, an overpayment of FTB
is calculated. If claiming online, a customer can elect 1 January as the
start date for their YA payment if they submit their claim between
October and December, and finish Year 12 in November or December of that
calendar year. FTB may continue up to 31 December.

Young person attracting child support

If a family is receiving child support for a child who is granted YA as
an independent, consider if child support is still payable. Notify Child
Support if this is the case, because it may be a terminating event for
maintenance purposes.

Transfers, reclaims or YA customer changes activities

[] Customers transferring from another benefit or reclaiming within 52
weeks of last receiving YA should re-claim online.

Current YA customers changing their activity from job search to study do
not need to re-claim. See Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian
Apprentice returning to full-time study. These customers must give full
details of their study or show they are undertaking a full-time
Australian Apprenticeship. Do not issue a Study Details MOD (ST) unless
study details are not given verbally.

If a YA customer indicates that they are undertaking a full-time
Australian Apprenticeship, Services Australia will obtain the Australian
Apprenticeship details from the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment.

If there is a gap between ceasing study and starting the Australian
Apprenticeship, and the customer wants to receive a payment for this
gap, they may be:

-   eligible to remain on YA as a job seeker (if under 22 years of age),
    or
-   claim JobSeeker Payment (JSP) if aged 22 and over

Reassessments required due to review of decision

If a customer receives a favourable decision after requesting a review,
a new claim is not needed. The previous claim must be reassessed.

Social Online Application (SOA) Shell

When a Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001) paper claim is scanned onto a
customer's record, the system creates a SOA Shell for allocation and
processing in Process Direct.

A claim can be created using the SOA Shell application within Process
Direct, if:

-   a customer is subject to a re-grant or reassessment, and
-   an online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is not available to
    re-index

For example, to implement an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) decision
where no new claim has been lodged

Note: do not use a SOA Shell in place of re-indexing a determined YA
online claim or Assisted Customer Claim.

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

If a customer is transferring to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
(student) from another payment, eligibility for EdEP must be checked as
part of the YA (student) new claim assessment process.

Health Care Card (HCC) claims

From 1 January 2019, YA students and Australian Apprentices are
automatically issued a HCC after their claim is granted.

If the student or apprentice is transferring from a payment that
includes a Pension Concession Card (PCC), the PCC entitlement stops on
the payment transfer date. Customers transferring from YA (job seeker)
keep their current HCC and will receive a new card when it expires.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
online accounts, the SY001 form, information about payments and a link
to the Process Direct sub-site.

Related links

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

General course requirements for Centrelink administered payments for
students

Identity Confirmation

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices with a
disability, illness or injury

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Rates of Youth Allowance (YA)

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

Start Day and Waiting Periods (CLK)

Straight through processing

Terminating events (Stage 2) (CS)

Withdrawal of claims

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
