
Study exemptions for ABSTUDY and Activity Test exemptions for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) 010-02080120

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the various study exemptions for ABSTUDY and
Activity Test exemptions for Austudy and YA.

On this Page:

ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY students must undertake the course in which they are enrolled.
However, concessions are available to the study requirement for ABSTUDY
where a student is incapacitated or cannot undertake the study because
of circumstances beyond their control.

YA

YA students must satisfy the Activity Test. However, they may be
exempted from the requirement to undertake full-time study or training
if they have an allowable exemption. Customers who are 22 and over
should test their eligibility for another income support payment. If
they are applying for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Parenting Payment (PP),
they may gain an exemption to their Activity Test and participation
requirements.

Austudy

Austudy students must be enrolled in and undertaking a full-time study
load in order to satisfy the Activity Test. They have no exemptions from
the Activity Test. They are able to undertake other activities (e.g.
attending Defence Force Reserve Services training camps) during the
vacation periods, but not at other times and still be eligible for the
payment.

Student participation failures

Where a student is receiving Austudy or YA and they fail to satisfy the
Activity Test, they may incur a student participation failure.

ABSTUDY student not undertaking approved study

ABSTUDY tertiary and secondary non-schooling students may incur an
overpayment of benefits if they are not undertaking the approved study.
ABSTUDY secondary students may incur an ABSTUDY breach penalty where
they have had more than 5 unapproved absences in a term.

Related links

Payment of ABSTUDY when a student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Participation and serious failures for students and Australian
Apprentices

Determining Activity Test breaches for unapproved absences for ABSTUDY
secondary school students

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
