
Transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) (student) from another payment 010-01020060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a current income support customer can apply
to transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) as a student. It covers
how to determine the most beneficial payment for the customer.

Claiming a student payment

Customers wishing to have their eligibility for YA or Austudy assessed
as a student must submit a new claim, unless they are already receiving:

-   YA as either a job seeker or an Australian Apprentice wishing to
    transfer to YA as a student. For more information, see Youth
    Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning to
    full-time study, or
-   Austudy as an Australian Apprentice and are ceasing their Australian
    Apprenticeship and returning to full-time study. For more
    information, see Customer no longer an Australian Apprentice

Claims for YA or Austudy can be submitted using:

-   [] Customer online accounts
-   Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001)
-   Claim for Austudy (SY002)

Claimants receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment Partnered
(PPP), Parenting Payment Single (PPS) or Widow Allowance (WA) with a
status of current (CUR) or Current Zero Rate (CZR) wishing to transfer
to a student payment, are presented with a reduced question set as part
of their online claim. The online claim for YA or Austudy only requests
information from the customer that is not known to the agency. The
following question modules are presented to the customer:

1. Study Details

2. Circumstances

3. Payment Instructions

4. Scholarships

Students are asked to update their details via the My Profile page
before completing the above question sets. On completion of the question
modules, the Claims Summary page only displays the questions answered on
the modules listed above. This also applies for staff helping students
complete an ACC.

Note: [] full-time students and Australian Apprentices claiming YA and
Austudy are required to use online accounts, unless the transaction is
not appropriate. The relevant claim form should only be issued to a
customer when all other avenues of claiming have been exhausted.

Identifying the most beneficial payment

Services Australia is obligated to ensure that customers are advised of
their options, where they may be eligible for more than 1 payment type.
For example, a customer may be better off financially by remaining on
Parenting Payment Single (PPS) and receiving Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) rather than receiving Austudy. Once a claim is
received, Service Officers assessing claim transfers must ensure they
are making decisions that provide the most benefit to the customer. See
Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices.

Early submission of claims

Customers can submit early claims for YA or Austudy up to 13 weeks
before the commencement date of the course, if they have not been
studying and will be commencing a new course. In some circumstances, a
claim that is submitted early may only be processed from date the
student commences study, so it does not affect the delivery of the
payment the customer is currently receiving.

If the customer is considered a continuing student and wishes to submit
a claim, any potential entitlement to YA or Austudy will be considered
from the date the claim is submitted. See Calculating the start day for
Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices
claims.

Working Credits

If a customer has unused Working Credits or a Student Income Bank in the
last 12 months, they may be eligible to transfer or restore their
previous Working Credits/Income Bank balance to their new Student Income
Bank opening balance.

The Resources page contains a link to the Approved Courses and
Educational Institutions sub-site.

Related links

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Calculating the start day for a transferee

Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
