-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess if a student needs to provide POE
and acceptable documentation.

When POE is needed

For ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES):

Customers must provide proof of enrolment where they are enrolled in a:

-   tertiary course at a Technical and Further Education (TAFE) or a
    private education provider
-   secondary course at an education provider other than a secondary
    school. This includes, university, TAFE or a private provider

For all other student payments:

Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) (student) customers are not normally
required to provide POE unless specifically requested. This may include
a request, as a result of a Student Payment review, or where the study
details provided by the student are not clear.

If a Tertiary course is normally delivered as a:

full time course, POE is not required unless the study details received
from the student or education provider are not clear

part time course, no further evidence is required unless the study
details received from the student or education provider are not clear:

-   students can undertake the course via a flexible study option
    (accelerated or otherwise), where:
    - the flexible study option is on the education provider's website
    or handbook
    - the education provider has advised that the student is undertaking
    the equivalent of a full time study load

part time course:

-   where there is no flexible study option available on the provider's
    website or handbook, POE from the education provider is required to
    confirm the student is considered to be full time
-   where the POE confirms the student is enrolled and undertaking the
    equivalent of a full time study load, the student is a full time
    student
-   where the POE provided by the education provider confirms the
    student is not full time, regardless of study load/hours etc.:
    - the course will not meet the requirements of the Student
    Assistance (Education Institutions and Courses) Determination 2019
    - the student is not eligible

Students under the Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme are not
required to supply POE.

Students enrolled in a Startup Year Course must supply POE. Payment
cannot commence until POE and evidence they have been selected for a
STARTUP-HELP loan have been supplied. See Startup Year Courses for more
information.

Note: study at Open Universities Australia (OUA) should only be coded
for one study period or session at a time unless the customer has
provided POE that confirms enrolment for a longer period. See
Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities
Australia.

Requesting POE

For ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES):

If POE is required, the customer will be asked to provide it within 14
days of the course start date.

The customer's record should be coded as requiring verification (VRR) on
the Customer Study Details (EDC) screen in Process Direct or the
Education Course Details (EDC) screen in Customer First. Payment will
automatically suspend if POE has not been received and coded within 28
days.

Customers enrolled in a Startup Year Course must provide POE and
evidence they have been selected for a STARTUP-HELP loan prior to:

-   to their payment being granted, or
-   being paid as a continuing student

See Startup Year Courses for more information.

For all other student payments:

The EDC screen does not need to be updated when POE has been requested.
This is usually because it will be requested as a part of a review, and
payment will automatically stop if the student does not comply with the
request.

POE is not the same as proof of study load

Service Officers should carefully assess documents provided by students
to ensure the specific information required by Services Australia is
included. For example, some enrolment documents may outline the study
load of the student or the units they are enrolled in, but will not
provide the name of the course or enrolment dates. Where proof of study
load has been provided, Service Officers should ensure it is recently
dated, as students are able to vary their study load throughout their
course.

Acceptable POE documents

The format of POE documents varies from one education provider to
another. If a customer makes an enquiry about the enrolment information
they have been asked to provide, Service Officers should check the
reason for the request to determine what evidence is required. For
example, verifying the course name to determine if it is an approved
course, or verifying a non-standard course start or finish date. POE
must include the student's full name to be deemed acceptable evidence.

Acceptable POE documents may include:

-   the education provider's enrolment advice to the student (placement
    offer)
-   an enrolment fee receipt
-   Mainstream Enrolments Via the Internet (MEVI) receipts - (for TAFE
    courses only, and can only be accepted if the nominal course hours
    are on the receipt)
-   a Commonwealth Assistance Notice (this document shows enrolment in
    subjects at census date, subjects may have different census dates
    and customers will receive a separate Commonwealth Assistance Notice
    for each census date)
-   a student identification card (where period of enrolment is
    specified on the card)
-   a statement from the education provider advising acceptance into the
    course
-   proof of registration for Open Learning Students
-   Productivity Places Programme letter of notification
-   electronic confirmation of a placement in Skills for Education and
    Employment (SEE)
-   placement by Workforce Australia in a short course (the Activity and
    Exemption Summary (AEX) screen must have 'SHD' - short course, and
    the course number must be included in the Job Plan)

Note: these documents are acceptable POE, but not proof of study load.

Either the original or a copy (photocopy or fax) of the above POE
documents, including printed versions of online documents, are
acceptable.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the Open Universities Australia
(OUA) website.

Related links

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities
Australia

Coding new study details

Coding ABSTUDY education details

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Requesting information (CLK)

Restoration of ABSTUDY payments

Startup Year Courses

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
