-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Service Officers to follow when a
student or Australian Apprentice initially contacts regarding a claim
for Austudy.

Initial contact

A customer, or a third party on their behalf, may contact to claim for
payment of Austudy. Service Officers should identify if Austudy is the
most beneficial payment. See Identifying the most beneficial payment for
students or Australian Apprentices.

[] Students or Australian Apprentices who contact to claim Austudy can
make an online claim for Austudy using their Centrelink online account.
Customers should be advised payments may only commence from the date
they submit a claim, unless they are identified as a vulnerable
customer. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Qualifying for Austudy

To qualify for Austudy, a customer must meet all of the following
criteria:

-   be of Austudy payment age, and
-   satisfy the residence requirements, and
-   for students, satisfy the Activity test for Austudy, or
-   for Australian Apprentices, undertake a full-time Australian
    Apprenticeship and have a current Commonwealth registration number.
    Note: an Activity Test does not apply to Australian Apprentices

For more information see Eligibility for Austudy.

How to claim

[] Students and Australian Apprentices are required to claim using an
online account. If a customer contacts in relation to making a new claim
for Austudy they must be referred to submit their claim online, unless:

-   self-service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by
    NNU/Stop Press), or
-   the Service Officer determines the transaction is not appropriate to
    be self-managed by the customer in that instance

Note: for customers in vulnerable circumstances, record an intent to
claim. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers before returning to
this process.

A paper Claim for Austudy (SY002) should only be issued where the
Service Officer determines the transaction is not appropriate, that is,
a customer is unable to submit a claim using their online account or
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) cannot be used.

Note: the Re-claim or Transfer for Austudy or Youth Allowance (SY089)
paper claim lodged with a Date of Receipt on or after 1 April 2023 are
no longer accepted.

When claiming online, a customer claiming Austudy, may be selected for a
reduced question set if they:

are currently in receipt of a payment listed below (for example their
payment status is Current (CUR) or Current Zero Rate (CZR)), or

were in receipt of one of the payments listed below and the cancellation
date was in the previous 52 weeks:

-   Age Pension
-   Carer Payment
-   Carer Allowance
-   Disability Support Pension
-   Farm Household Allowance
-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Parenting Payment Partnered
-   Parenting Payment Single
-   Special Benefit
-   Youth Allowance (YAL)

The reduced question set claim will only request information that is not
known to the department. The reduced question set also applies to the
ACC process where applicable.

See Transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) (student) from another
payment and Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian
Apprentices online claims and Assisted Customer Claims.

Customers with nominee arrangements

[] Correspondence nominees can submit an online claim for Austudy on
behalf of their principal.

If a correspondence nominee contacts to claim Austudy on behalf of their
principal, offer an online claim first. If they decline the online claim
offer, run the ACC with the nominee.

Organisation nominees are unable to submit an online claim for Austudy
on behalf of their principal. Assist them to lodge an ACC. If they
decline to be assisted via an ACC, they can lodge a SY002 – Claim for
Austudy.

Early claim

A claim for Austudy can be made up to 13 weeks before the student or
Australian Apprentice becomes qualified for payment under the early
claim provisions. Some claims submitted early may not be able to be
assessed until the customer becomes qualified for Austudy (for example,
not an intending or continuing student, and study starts in the future
or where their apprenticeship start date is in the future).

The student or Australian Apprentice will be advised of when to submit
the claim to ensure full entitlement and of other
documentation/information that will be required when lodging the claim.
This may include:

-   Identity Confirmation
-   tax file number(s) (TFN)
-   other supporting documentation

Note: customers should be advised that before submitting their claim,
all required documents must be provided. Exceptions are made to
customers identified as vulnerable. See Circumstance Change Monitor.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website
which includes online accounts and access to online claims and forms.

Contents

Completing the Study Details MOD St

Completing the Claim form for Austudy (SY002)

View or update Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy student and Australian
Apprentice online claim

Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims

Related links

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card options online

Searching for a customer on the system

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for
Austudy

Residence assessment for customers claiming Austudy

Circumstance Change Monitor

Eligibility for Austudy

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
