
Masters and Doctorate travel for ABSTUDY 010-02100190

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA) is payable for
Masters and Doctorate students.

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

FAA is payable to an ABSTUDY student who is in receipt of a Masters or
Doctorate award for assistance to travel between their permanent home
and their institution or for assistance to travel to a new permanent
home if they need to relocate to another town or city to undertake their
study.

Entitlements

If a student’s permanent home has not changed, they may be entitled to a
number of types of travel for FAA.

Where their permanent home has changed to the place of study, FAA is
payable under Relocation Allowance to Masters and Doctorate students for
the cost of the travel for themselves, their partner and dependents (if
applicable) to move to the new location to commence their study. FAA for
this journey is considered one component of their Relocation Allowance.

To be eligible for relocation travel, students must be receiving ABSTUDY
Living Allowance, either at the maximum or at a reduced rate. Full-time
or concessional workload students receiving ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) for Masters or Doctorate studies are also eligible.

Once the student and their family have relocated, there is no further
travel entitlement to return to the former home location. However, they
may be entitled to Away from Base travel assistance and graduation
travel.

The Resources page contains a link to the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
form (SY032).

Related links

ABSTUDY Eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

Relocation Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate study

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Fares Allowance (FAA) authorised in advance of travel for ABSTUDY

Completing Form n (SY032) for the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Assessing study load requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
