
Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate 010-02070150

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine the correct end date for payment
of the away from home rate of ABSTUDY for a dependent student or
Australian Apprentice.

On this Page:

Change in circumstances

A student or apprentice who has a change in circumstances may no longer
be entitled to away from home rate. A Service Officer is required to
determine whether the change in circumstances warrants the cessation of
away from home rate, and if so, the appropriate date for it to cease.

The most common changes in circumstances that affect eligibility to away
from home rate are:

-   the student is moving or has moved back to the permanent home
-   the circumstances that made the student eligible for away from home
    rate have changed
-   a student discontinues or completes a course of study
-   a secondary non schooling, tertiary student or Australian Apprentice
    is temporarily returning to the parental home and not maintaining
    their residence at the study or Australian Apprenticeship location

The correct end date for payment of away from home rate is determined by
the activity the student is involved in.

Secondary school student end dates

The last date of eligibility for away from home rate for a secondary
school student is:

-   where the student completes the full term's study, the last formal
    day of the school term in which the student commenced study
-   where the student discontinues study during a term, the date the
    student discontinued, or
-   the date from which the student ceases to be approved for away from
    home entitlements

Tertiary or secondary non schooling level end dates

The last day of eligibility to the away from home rate for a tertiary or
secondary non-schooling level student is the earlier of:

-   the date the student returns on a permanent basis to live at the
    family home
-   the date the student discontinues in a course
-   the last day of study in a completed course, or
-   the date from which the student ceases to be approved for away from
    home entitlements

Australian Apprentice end dates

The last day of eligibility to the away from home rate for an Australian
Apprentice is the earlier of:

-   the date they return on a permanent basis to live at the family home
-   the date they discontinue their apprenticeship, or their
    Commonwealth registration number is suspended or cancelled, or
-   the date from which the student ceases to be approved for away from
    home entitlements

Student temporarily returning to the permanent home

A secondary student who returns to the permanent home on a temporary
basis during their course of study (such as a study vacation period) can
continue to receive the away from home rate for the period of the return
to the family home. It is not considered to be a permanent return if the
student intends to return to his/her course after a recognised holiday
period, or a temporary visit.

A secondary non-schooling or Tertiary student who returns to the
permanent home on a temporary basis during their course of study (such
as a study vacation period) must continue to maintain their residence at
the study location for the period of their temporary return to continue
to qualify for the away from home rate.

Tertiary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some students were required to leave their on campus term
accommodation. Many students also transitioned to online study as
face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Students who were receiving the away from home rate, and temporarily
transitioned to online learning as a result of COVID-19, remain eligible
for the away from home rate. Tertiary students must return to
face-to-face study as soon as it becomes available to continue to be
eligible for the away from home rate.

Where a student had to move out of education provider accommodation
(such as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their
parents, will remain eligible for the away from home rate providing
they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

This includes students who:

-   had their accommodation arrangement cancelled by the education
    provider and have moved their belongings out of that accommodation
-   were approved for the Residential Cost Option (RCO)

Note: the away from home rate of ABSTUDY Living Allowance can be paid
for any period that the education provider does not charge a residential
fee, rather than the reduced rate of Living Allowance.

Australian Apprentice temporarily returning to the permanent home

An Australian Apprentice who returns to the permanent home for a holiday
but intends to return to their apprenticeship, must continue to maintain
their residence at the Australian Apprenticeship location to continue to
receive the away from home rate for the period of the return to the
family home.

Ceasing eligibility

If the circumstances warranting approval of away from home rate change,
such as the permanent home relocating to within reasonable travel time
of the institution or place of work, away from home rate will normally
cease from the change in circumstances. However, the exception would be
for a secondary school student where continuity of study provisions
exist.

Students who cease eligibility for the away from home rate, but continue
to study, may be eligible to access alternate ABSTUDY allowances.

Note: students returning home to study do not have to lodge a new
ABSTUDY claim but will need to provide any changes, such as new school
details for ABSTUDY assistance to continue.

Recipients of Residential Cost Option

If the student is in receipt of the Residential Cost Option (RCO) and
they are planning on accessing RCO again in the next available study
period, they are entitled to receive the away from home rate during
their temporary return home over the vacation period. Only those RCO
students who plan on accessing RCO again in the next available study
period are considered to be maintaining their term address.

Secondary school students applying for Youth Allowance (YA)

Secondary school students who complete their studies for the year and do
not intend to return to studies in the following year are entitled up
until the end of their term entitlement period, which is 31 December for
Term 4. Therefore, if the student applies for YA prior to the end of the
term entitlement period, their ABSTUDY must not be cancelled. The
ABSTUDY must continue to remain current until the end of the term
entitlement period, for example, 31 December, and then the YA can be
granted if eligible.

This is to ensure unnecessary overpayments are not created for Living
Allowance and/or Group 2 School Fee Allowance.

Secondary school boarders who discontinue study

A secondary school boarding student who discontinues study in a school
term before it is complete, ceases eligibility to away from home rate
from the date the student discontinues study.

Secondary school boarders prior to 1 January 2019

Prior to 1 January 2019, the end date for payment of away from home
allowances for a secondary school student who ceases eligibility for
away from home rate, was significantly different for students who reside
at a boarding school, in an approved ABSTUDY Homestay arrangement, or at
a hostel which is a signatory to the ABSTUDY Hostel Agreement.

Students who resided at a boarding school, ABSTUDY Homestay arrangement,
or at a signatory hostel, had their payments directed to the boarding
institution. In some circumstances, the school or hostel could retain
the boarding allowances for a period after the student had discontinued
boarding at the institution. Schools that would, as a condition of their
enrolment policy, retain full term payment for a student who
discontinued during a term, were entitled to retain the full ABSTUDY
term-in-advance payment, see the Resources page.

A hostel that is a signatory to the ABSTUDY Hostel Agreement was
entitled to retain the away from home rate entitlements until either
the:

-   sixth Friday of the school term if they became eligible for Living
    Allowance from the commencement of the term entitlement period, or
-   the sixth Friday after the student became eligible for Living
    Allowance, if they began to receive Living Allowance after the
    commencement of the term entitlement period, provided this does not
    extend beyond the end of the term entitlement period

If the student discontinues study, or leaves the hostel after 6 weeks of
taking up residence, then the hostel is entitled to payments up until
the date they discontinue studies or residing at the hostel, whichever
was earlier.

Under no circumstances could a boarding school or hostel retain boarding
allowances for a student who did not commence at all in a term,
irrespective of their fee policy.

In this circumstance, whilst the boarding institution or hostel was
entitled to retain away from home entitlements already received via a
term-in-advance payment for a period after the student discontinues, the
student is deemed to have ceased eligibility to away from home rate from
the date determined by this procedure.

The above did not apply to boarders with private boarding arrangements.
In these situations, entitlements to term-in-advance and other
entitlements such as School Fees Allowance (Group 2) are subject to the
entitlement provisions for Living Allowance.

Note: the student was not entitled to any fortnightly residual boarding
entitlement from the date they are deemed to have ceased eligibility for
the away from home rate. The student could not access alternate ABSTUDY
allowances for any period the boarding institution or hostel retained
ABSTUDY away from home allowances.

The Resources page contains information about term-in-advance payments
prior to 1 January 2019 and examples of changes to study that affect
entitlement.

Related links

Assessing continuity of study for ABSTUDY away from home rate

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Calculating the commencement date of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Payment on Advice for ABSTUDY away from home rate

ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement

Returning to the parental home when in receipt of the Away from Home
rate of ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
