-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about determining and processing
claims for the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP).

Eligibility

For a student to be eligible for the TAP, they must meet all of the
following:

-   commence tertiary study within 12 months immediately following
    completion of Year 12 or equivalent qualification study
-   undertake at least 75% of a full-time study load, or an approved 66%
    concessional study load in a TAP approved tertiary course
    (Certificate IV and above)
-   be studying a course with a duration of at least 1 academic year.
    See the Resources page for Determining if course is 1 year in
    duration for TAP table
-   be studying on campus or via blended delivery. Note: customers who
    have moved to live near and study at a Regional University Centre
    can still qualify for TAP even where their course is online only
-   be under 23 years of age on the day they commence the TAP approved
    tertiary course
-   relocate because their family home is at least 90 minutes by public
    transport from their education institution
-   their family home is in an inner regional, outer regional, remote or
    very remote area as per the Australian Statistical Geography
    Standard (ASGS). See the Resources page for a link
-   Australian residence rules as they apply to YA (students), see
    Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and
    Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)
-   parent(s)/guardian(s)' combined income is below $250,000 for the
    relevant tax year

In special circumstances, exemptions may apply to the eligibility
criteria.

Note: a student is able to apply for TAP within 12 months immediately
following the completion of year 12. See the Resources page for
different examples.

For TAP purposes, only the first successful attempt at Year 12 or
equivalent level of education is accepted. Students will not be eligible
for TAP if they do not commence tertiary studies within 12 months
immediately following completion of their first successful attempt of
Year 12. See the Resources page for examples.

A student does not need to be in receipt of another Social Security
Payment to qualify for TAP, nor does another Social Security payment
preclude them from TAP. They can qualify for both a Social Security
Payment, including the Relocation Scholarship (RS), and TAP.

Assessment and Payment dates

There are 2 payment types for students. If their family home address is
classified as:

-   outer regional, remote or very remote, students will receive a
    payment of $5000, paid in 2 instalments, or
-   inner regional, students will receive a one off payment of $3000

The amount and payment dates will depend on which of the above payment
amounts the student is eligible for.

Parental Income Test (PIT)

The TAP is subject to the Parental Income Test (PIT), and the
parent(s)'/guardian(s) combined income must be less than $250,000, for
the relevant tax year.

For the purposes of TAP, the parent(s)/guardian(s) is:

-   the natural, adoptive or relationship parent(s) of the student, if
    the student normally lives with them
-   the parent and step-parent, if the student normally lives with them
-   the person they are dependent on if the student does not normally
    live with their parent(s) and they are wholly or substantially
    dependent on someone other than a parent
-   the parent they last lived with if the student does not normally
    live with parent(s) and they are divorced or separated. If that
    parent has gained a new partner, the step parent's income is not
    taken into account
-   the adoptive parent if the student has a parent under traditional
    Torres Strait Islander adoption, the birth/natural parent is no
    longer the parent
-   the parent they last lived with if none of the above applies. If
    that parent has gained a new partner, step parent's income is not
    taken into account

Note: in shared custody situations, including parents separated under
one roof, use the parent with primary care responsibility. In 50/50
shared care situations the student may nominate which parent they want
to use.

Generally the relevant tax year is the base tax year, however the
current tax year income may be used, where an increase or decrease from
the base tax year has occurred.

The TAP will only be payable once the parental income (base or current
year) is verified, see documents accepted as evidence of parental
income.

Apply the current tax year where:

combined parental income substantially decreases in the current tax
year, and

-   the decrease is likely to last for at least two years from the later
    of 1 January of the current tax year, or the date of the decrease,
    or

the first TAP assessment date is from 1 October to 31 December and there
is an increase in the combined parental income for the current tax year
that exceeds:

-   25% of the base tax year income and 25% of Parental Income Free Area
    (PIFA)
-   Note: the Parental Income Free Area (PIFA) for TAP is the same as
    for Youth Allowance. See Rates and Thresholds for the current Youth
    Allowance Parental Income Test (PIT) free area

Exemption from providing parent(s)/guardian(s) income

Unlike other dependent payments, a PIT exemption is not applied where
the parent(s)/guardian(s) are in receipt of certain social security
benefits, pensions or DVA payments.

TAP students are only exempt from providing their parent(s)/guardian(s)
income details to claim TAP in the following circumstances:

-   has (or has had) a dependent child
-   is an orphan
-   parents are unable to exercise parental responsibilities, for
    example, parents are in prison or a nursing home
-   cannot live at home because it is unreasonable to live at home
    (UTLAH)
-   is a refugee
-   is in State Care
-   Special Adult Status in a traditional community (indigenous only)
-   currently have care of another person's child
-   16 years or older, living in an Indigenous community after
    previously living with a non-indigenous family for more than 2 years
    (indigenous only)
-   are 18 years or over and have been in lawful custody for 6 months

Note: if a student is assessed as independent under a different reason
for their income support payment, the parent(s)/guardian(s) income is
still required for TAP purposes, unless they also meet one of the above
criteria. Examples of other forms of independence for income support
that cannot be used for TAP are:

-   PSS - worked in full-time employment averaging 30 hours or more per
    week for at least 18 months during any period of 2 years
-   PSC - working full-time for average of at least 30 hours per week
    for 18 months within a 2 year period including the COVID-19
    concession period
-   aged 22 years or older and considered independent for other Income
    Support Payments

Family home and relocation requirements

To be eligible for TAP the student must have moved away from the family
home, and the family home must be located in:

-   inner regional
-   outer regional
-   a remote, or
-   a very remote area

The location of the family home is assessed using the Australian
Statistical Geography Standard (ASGS). See the Resources page for a link
to the Student Regional Area search tool to find this information.

There are 4 'Other Territories' defined in the ASGS as a 'Very Remote
area' for family home location. As long as all other eligibility
criteria have been met, students living in these locations will be
eligible for TAP. These locations include:

-   Cocos (Keeling) Islands
-   Christmas Island
-   Jervis Bay
-   Norfolk Island

Assessing the TAP family home address depends on whether the student
needs to supply their parental income, or if they are exempt from doing
so.

For students who need to supply their parent(s)/guardian(s)' income the
family home:

-   is/was the address where the student's parent(s)/guardian(s) reside
    on the day they commenced the relevant TAP approved course, and
-   remains the family home up to the first TAP assessment date

For students who are exempt from providing their parent(s)/guardian(s)
income the family home is the place where they resided 6 months before
commencing the approved tertiary course.

To meet the relocation eligibility criteria, customers must:

-   be studying face to face, or in dual delivery method, for at least
    part of the course duration or be a registered student at a Regional
    University Centre (RUC), and
-   be studying at an education provider, which is at least 90 minutes
    travel time from the TAP family home, including via public
    transport. This includes walking time and waiting times between
    different modes of transport or legs of a journey

Note: customers who have moved to live near and study at a Regional
University Centre can still qualify for TAP even where their course is
online only. The customer must still meet the 90 minute travel time
criteria. See the Resources page for a link to the Regional University
Centres website.

Students can relocate for tertiary studies anytime in the year
immediately after completing Year 12 and still meet the relocation
eligibility. If a student commences their course in Semester 1 and does
not relocate until Semester 2, they may still be eligible for TAP as
long as they meet all other TAP eligibility criteria and lodge their
claim on or after the date they relocated.

Course Approval and study requirements

To meet TAP eligibility, students must be undertaking tertiary studies
within 12 months following completion of Year 12 or equivalent
qualification.

Providing all other eligibility criteria is met, a student will be
eligible for TAP if they:

If a TAP student:

-   complete a non-TAP approved course in Semester 1 and enrol in a TAP
    approved course in Semester 2, or
-   do not study in Semester 1 and enrol in a TAP approved course in
    Semester 2, or
-   stop studying or defer their course (as long as they were enrolled
    on their first or second assessment date and provide evidence of
    their enrolment)

The tertiary course must be:

-   a nationally accredited Certificate IV level course or above
-   one academic year duration or longer (See the Resources page for
    Determining if course is 1 year in duration for TAP table), and
-   at a full-time study load of at least 75% or an approved 66%
    concessional study load

Note: a course may be approved for TAP even it is not approved for Youth
Allowance or ABSTUDY.

Check the National Course Approvals sub-site:

-   to ensure the course is approved for TAP
-   for a directory of education providers, and
-   for information about the courses they provide

If the National Course Approvals sub-site lists both the education
provider and the course as:

-   approved and the normal full-time course duration is one academic
    year or longer, the course is approved for TAP
-   not approved or the education provider and/or course is not listed,
    create a referral to a Course Assessment and Liaison Officer. See
    Referrals to Course Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs)

Special circumstances

Where a student experiences special circumstance beyond their control,
that affects their ability to submit a TAP New Claim in the calendar
year immediately following the completion of year 12 (or equivalent
qualification), they have 14 days after the closing date (31 December of
the year immediately following completion of year 12 or equivalent) to
contact Services Australia.

The student can then lodge their TAP New Claim within 13 weeks from the
day they contact Services Australia to have their claim assessed. The
student needs to meet one of the special circumstance beyond their
control criteria and may need to provide evidence.

Studying less than full-time

TAP students must be undertaking full-time study load in a nationally
accredited course. Students who are not undertaking full-time study may
still be eligible for TAP where they are:

-   undertaking an approved concessional study load of at least 66%, in
    line with the YA concessional study load rules (see Assessing
    concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA) or Assessing the
    two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY), or
-   unable to study due to a medical condition and meet the incapacity
    rules in line with YA (see Youth Allowance (YA) student or
    Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated)

In all other circumstances, the student must be undertaking study of at
least 75% of the full-time study load to be eligible for TAP.

If a student chooses to aggregate their study load, they will only meet
the study requirements for TAP if:

-   the student is able to enrol over the entire aggregation period at
    the start of the period
-   the study load over the aggregation period is 75% (or concessional
    percentage) of the normal full-time study
-   they must be enrolled full-time in the first semester (0.500 EFTSL),
    and
-   the shorter periods that make up the aggregation period are
    consecutive

For TAP purposes, only accept aggregation of study if the student is
enrolled full-time in semester 1 and part-time in semester 2. For
example, a student must be full-time (0.500 EFTSL) in semester 1 and
part-time (0.250 EFTSL) in semester 2 to meet aggregation requirements.

Change of circumstances

After lodging a claim, and before receiving the first instalment, the
student needs to confirm if there is a change in:

study information, including study load, duration, course details or
provider

parental information, including changes to parental income or
circumstances (partnered/separated)

address details, including:

-   address while studying
-   returning to the family home
-   family home location

After receiving the first instalment and before the second instalment,
the student only needs to advise if study information changes.

A student can update their study and address details online through
their Centrelink online account via myGov. Updating parental
information, requires completing a SY105 - Tertiary Access Payment
parent(s)/guardian(s) details form. Parental income already verified for
another income support payment, can be accepted for TAP. The SY105 is
not available as a stand- alone form. Print the SY105 section of the
SY104 to issue to customers. The SY104 is available within Online Forms
on the Intranet. See the Resources page for a link.

The Resources page contains examples, information on the relevant base
or current tax year and links on the intranet, Services Australia
website and internet. It also includes rejection and cancellation reason
codes for TAP and high-level hierarchy rejection reason.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
