-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to check the SY040 claim form has
been completed correctly. AIC may be paid for primary, secondary and
certain tertiary students who are unable to attend an appropriate state
school because of geographic isolation or a special health-related or
educational need.

SY040

Customers lodging AIC claims can do so at any Services Australia service
centre, by post or via their online services account. When the form is
received, staff will check the form for completeness and record its
receipt on the system if required.

An organisation claiming AIC must complete an Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Organisation details (SY067) as well as the SY040.

When claims or forms are received in a service centre, all documents
will be scanned. However, scannable document exceptions will be recorded
in a DOC. This states where and when the document was received, what
action was taken with the document and where it was sent. For more
information, see Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD.

Customers with a Centrelink record may be able to [] upload claim
documents online.

The claim form must be, signed by the applicant with all relevant
questions answered and all supporting documents provided.

Applicants living in isolated areas may have their original documents
photocopied and endorsed by an official of the local court, police
station or other government office. The photocopies must be stamped (if
an office stamp is used), signed and dated by the official viewing the
original documents.

Related links

Completing the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040)

Assessing the new Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
(SY040)

Assessing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Organisation
details (SY067)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Creating and updating Organisation records for ABSTUDY and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) purposes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
