-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines who the payee is for student payments.

Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY

YA and ABSTUDY is paid to the customer, except in certain circumstances.
The payee can include:

-   Parent(s)/guardian(s)
-   Payment Nominees, or
-   Third parties

Independent

Independent students will receive payments to their own account unless
they appoint a Payment Nominee.

See:

-   Independence for ABSTUDY customers
-   Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Dependant

Dependant customers who are under the age of 18 will have payments made
to their parent/guardian(s), except in certain circumstances.

A dependent student (16-17 year old) may receive the payment, if:

-   it is unreasonable for the student to live at home, or
-   they do not benefit from the allowance because their
    parent(s)/guardian(s) are using it for other purposes, or
-   their parent(s)/guardian(s) choose to have the payment made to the
    young person and they authorise the change. Parents can change the
    payment destination back at any time without explanation or reason

ABSTUDY payments will go to the student if they are:

-   studying at a secondary non-school, tertiary or Masters and
    Doctorate level, or
-   undertaking an Australian Apprenticeship

An ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice who are in State Care
receiving Living Allowance receives their allowances direct. However,
the relevant government authority (or an organisation approved by that
authority) may request that payment be made to the caregiver or a person
nominated by the student or Australian Apprentice, if:

-   the payment of allowances directly to younger students or Australian
    Apprentices could jeopardise the student-carer or Australian
    Apprentice-carer relationship, or
-   it is determined that the student or Australian Apprentice is unable
    to manage their own finances, for example, a student in a special
    school

There can only be one payment destination. Any disagreement between two
parent(s)/guardian(s) as to the payment destination must be resolved. If
the student is dependent on only one parent, then Services Australia
will comply with that parent/guardian's request.

When a dependent YA or ABSTUDY student turns 18 years of age, the
payment must be paid to one of the following:

-   an account held by the student
-   a joint bank account with their parents
-   a Payment Nominee

Payments to a third party

ABSTUDY students approved for away from home entitlements have strict
rules governing the payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY. This
includes boarding organisations receiving full student entitlements.
While payments may be made to a third party, they remain the taxable
income of the student. See Payments to third parties and institutions
for ABSTUDY.

If the student is at boarding away from home to attend school, ABSTUDY
may be paid directly to the school/hostel or private board provider.
There are certain 'payees' for students in receipt of ABSTUDY Living
Allowance, see ABSTUDY Living Allowance.

Note: some students who are boarding may have their payments directed to
a Boarding School or Hostel that is a signatory to the ABSTUDY Hostel
Agreement. However, bank details still need to be recorded for the carer
or student on the Payment Destination Summary (PAS) screen so that
residue/supplementary payments are paid correctly.

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

AIC payments are made to the applicant. The applicant can request that
payments be made to the student or a third party. Third parties may
include:

-   a private board provider
-   educational institution (for example, boarding school)
-   a student accommodation provider (for example, school term hostel)
-   a non-government organisation who is an approved applicant for an
    eligible student

AIC does not have a provision for nominee arrangements, payments to a
third party on that basis cannot be made.

The Resources page has a link to the Authorising a person or
organisation to enquire or act on your behalf form (SS313) form.

Contents

Creating and updating Organisation records for ABSTUDY and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) purposes

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Payments to third parties and institutions for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC)

Payment of Residential Costs Option (RCO) for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Related links

Nominees

Nominee organisations

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Reviewing nominee arrangements

Protection of customer payments

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Group payment schedules and payments to organisations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
