
Aftercare assessing rules in Medicare 011-42060080

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the aftercare assessing rules in Medicare.

On this Page:

Aftercare (post-operative treatment)

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items that apply to procedures include
all professional attendances necessary for the purposes of
post-operative treatment of the patient. Post-operative treatment is
generally referred to as 'aftercare'.

Aftercare is deemed to include all post-operative treatment rendered by
medical practitioners. It includes all attendances until recovery from
the operation and the final check or examination, regardless of whether
the attendances are at the hospital, private rooms, or the patient's
home.

Some items include or exclude aftercare in their item description. Where
‘excluding aftercare’ or similar is listed in an item’s description
Medicare benefits are payable for relevant post-operative treatment
attendances.

Attendances billed in the aftercare period

Medicare benefits are not payable where routine post-operative care is
provided by the specialist or general practitioner (GP) who performed
the procedure.

Prior to 1 November 2017 attendances performed by all practitioners
during the aftercare period were checked to ensure they did not form
part of the normal aftercare routine of that procedure.

Following changes made on 1 November 2017 attendances performed by GPs
who did not perform the original procedure are no longer assessed under
aftercare rules. Attendances performed by specialists and GPs who
performed the original procedure continue to be assessed as before.

All practitioners who perform a procedure and subsequently provide
non-aftercare related attendances will need to advise Services Australia
if the attendance is not considered to be normal aftercare in order for
the attendance to attract a Medicare benefit. This applies to both GPs
and specialists.

Not normal aftercare services guidelines

Attendances which do not form a part of normal aftercare attract a
Medicare benefit. Such services need to be endorsed on the account as
‘not normal aftercare’ before a benefit is payable.

Services which are not deemed to be normal aftercare fall into 2
categories of services:

-   attendances for a condition not related to the procedure
-   attendances for complications arising from the procedure

Additional benefits would generally only apply to major complications.
For example, wound infections and abnormal pain would be examples that
would be considered as not normal aftercare.

Vocationally and non-vocationally registered general practitioners
providing post-operative treatment within an aftercare period are
eligible for Medicare benefits only when they did not perform the
initial procedure requiring post-operative treatment.

How to advise of ‘not related to aftercare’ services

All practitioners who perform a procedure must advise where an
attendance is 'not normal aftercare' when submitting a patient’s claim.

Notations can include wording similar to:

-   Not Normal Aftercare
-   NNAC
-   NNA
-   Not related to procedure

Online claims – aftercare indicators

Some practice software may have the option of including an indicator
which ‘overrides’ aftercare rules for electronically submitted claims.

Health professionals should set the aftercare indicator
(AfterCareOveridelnd) to 'Y' where available, when the attendance does
not form part of the normal aftercare.

Health professionals can be directed to Services Australia website for
more information about electronic claim indicators. See the Resources
page for external links.

Public hospital patients

All care directly related to an admitted public patient's care should be
provided at no cost to the patient. Where a patient has received
treatment in a hospital as a public patient, routine and non-routine
aftercare directly related to that episode of admitted care will be
provided at no cost to the patient as part of the public hospital
service, regardless of where it is provided, on behalf of the state or
territory as required by the National Healthcare Agreement. In this case
no Medicare benefit is payable.

Where a public patient independently chooses to consult a private
medical practitioner for aftercare:

-   the clinically relevant service provided during this professional
    attendance will attract Medicare benefits
-   following treatment from a public hospital emergency department,
    then the clinically relevant service provided during this
    professional attendance will attract Medicare benefits

Note: where aftercare is provided by a specialist or consultant
physician in the above circumstances or because it is 'not normal', a
referral is required to allow benefit to be paid at the referred rate.
The normal provisions relating to aftercare apply to private patients.

Aftercare periods

The amount and duration of aftercare needed can vary between patients
for the same procedure, as well as between different procedures.

The medical practitioner determines each individual aftercare period
depending on the needs of the patient.

Although the MBS explanatory notes include a table of aftercare periods
considered reasonable for the treatment of fractures, this does not
determine when a service relates to aftercare. For example, an
attendance by a patient which falls outside of the nominated aftercare
period listed in the explanatory notes but was the final examination of
the patient would be deemed aftercare and not attract a benefit.

Services Australia uses a set of aftercare periods which are a part of
the guidelines for the processing of claims. These aftercare periods are
an administrative mechanism only, and considered reasonable to assist in
identifying services that may relate to aftercare. They do not determine
when the service is aftercare.

Note: the aftercare periods noted in QITI are an internal guide only and
not to be released to the public.

Where the service falls within the nominated aftercare period and the
account does not endorse the service as ‘not normal aftercare’, payment
is deferred pending clarification by the practitioner.

The Resources page contains links to MBS online, Services Australia
website and a table of common enquiries.

Related links

Restrictive items assessing in Medicare

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
