
Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) 011-43080020

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Extended Medicare Safety Net
(EMSN). Note: as at 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island is covered under Medicare
provisions.

On this Page:

What is the EMSN

The Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) provides an additional benefit
for eligible families and individuals who incur out-of-pocket costs for
out-of-hospital services. Out-of-hospital services include General
Practitioner (GP) and specialist attendances. Once the relevant annual
threshold of out-of-pocket costs has been met, Medicare will pay for 80%
of any future out-of-pocket (OOP) costs for out-of-hospital Medicare
services for the remainder of the calendar year.

Eligibility for EMSN

Individuals and families eligible and enrolled for Medicare and families
registered as a family for the existing Medicare Safety Net (MSN) are
eligible for EMSN.

The EMSN applies to all persons entitled to receive Medicare benefits,
either individuals or families registered for MSN, other than those
eligible under the Concessional Safety Net or Family Tax Benefit (Part
A) Safety Net.

Individuals

Eligibility commences when the individual enrols for Medicare.

The additional Medicare Safety Net benefit is automatically paid when
the Medicare Safety Net threshold is reached.

Families

Eligibility commences from the date the family is registered for the
Medicare Safety Net. All family members must be enrolled for Medicare to
be added to a Medicare Family Safety Net.

The additional benefit is paid when the Medicare Family Safety Net
composition has been confirmed and the Medicare Safety Net threshold has
been reached.

All members of a family registered for EMSN are eligible to receive
additional benefits.

EMSN benefit capping

EMSN benefit capping means that for some Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) items there is a maximum amount of EMSN benefits payable
regardless of the fee charged by the doctor.

An EMSN benefit cap has been applied to some Medicare Benefit Schedule
(MBS) items since 1 January 2010.

From 1 January 2013, the calculation of the EMSN benefit cap changed.

Once a patient reaches the EMSN threshold, they are entitled to the
Medicare benefit, plus whichever is the lower amount of either:

-   EMSN benefit (80% of out-of-pocket costs)
-   EMSN percentage cap (when applicable and may vary between item
    numbers)
-   EMSN maximum cap (when applicable and may vary between item numbers)

The capping amounts for item numbers can be found on the Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Items that have an EMSN benefit cap

EMSN benefit caps apply to the following items:

-   Consultations
-   Allied Health
-   ART (Assisted Reproductive Technology)
-   Obstetrics
-   Midwifery
-   Pregnancy ultrasounds

Multiple operations and EMSN benefit cap

A multiple operation is where 2 or more procedures, listed in Group T8
of the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) (other than Subgroup 12 of that
Group), are performed on a patient on the 1 occasion.

The Health Insurance Amendment (Extended Medicare Safety Net) Act 2012
allows items that are part of a multiple operation with a date of
service on or after 12 October 2012 to be capped.

The Resources page contains a link to further information on processing
a patient claim for a multiple operation where the EMSN cap is less than
80% of out of pocket expenses.

See also:

-   Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net
-   Medicare Safety Net thresholds
-   Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare

Unpaid accounts

Where the item is subject to an EMSN benefit cap, the 20% of the
out-of-pocket (OOP) expense paid by the claimant may not be sufficient
to pay the account in full. The account is therefore treated as unpaid.

Role of Service Officers

Service Officers are not expected to manually calculate the percentage
amounts for the EMSN benefit cap. The caps are automatically calculated
by the system and are applied at the time of processing the claim.

Service Officers must:

-   be able to explain when an EMSN benefit cap applies
-   not separate paid accounts where the patient is crossing the
    threshold (where possible)
-   allow the system to calculate and pay the maximum Medicare Safety
    Net benefit

Accumulation rules for EMSN

From 1 January 2004, out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses accumulate towards the
Safety Net thresholds for individuals and registered Medicare Safety Net
(MSN) families.

Service Officers can view:

-   An individual's OOP expense totals on the Patient Claims History
    screen (NHSI, Medicare card number and [Shift F6])
-   A family's OOP expenses on the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
    (CDMS). Select Medicare Safety Net program, key Medicare card number
    or Consumer ID or Medicare Personal Identification number (PIN).

When an EMSN family contains a concessional individual, the concessional
individual's OOP expenses still accumulate towards the family's EMSN.

When the concessional individual meets the CSN threshold they are paid
the additional benefits (that is, an additional 80% of the OOP expenses
or the EMSN benefit cap) and the remaining 20% OOP expenses still
contribute to the family's EMSN.

The gap (difference between Medicare benefit and the Schedule Fee) still
accumulates towards the MSN.

Accumulation of out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses

The EMSN reimburses either:

-   80% of OOP expenses, or
-   the EMSN benefit cap

Whichever is less for out-of-hospital services for individuals and
families that meet the Safety Net criteria.

The OOP expense is the difference between the Medicare benefit and the
total amount the doctor charges for services listed in the Medical
Benefits Schedule (MBS) which are performed out-of-hospital.

Fully paid accounts

Where an account has been paid in full, the system processes fully paid
accounts automatically and calculates the correct benefit payable to the
claimant.

Unpaid accounts

Where an account is unpaid, the system produces a Pay Doctor via
Claimant (PDVC) cheque for the standard Medicare benefit. The claimant
is required to verify (substantiate) the OOP expense amount to be
entitled to an additional benefit.

Partially paid accounts

To reduce upfront costs to patients who have reached a Medicare Safety
Net threshold, legislation allows claimants to only pay a maximum of 20%
of the out-of-pocket (OOP) expense at the time of consultation.

Where exactly 20% of the OOP expense has been paid at the time of
consultation, and the patient has reached the threshold, Services
Australia will accept and process the claim. Where more than 20% of the
OOP expense has been paid at the time of consultation, the system will
determine based on the partial payment, to split the benefit or generate
a Pay Doctor via Claimant (PDVC).

Note: where the item is subject to an EMSN benefit cap the 20% of the
OOP expense paid by the claimant may not be sufficient to pay the
account in full and the account will be treated as an unpaid account.

Calculating the Medicare Safety Net benefit

This section provides scenarios to explain how to calculate the EMSN
benefit payable for consultations and non-consultation items.

Note: Service Officers can access QITI in mainframe to determine whether
an item number has an EMSN benefit cap applied to it. QITI will display
the EMSN percentage cap and EMSN maximum cap, where applicable.

To access item number information in the mainframe type QITI,
itemnumber, date of service, press [Enter], then press [F5].

The Resources page includes a link to the MBS items which will have an
Extended Medicare Safety Net cap from 1 November 2012 on the Department
of Health and Aged Care website.

Consultation items

The Medicare Safety Net benefit for consultation items is the lesser of
either:

-   80% of out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses
-   the EMSN percentage cap (for example 300% of schedule fee)
-   the EMSN maximum cap of $500.00

The Resources page contains examples to assist with working out the
Medicare Safety Net benefits for consultation items.

Non-consultation items

The Medicare Safety Net benefit for non-consultation items is the lesser
of:

-   80% of the out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses
-   the EMSN percentage cap (for example 80% of the schedule fee)

Note: the EMSN maximum cap only applies to consultation items.

The Resources page contains examples to assist with working out the
Medicare Safety Net benefits for non-consultation items.

The Resources page contains information on multiple operations, an
example of the new safety net, frequently asked questions about changes
to Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) benefit caps, a link to the
Medicare Safety Net - Inquire on Medicare Card Number user help guide
and links to external websites.

Related links

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Concessional Safety Net (CSN) thresholds for Medicare

Medicare Safety Net

Process Medicare Safety Net claims

Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare

Verify services for Medicare Safety Net

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
