
In-vitro Fertilisation (IVF) and other Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) MBS services 011-42060110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Assisted Reproductive
Technology (ART) services covered by Medicare. ART refers to methods
used to achieve pregnancy by artificial or partially artificial means,
and includes a range of treatments including In-vitro fertilisation
(IVF), gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI) and intrauterine insemination (IUI).

Education guide for health professionals

An education guide for health professionals relating to billing ART
services is available on the Services Australia website. Health
professionals can be directed to the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
health professional education page for further information.

The Resources page contains a link to the health professionals’
education page.

ART items in the Medicare Benefits Scheme (MBS)

The Medicare ART items described in this document are located in MBS
Category 3 (Therapeutic Procedures), Group T1 (Miscellaneous Therapeutic
Procedures). Subgroup 3 is dedicated to specific ART services.

ART services are treatments for medical infertility, performed to
achieve the live birth of a healthy child. The payment of Medicare
benefits for ART services relies on the health professional’s decision
that they are providing clinically relevant treatment, The health
professional is also required to take state/territory laws into
consideration when making that decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online website.

Global items and treatment cycles

For Medicare purposes, there are 5 ‘treatment cycle’ types, each with a
‘global’ item number which covers all services performed during the
treatment cycle. This means all consultations, diagnostic imaging and
pathology services provided as part of ART treatment cannot be billed
separately to Medicare. The ART global items include these services.

The date of service in respect of treatment covered by global items is
deemed to be the first day of the treatment cycle. There is no limit on
the number of treatment cycles a patient can have. The 5 global ART
items are:

-   Item 13200 Initial superovulated cycle
-   Item 13201 Subsequent superovulated cycle
-   Item 13202 Cancelled superovulated cycle
-   Item 13203 Artificial insemination cycle
-   Item 13218 Frozen cycle

Note: for Medicare purposes, a 26 day restriction has been applied to
all global items and item 13209. When counting any restrictive period,
day one starts on the date of the global item.

In addition to ART global items, other ART specific MBS item numbers
include:

-   Item 13209 Planning and management services
-   Item 13210 Planning and management services undertaken via
    Telehealth consultation*
-   Item 13212 Oocyte retrieval
-   Item 13215 Transfer of embryos or both ova and sperm
-   Item 13221 Semen preparation
-   Item 13241 Testicular sperm retrieval
-   Item 13251 Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)

*Item ended 31 December 2021

The Process page contains a more detailed description of the global
items and lists the associated ART items that are claimable with the
global items.

Eligibility and Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA)

Medicare provides financial assistance to eligible persons towards the
cost of clinically relevant services that are included in the MBS and
are provided by health professionals. Eligible persons includes those on
a standard Medicare card or an interim card.

Medicare benefits are payable for ART services only where they are:

-   clinically relevant
-   undertaken in accordance with relevant state and territory laws, and
-   not rendered in conjunction with surrogacy arrangements

Eligibility under Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA)

Medicare benefits are not payable for ART services provided to RHCA
cardholders with a date of service on or after 1 November 2017.

For claims with dates of service prior to 1 November 2017, Medicare
benefits are payable for ART services provided to RHCA cardholders where
the service has been provided out of hospital.

Note: item 13260 is eligible for RHCA. This item would only be used in
situations where the patient has undergone or will undergo treatment for
gonadotoxic treatment for malignant or non-malignant conditions. This
treatment is therefore immediately necessary.

Surrogacy

Items 13200-13221 do not apply to a service provided in relation to a
patient's pregnancy or intended pregnancy under a surrogacy arrangement.

Item 13251 is not covered by the surrogacy restriction and therefore can
be claimed when male factor infertility applies in a surrogacy
situation. Item 13251 cannot be claimed where item 13203 or 13218 apply.

Surrogacy arrangements occur when a person:

-   agrees to become pregnant and to bear a child for another person,
    and
-   transfers guardianship and custodial rights to the other person at
    or shortly after birth

Donor and recipient services

Medicare benefits are available for donors who:

-   donate eggs, or
-   donate sperm

Items 13200, 13201, 13202, 13209, 13212, 13221 and 13251 can be claimed
by patients who intend to donate their ova. Services for the donated ova
must be billed against the donor and not the recipient. The recipient is
eligible for items 13209, 13215 and 13218.

Note: Medicare benefits are not payable for donor services performed
under ART MBS items 13200, 13201 and 13212 where a recipient has not yet
been identified. This is because under Medicare, the identification of a
medically infertile recipient is a precondition for the provision of ART
services. Therefore, there must be a medical condition that requires
treatment before Medicare benefits can apply.

The Process page describes the items that can be claimed by donors
and/or recipients.

Fertility cryopreservation (item 13260)

Item 13260 is for the preservation of fertility for post-pubertal
patients who will be going through gonadotoxic treatment (radiation or
chemotherapy).

The item covers processing and cryopreservation (freezing) of semen and
applies to services provided from 1 November 2018 onwards. For the
service to be eligible for a Medicare benefit, a specialist or
consultant physician must have referred the patient.

A patient can have a maximum of 2 semen collection cycles. A semen
collection cycle involves taking up to 3 samples, on alternate days.

The health professional should collect the:

-   first cycle before the patient has their first chemotherapy or
    radiation treatment
-   second cycle if the patient has relapsed and requires further
    treatment

Item 13260 does not cover the ongoing storage costs of the sperm sample.

Pre-implantation Genetic Testing (PGT) services

PGT is used by couples or individuals who know they carry a serious
genetic disorder. PGT is applied within the IVF process to detect
specific genetic or chromosomal abnormalities prior to implantation and
pregnancy.

During the IVF cycle, the created embryos have a small number of cells
extracted and these cells are tested for specific genetic variations.

Pre-implantation Genetic Testing (PGT) services include:

-   one ART surgical item for an embryo biopsy from a couple at high
    risk of having a child affected by a genetic disorder (item 13207)
-   pathology tests

For more information on PGT and patient eligibility, see the Resources
page for a link to the MBS Online factsheet.

Medicare Safety Net

The Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) provides additional benefits for
patients and their registered Medicare Safety Net families who incur
high out-of-pocket (OOP) costs for out-of-hospital services.

An EMSN benefit cap applies to ART services. This means that some ART
items have a maximum amount of EMSN benefits payable, regardless of the
fee charged by the doctor. See QITI or the MBS for the current EMSN cap
limits.

For more information on the Extended Medicare Safety Net see:

-   Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN)
-   Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

The Resources page contains links to external websites, common Medicare
ART services enquiries and common ART return messages and rejection
reasons.

Related links

Claims processing in Medicare

General assessing information for Medicare

Professional attendance assessing rules in Medicare

Therapeutic procedures assessing rules in Medicare

Understanding Pathology assessing rules in Medicare

Diagnostic procedures assessing rules in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
