-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details for Service Officers about how to search
for an existing claim. This is to update, migrate a legacy Compensation
Case Management System (CCMS) claim to Medicare Compensation Recovery
System (MCRS), and register a new claim. Also, what to do when staff
identify errors after registering the claim in MCRS.

Search for an existing claim

After assessing the correspondence and confirming that a claim is
notifiable, check that it does not already exist in MCRS or CCMS before
registering a new claim.

See:

-   Process correspondence
-   Notifiable and not notifiable claims

When to register a compensation claim

A compensation claim may be registered in MCRS when one of the below is
received:

-   Notice of past benefits request form (MO026)
-   Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022)
-   Notice of reimbursement arrangement form (MO027)

Services Australia does not have to be notified of a compensation claim
until:

-   an amount has been fixed by judgment or settlement, or
-   a reimbursement arrangement has been made

If all required information is not received to register a full claim, a
provisional claim creates. This allows for the We need more information
to register a compensation claim letter (Z2798) to be sent. A Work
Identification Number (WIN) is assigned and documents will attach to the
claim.

An injured person name and address, or injured person name, notifiable
person name and address are required to create a provisional WIN. If no
address is provided for either party, the document is invalid and no
letter is sent.

Note: notification via one of Services Australia’s forms above is
preferred. A letter may only be accepted in limited circumstances. If
required, a letter will be issued for missing information. See the
Resources page for links to the forms.

Provisional claim versus registered claim

Provisional record

-   Create a provisional claim if the submitted form or letter does not
    include all the required information to fully register a claim in
    MCRS
-   A Work Identification Number (WIN) is allocated, and a We need more
    information to register letter (Z2798) is sent
-   No other processing occurs on the provisional claim unless a new
    form with all the required information is received by the agency

Registered claim

-   A claim may be registered if the submitted form or letter includes
    all the required information for MCRS
-   A WIN is allocated and an Information about a compensation claim
    letter (Z2799) is sent
-   A notice to claimant is also sent, if required, and the claim is
    ready for other processing activities to occur. See Notice of past
    benefits request and notice to claimant for more details

See the Process page for instructions on registering a provisional
record or new claim.

When a Medicare card cannot be found

If a Medicare card number cannot be matched to the injured person’s
details, create a provisional record so that a We need more information
to register (2798) letter can be sent.

An injured person may not be enrolled in Medicare, however if Services
Australia is advised there are care related costs to be recovered:

-   register a claim in MCRS, and
-   issue a Notice to Claimant (NTC) for care costs only

If an injured person confirms they are not enrolled in Medicare, and a
provisional WIN has been registered:

-   terminate the WIN, and
-   send a We need more information to register (2798) letter

An injured person may have enrolled in Medicare with a different name or
date of birth. If there is a mismatch with the injured person’s details,
see Process Correspondence.

Note: even if a person has not lived in Australia for many years and has
renounced their Australian citizenship, a record of Medicare enrolment
will still exist in the agency systems.

Updating addresses

The Rapid address entry tool is available in MCRS to help with updating
addresses.

It is not available for:

-   PO boxes
-   GPO boxes
-   Locked bags
-   Overseas addresses

For PO and GPO boxes or locked bags, enter the suburb first, then the
PO, GPO boxes or locked bag details, in that order

For overseas addresses, select the Address outside Australia button. Do
not enter 9999 for an overseas postcode. Key # if no overseas postcode
is provided

If the Rapid address entry tool is unable to locate an address, enter
the address details manually

Migrate a legacy CCMS claim to MCRS

If a legacy CCMS claim exists, to continue processing it must be
migrated to MCRS. All legacy claim information will transfer to MCRS,
except address details. Staff must update the address details.

Note: third party authority automatically transfers from CCMS if
solicitor details are entered. A start date for authority must be
entered.

See the Process page for more details.

Update a claim

Staff must update a compensation claim if:

-   documents received contain updated contact details
-   a customer advises the agency during a phone call that contact
    details need updating
-   a claim has been reopened
-   the claim is a legacy claim (unmigrated)
-   changing a provisional claim to a full claim when additional
    information has been provided
-   Medicare details have recently been updated

The Process page contains more details.

The Resources page contains links to forms and contact details.

Related links

Enquiries and authenticating a customer – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare Compensation Recovery System

Notifiable and not notifiable claims – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Process correspondence – Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
