
Amend CDMS tab fields for the Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare 011-41030010

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the information held within each accessible tab
in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the Child Dental
Benefits Schedule (CDBS).

Eligible Persons tab

The Eligible Persons tab displays the personal details for a child or
teenager.

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Eligible Persons tab.

Guardian/Parents tab

The Guardian/Parents Details tab displays the person or persons and the
address to which the notification was sent.

Note:

-   the addressee can be 1 or 2 parents, a guardian or an organisation
    or a combination of all
-   Centrelink can send Medicare a maximum of 2 addresses per teenager
-   Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) can send Medicare a maximum of
    1 addressee per teenager
-   addressee details are not displayed for a child/teenager who is
    eligible for Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY. In this case, the fields in
    this tab are blank and the letter of notification (if sent) is
    addressed to the child/teenager

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Guardian/Parents Details tab.

Entitlement Details tab

The Entitlement Details Tab displays the entitlement details for Child
Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS).

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Entitlement Details tab.

Eligibility Details tab

The Eligibility Details Tab displays the eligibility details for Child
Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS)

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Eligibility Details tab

Notification Details tab

The Notification Details Tab displays the notification details for CDBS.

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Notification Details tab.

Notification Reissue tab

A notification reissue can only occur via the Amend Child Dental
Benefits Schedule Details. If a notification reissue is to be
undertaken, the Notification Reissue tab will perform the function if
the notification:

-   has been lost, stolen or damaged
-   was never received by the addressee
-   a change of address occurred
-   was not issued because Centrelink or DVA did not send the address
    details
-   eThe notification can be issued to the child/teenager

When changing address details, ensure you have completed a security
check depending on the circumstances.

Note:

-   CDBS notifications are only valid for services during the current
    calendar year and cannot be reissued for a previous calendar year
-   notifications can only be reissued if the original notification was
    issued previously.
-   a notification issue or reissue cannot be requested before 31
    January each year. Advise the caller the annual mail-out has now
    commenced and a notification will be sent automatically. If the
    address details need to be updated, advise the caller to update
    their address details with Centrelink or DVA so that a notification
    can be sent to that correct address

See also: Patient eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS)
in Medicare

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Notification Reissue tab.

Agency Data tab

The Agency Data tab:

-   displays the original information transmitted to Medicare from
    Centrelink or DVA
-   displays all eligible children/teenagers, and
-   assists to match records that were unable to be automatically
    matched by the system

Note: where the child/teenager is eligible because they are in receipt
of the payment directly, only the child/teenager’s details are displayed
in this tab.

The Agency Data tab is only displayed unprotected to specified
TAMS/Security roles. For Service Officers who do not have the
appropriate security access role the Agency Data tab will be hidden.
Authorised Service Officers can select radio buttons beside agency
details. Only 1 radio button can be selected at a time. Once selected,
the XML data appears in the box below. This box can’t be edited. All
messages are displayed regardless of whether the message has a pending,
log only, success or failed message status.

Comments tab

The Comments tab is used by Service Officers to record any interaction
with the customer either face to face, on the phone or in
correspondence. All contact between Medicare and the customer must be
documented for further follow up.

The Recorded Comments table displays comments that are without end dates
or have end dates in the future.

Related links

Claims for the Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare

Patient eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

Inquire CDMS tab fields for the Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
