
Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare 011-41050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to the MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19) 011-20031903

This document outlines the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) CDM items.
The CDM items are for health professionals in general practice to plan
and coordinate the health care of patients with chronic or terminal
medical conditions. This includes patients with these conditions who
would benefit from multidisciplinary team-based care from a GP and at
least 2 other health or care professionals. Note: medical practitioners
practising in general practice are referred to as 'GP' in this document.

Overview of CDM

There are CDM items that provide benefits for preparing, coordinating,
reviewing or contributing to CDM plans.

-   General Practitioner (GP) services for Planning and Management items
    721 to 732
-   Non-vocationally recognised medical practitioner (non-VR MP)
    services for Planning and Management, items 229 to 233
-   A review item is the key component for assessing and managing the
    patient's progress once a GP management plan (GPMP) or team care
    arrangements (TCAs) have been prepared
-   Monitoring and support item 10997 and Allied Health services 10950
    to 10970, 81100 to 81125

Whether a patient is eligible for CDM services is a clinical judgement
for the GP. It takes into account the patient's medical condition, care
needs, and the general guidance set out in the MBS.

A GP management plan (GPMP) is a comprehensive written plan that sets
out the following:

-   The patient's health care needs, health problems and relevant
    conditions
-   Management goals with which the patient agrees
-   Actions to be taken by the patient
-   Treatment and services the patient is likely to need
-   Arrangements for providing this treatment and these services
-   Arrangements to review the plan by a date specified in the plan

The Resources page contains additional information about GP management
plans

Team care arrangements (TCAs) result in a written plan that sets out the
following:

-   Treatment and service goals for the patient
-   Treatment and services that collaborating health or care
    professionals will provide to the patient
-   Actions to be taken by the patient, and
-   Arrangements to review the above by a date specified in the document

The Resources page contains additional information about team care
arrangements.

CDM items replaced enhanced primary care (EPC) in 2005, some health
professionals may still refer to EPC.

Patient eligibility

To be eligible for CDM items the patient must have at least one medical
condition that is considered chronic (has been, or is likely to be,
present for at least 6 months) or terminal and would benefit from a
structured approach to their care.

Whether a patient is eligible for CDM services is a matter for the GP to
determine. They need to use their clinical judgement and take into
account both the eligibility criteria and guidance provided by their
professional college or the Department of Health.

The Resources page contains a table outlining the patient eligibility of
CDM items.

Health professional eligibility

Health professional eligibility for planning and management items

Items 721, 723, 731, 732, 229, 230, 232 and 233 are intended to be
provided by the patient's usual medical practitioner.

The patient's 'usual medical practitioner' means a GP, a
non-vocationally recognised medical practitioner(non-VR MP), or
practitioner at the same practice who:

-   has provided the majority of care to the patient over the previous
    12 months, and/or
-   will be providing the majority of care to the patient over the next
    12 months

The Resources page has a list of item numbers and the health
professionals that can claim them.

Health professional eligibility for monitoring and support item 10997

A general practitioner (GP) or non-vocationally recognised medical
practitioner (non-VR MP) can bill item 10997 for monitoring and support
services provided to a person with a chronic condition by a practice
nurse, or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practitioner, if
the service is provided on behalf of and under the supervision of the
medical practitioner.

The medical practitioner is responsible for ensuring the practice nurse
or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practitioner has the
appropriate qualifications and training and undertakes continuing
professional development.

-   A practice nurse must be a registered or enrolled nurse
-   An Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practitioner must be
    registered with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health
    Practice Board of Australia

Team care arrangements (TCAs)

Practitioners are required to collaborate with at least 2 other health
or care professionals in the development of TCAs.

-   A health professional should have an ongoing role and involvement
    with the patient to contribute to the TCAs
-   Other GPs or non-VR MPs would not usually be a team member unless
    they provide a distinctly different service to the patient, such as
    medical acupuncture

Note: a GP who is also a recognised specialist in the speciality of
palliative medicine cannot claim items 721 to 732 when they are treating
a referred palliative care patient under items in Group A24, Subgroups 3
or 4 of the MBS.

See the Resources page for a list of health or care professionals who
may contribute to TCAs.

Referral requirements

The medical practitioner can refer a patient for allied health services
if it has been determined that these services will benefit the patient's
chronic medical condition.

-   The referral can be provided using the referral form issued by the
    Department of Health or a document which contains all of the
    components of the form
-   There are separate referral forms for individual allied health
    services, items 10950 to 10970 (excluding items 10955, 10957,
    10959), and the group services items 81100 to 81125
-   The medical practitioner must complete a referral form for each
    allied health professional or allied health practice that they refer
    the patient to. The referral form sets out the number of services
    that are to be provided to the patient by that allied health
    professional

Referrals not required for items 10955, 10957, and 10959 but must
document that the patient agreed to the allied health professional's
participation in the conference.

The Resources page has links to the appropriate forms and more
information regarding the referral requirement.

Reports from allied health professionals

Allied health professionals are required to provide written reports back
to the referring practitioner. Written reports can be by paper or
electronic communication.

The Resources page contains additional information about the
requirements for reports.

Case conferences

A case conference is the process where a multidisciplinary team of
health professionals or community care providers carries out discussions
concerning:

-   the patient's history
-   identifying care needs
-   outcomes to be achieved, and
-   assessing whether previously identified outcomes (if any) have been
    achieved

The Resources page contains additional information about what is
required for case conference items.

Requirements and limitations

All participants must be in communication with each other throughout the
conference, either:

-   face to face
-   by telephone
-   by video link, or
-   a combination of these

In exceptional circumstances where there has been significant change in
a patient's clinical condition or care circumstances, the GP may
determine a new GPMP (item 721) and TCAs (item 723) are required

These items provide a service for patients who have at least one medical
condition that has been (or is likely to be) present for at least 6
months; or is terminal, and requiring ongoing care from a
multidisciplinary case conference team

It is expected that a patient would not normally require more than 5
case conferences in a 12 month period

Note: see the Resources page for a list of health professionals and
formal care providers.

Regulatory requirements for multidisciplinary case conferences:

More information regarding the Case Conferences can be located via MBS
Online explanatory note AN.0.49 and the Department of Health's website.
The Resources page has links to these websites.

Allied health multidisciplinary case conferences

Eligible allied health professionals can bill Medicare items for
participating in multidisciplinary case conferences with medical
practitioners.

The 3 time-tiered items apply to non-admitted patients needing chronic
disease management.

Eligible allied health professionals:

-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practitioners
-   Aboriginal health workers
-   Audiologists
-   Chiropractors
-   Diabetes educators
-   Dietitians
-   Exercise physiologists
-   Mental health workers
-   Occupational therapists
-   Osteopaths
-   Physiotherapists
-   Podiatrists
-   Psychologists
-   Speech pathologists

The items are restricted to once every 3 months.

Note: in exceptional circumstances where there has been significant
change in a patient's clinical condition or care circumstances, the
medical practitioner may determine another case conference is required
within 3 months. Such claims should include appropriate text or
notation.

See Resources page for items and more information.

Exceptional circumstances or significant changes to clinical condition

Where a patient has a significant change in their clinical condition or
care circumstances, more frequent claims can be paid.

Only the treating health professional has the discretion to determine
what may be a 'significant change' for their patient.

These changes may include:

-   the development of co-morbidities or complications
-   deteriorating condition
-   illness or death of carer

To bill services under exceptional circumstances the account should
include a note with wording such as 'exceptional circumstances' or
'significant change in clinical condition'.

Co-claiming consultations

Co-claiming consultation items with CDM planning and review items is not
permitted for the same patient, on the same day by the same health
professional.

MBS consultation items 3, 4, 23, 24, 36, 37, 44, 47, 52, 53, 54, 57, 58,
59, 60, 65, 179, 181, 185, 187, 189, 191, 203, 206, 585, 588, 591, 594,
599, 600, 733, 737, 741, 745, 761, 763, 766, 769, 5000, 5003, 5020,
5023, 5040, 5043, 5060, 5063, 5200, 5203, 5207, 5208, 5220, 5223, 5227
and 5228.

Claiming review items 732 or 233 (review GPMP or TCAs)

Patients must have a paid GPMP or TCAs item on their history before a
review item can be paid.

Review item 732 or 233 can be claimed twice on the same day for a review
of a GPMP and for a review of TCAs.

Note: under exceptional circumstances, review items can be claimed twice
in a 3 month period for the same GPMP or TCAs.

The account should be notated to advise whether the claiming is for:

-   a review of the GPMP or TCAs (for example. text says 'TCAs review'
    or 'GPMP review', or to that effect)
-   different times, or
-   exceptional circumstances

Recommended frequency and claiming limits for CDM items are set out on
the Resources page, or claiming limits can be viewed on QITI.

Monitoring and support item 10997

Patients must have a GPMP, TCAs or a Multidisciplinary Care Plan on
history before item 10997 can be paid.

Item 10997 has a maximum limit of 5 services per calendar year.

Allied health service items

For internal use only: a claim for allied health services no longer
requires a CDM item/s to be on a patient's Medicare claiming history.
Health professionals may be subject to post payment audits to ensure
they are claiming Medicare benefits appropriately.

Under the legislation, allied health items should only be claimed after
a patient has one of the below listed prerequisite CDM services:

-   Both a GP management plan (GPMP) and team care arrangements (TCAs)
-   Contribution to a multidisciplinary care plan prepared by an aged
    care facility, or
-   A shared care plan prepared for a patient enrolled in a health care
    home

Note: patients do not require a TCA to be eligible for group allied
health services.

Claiming limits for individual allied health services

Note: these items do not restrict with follow-up allied health service
items for people of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent.

Allied health claiming limits can be either:

-   all services from one allied health professional, or
-   shared across 2 or more allied health professionals

Ongoing MBS telehealth services will count towards claiming limits.

Patients in the community

Patients may be eligible for 5 services. per calendar year using items
10950 to 10970 (excluding items 10955, 10957, 10959).

Items 93501-93536 and 93606 to 93620 ended 30 June 2022. These items
will continue to contribute to the total number of services available to
the patient for the remainder of the calendar year.

Claiming limits for group allied health services for patients with type 2 diabetes

MBS items are available for group allied health services for patients
with type 2 diabetes. These services are provided by eligible:

-   diabetes educators
-   exercise physiologists
-   dietitians

Group services are in addition to the individual allied health services
available to patients each calendar year.

Group allied health claiming limits can be either:

-   all services from one allied health professional, or
-   shared across 2 or more allied health professionals

Once a patient has been referred by their GP, the allied health
professional will conduct an individual assessment for suitability of
group services. After assessment, the patient can access group treatment
services.

Patients in the community

Each calendar year patients may be eligible for:

-   one individual assessment service using item 81100, 81110 or 81120
-   8 group treatment services using items 81105, 81115 and 81125

The Resources page contains information on recommended frequency and
minimum claiming periods, examples of multidisciplinary care team for
TCAs and care providers for case conferencing, FAQs and links to useful
websites.

Related Links

Assessing MBS items restrictions

Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) health assessments for specific target
groups (including Indigenous Australians)

Referrals for assessing in Medicare

Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
