
Printed receipts confirming payment of Medicare benefit 011-43010170

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers on printed
receipts for Medicare claims, including the procedure where a claimant
does not want a receipt. Note: thermal receipts were previously used.

On this page:

When to print a receipt to confirm payment

When a claim is processed face-to-face the Service Officer is required
to print the confirmation of payment for the patient to sign. Until
2015/2016 these confirmations were printed using thermal roll receipts.
The thermal receipts have now been replaced by a printed receipt. For
some batched processed claims, thermal roll receipts may still be
attached to the claim.

There is an office receipt, which must be printed and the claimant or
authorised person must sign. Also available is a customer receipt which
is not signed and mirrors the office receipt except for parts of the
bank account details which have been removed for security purposes.

Claim identification through the printed receipt

The printed receipt enables claimants to identify the:

-   date of the service
-   patient
-   provider who rendered the service
-   charge
-   Medicare benefit received

Medicare benefit payments

When claimants receive their Medicare benefit the printed receipt
provides full details of the transaction, including the:

-   date the claim was made
-   location the claim was made
-   P number of the Service Officer who processed the claim
-   Bank State Branch (BSB), account number and account name the payment
    was made into. Before the customer signs the receipt, the Service
    Officer must circle this information and have the customer confirm
    that these bank details are correct.
-   full details about the service

Note: Medicare benefits for fully paid patient accounts can only be paid
by Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), funds are deposited into a nominated
bank account. Where the claimant does not have valid EFT details stored
in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) or cannot provide
valid temporary or permanent EFT details at the time the claim is
submitted, the BSB and account field will be blank and the payment for
the claim will be held until EFT details have been provided.

When an EFT payment is paid into a bank account the claimant receives a
limited amount of information on their bank statement. This information
can vary, depending on the financial institution. An example may
include:

-   Date: date of deposit
-   Description: DirectCR MCARE BENEFITS
-   Deposit ($): dollar amount of benefit

Note: the printed customer receipt assists claimants to identify and
reconcile the deposit.

Claimant does not want a receipt

If a claimant does not want the customer receipt, Service Officers must
still print the office receipt and the claimant or authorised person
must sign it.

Other ways a claimant can lodge a claim and not receive a receipt are:

-   telephone claiming (receipt issued only on request)
-   lodgement using a Medicare Claim form (MS014) (receipt issued only
    on request)

Note: [] patients are able to see their payment history on their
Medicare online account.

Related links

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
