
Cheque processing in Medicare 011-43090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines cheque processing in Medicare.

Medicare benefits paid by EFT deposits

From 1 July 2016, Medicare benefits for fully paid accounts can only be
paid by Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) with funds deposited into a
nominated bank account.

If the claimant does not have valid EFT details stored in CDMS or cannot
provide valid temporary or permanent EFT details at the time the claim
is submitted, the payment for the claim will be held until EFT details
have been provided.

Cheque types

Claimant cheques

Before 1 July 2016, Medicare could issue payments for fully paid
accounts to a claimant by cheque or EFT. Cheque payments to the claimant
are identified by a payee code 5.

From 1 July 2016, all payments for fully paid accounts are made by EFT
into the claimant's nominated bank account. EFT payments to the claimant
are identified by a payee code 9.

See Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT
payments for more information.

Pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheques

When a patient's unpaid or partially paid medical account is lodged for
payment, Medicare sends the patient a PDVC cheque made payable to the
health professional. The claimant is then responsible for forwarding
this cheque to the health professional, together with any outstanding
account balance. PDVC payments to the claimant are identified by a payee
code 2.

Determine the status of a cheque

For enquiries about a cheque not being received, Service Officers must
check the status of the cheque before actioning the enquiry.

The BBEI and BBCI screens show the status of cheques payable to either a
claimant or provider.

Status of cheques can include:

-   presented
-   unpresented
-   stopped
-   cheque returned
-   stale
-   CAN/EFT - paid via 90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

The Resources page contains a list of Cheque enquiry control lines.

Cheque payment times

There is a minimum turnaround time for Medicare benefits. These minimum
payment times vary according to the claiming channel.

The minimum payment times relate to the number of days (including
weekends) Services Australia holds the benefit before releasing the
payment to the claimant.

-   The count for the minimum payment time starts from the date the
    claim is lodged
-   The minimum payment times are decided by Government in consultation
    with peak bodies

For minimum payment times, see Patient claim requirements for payment of
Medicare benefits.

Reissue of Medicare benefit (cancelled/stop cheque)

If a Medicare benefit needs to be repaid to the claimant all Medicare
benefits for patient claims will be paid by EFT. Where the account
remains unpaid, PDVC cheque will be issued.

Reissue a benefit when a cheque has been:

-   paid for incorrect amount
-   lost, missing, stolen, destroyed or damaged
-   returned
-   unclaimed
-   stale

At the first point of contact, where the agency has been notified by the
claimant or provider that a cheque needs to be reissued, the Service
Officer must in the first instance check Mainframe to identify the
status of the claim before reissuing or performing a cheque trace.

Lost, missing, stolen, destroyed or damaged

If the cheque is lost or missing and the cheque is more than 14 days
old, a stop can be placed on the cheque. A provider can stop, cancel or
reissue a cheque only after it was in their possession and it has been
lost.

If the cheque is stolen, destroyed or damaged, the cheque can be stopped
immediately regardless of the age of the cheque.

This does not cover instances where the patient does not forward the pay
doctor via claimant cheque to the doctor and the doctor is seeking to
have the cheque reissued to them at their practice.

Cheque issued to the incorrect claimant

Unpresented cheque

A cheque can be cancelled and the Medicare benefit reissued to the
correct recipient if the cheque is unpresented and has been incorrectly
issued in favour of either the:

-   provider instead of a claimant
-   claimant instead of a provider, or
-   incorrect provider

Service Officers can cancel the cheque and the Medicare benefit reissued
to the correct recipient.

When Service Officers reprocess the claim and the account/invoice is
fully paid, the benefit must be paid to the claimant via EFT.

The agency must be in possession of a cheque before it is cancelled and
reissued. If a claimant states a cheque has been paid incorrectly, they
must be advised to return the cheque to the agency.

Where the claimant does not have possession of the cheque, see the
Process page for what action should be taken to ensure payment.

Members of the public cannot endorse the back of the cheque to pay the
funds to a provider, as banks will not accept the cheque.

Presented cheque

When the cheque is presented:

If trained in patient claim adjustments, reprocess the claim as an
overpayment ensuring the Medicare benefit is made payable to the correct
recipient

If not trained in patient claim adjustments and the claim is:

-   in PaNDA categorise to patient claim adjustments
-   not in PaNDA complete Adjustment for Patient Claims form and
    escalate to the MPS Assessing

Recovery action must be made in accordance with the agency's management
of debt policies.

See also:

-   Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing
-   Latter day adjustments (LDA) and HELD payments for patient claims
-   Process pages

Benefit processed incorrectly

The following guidelines apply when a benefit has been processed
incorrectly and a lesser or greater amount should have been paid. For
example, the service was paid as an out of hospital service (85%
benefit), but should have been paid as an in hospital service (75%
benefit).

Where an enquiry is received from a claimant who states a cheque has
been paid incorrectly, they must be advised to return the cheque to the
agency.

See the Process page for more instructions when the claimant does not
have the cheque.

Unclaimed cheques

Cheques can be returned unclaimed where the agency holds an incorrect
address for the claimant or an incorrect address has been submitted for
an online claim.

If the returned cheque was made payable to the claimant, the Service
Officer should check if EFT details have been stored on CDMS and
re-direct payment to the stored bank account.

If the returned cheque was made payable to the provider, the Service
Officer must return the cheque to the system. See Return to Sender (RTS)
mail for Medicare for details (Process RTS cheques).

The payment can be redirected via EFT if:

-   the claimant makes an enquiry regarding an unclaimed cheque or the
    address has been updated, and
-   the claimant has bank account details recorded

Return unclaimed cheque into system

Service Officers must verify if an unclaimed cheque made payable to a
provider is eligible for the 90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme. The
Process page contains more information on how to determine the status of
a cheque and if it can be stopped.

Where it is identified that the cheque is:

-   not associated with the scheme, see Return to Sender (RTS) mail for
    Medicare
-   is associated with the scheme, see 90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

The Resources page links to request this historical information on
Provider enquiries - 90 Day cheque cancellation.

Cheque extraction for patient claims

From 1 July 2016, only unpaid claims (PDVC cheques) will be issued via a
cheque.

If Medicare has made a processing error for unpaid claims, Service
Officers must identify whether a cheque extraction is possible and
inform their Team Leader of the error.

If the provider or claimant have incorrectly lodged a claim, a cheque
extraction is not available.

The Process page explains how to request and action a cheque extraction.

All extracted cheques are marked 'VOID' unless otherwise advised. When a
cheque is extracted but does not need to be cancelled, the cheque does
not need to be marked.

See also Adjustments for Medicare patient claims.

Timeframes

In most cases, the maximum timeframe for a cheque extraction is 2 days
short of the minimum payment time.

See also Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits.

If a Medicare processing error is identified outside these timeframes,
at least 2 attempts must be made to contact the claimant by telephone
and request that the cheque be returned to the agency for cancellation
and reissue.

Where a person cannot attend a Medicare service centre, see the
Resources page for postal details if a claimant must return the cheque
via mail with a letter of explanation.

If additional support is required, contact a Programme Support Officer
(PSO).

Stale cheque

The system will automatically cancel the cheque when it considered stale
15 months after the date it is drawn. Reissue the Medicare benefit if
not previously paid. A stale cheque originally issued to the claimant
will be reissued as an EFT payment. See Process page, Reissue a
cancelled or stale cheque.

Where a cheque is more than 6 years old from date of issue, Medicare is
unable to validate that no replacement cheque has been issued.
Therefore, the Medicare benefit should not be reissued.

Return the cheque to the individual with the appropriate standard
letter.

See also Using Standard Letter Templates (SLT).

For escalation when a cheque is more than 6 years old and the customer
is claiming financial hardship or an escalated complaint, the Process
page explains how to identify and action a stale cheque.

Statement of benefit

The agency automatically issues a statement of benefit for pay doctor
via claimant (PDVC) cheques.

A statement of benefit contains information that may assist private
health funds to identify services that may attract a fund gap benefit.
When requested, a replacement statement of benefit can be issued.
Service Officers must ensure that where a replacement statement is
requested, it must only be issued to the claimant or patient for that
service.

The Process page explains how to issue a duplicate statement of benefit.

The Resources page contains contact details, a list of control lines
that can be used to access the cheque enquiry screen, list of cheque
status, list of Allied Health providers, options available on the cheque
enquiry screen in the D field, a link to the Stop cheque and reissue
form, reissue of stale cheques, the state codes for cheque processing
and a link to the Medicare Claim form (MS014) on the Services Australia
website.

Contents

Cheque trace requests for patient claims in Medicare

Return to sender (RTS) mail for Medicare

Related links

90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims processing in
Medicare

Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT
payments

Incomplete or incorrect Medicare claims forms

Release of claims information in Medicare

Claims processing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
