
Pend processing of Simplified Billing manual claims for Medicare 011-43060040

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about pend processing of Simplified
Billing manual claims for Medicare.

Pend processing of manual Simplified Billing claims

Pend processing of manual Simplified Billing claims:

-   manual claims must be completed within 7 days of the date of
    lodgement (DOL)
-   uses the FAPI transaction

Note: all existing Medicare eligibility and assessing rules apply when
processing pended Simplified Billing claims using the FAPI transaction.

Simplified Billing pend processing transactions

RMDS report

The details needed for the FAPI control line are obtained from the daily
produced MCA NSB301 SIMPBILL DLY PEND RPT which is available via the
Report Management and Distribution System (RMDS). From 12 June 2017 this
report only displays Simplified Billing manual claims with a current
status of 'PEND'.

Simplified Billing pend processing control lines

The Simplified Billing pend processing control line is FAPI, Minor ID or
Registration number, Claim ID,DOL=ddmmyy.

For example, FAPI,1234567X,00023,DOL=150509.

Note:

-   Modifier DOL= is optional when the customer and claim ID combination
    are not unique. For example, FAPI,3531110A,00024.
-   Additional modifier ,PAT= cardnumber with issue number or patient
    name. For example, FAPI,1234567C,00023,DOL=150503,PAT=
    1098765432/MURIE.

Used to position directly on the first segment for the specified card or
patient combination.

The Resources page contains a list of the transaction identifiers
associated with Simplified Billing pend processing.

Simplified Billing payee codes

The following codes are to be used with the FAPI system and are unique
to Simplified Billing pend processing, payee code:

-   8 to pay
-   F to reject

Delete a Simplified Billing manual pended claim

Simplified Billing claims entered manually using the FEGI transaction
can be deleted at pend status using the supervisor FASI transaction.

For example, FASI, Minor ID or Registration number, DOL=ddmmyy,DELETE.
F9 to acknowledge deletion.

Note:

-   Prior to using the DELETE modifier, confirm the claim is the correct
    one to be deleted by browsing the details with FBPI. This is
    recommended since FASI, DELETE does not display the claim details at
    any point during the delete process.
-   If the Service Officer attempts to use the DELETE modifier with
    either the normal FAPI transaction or lacks supervisor access, the
    message 1-SUPVSR is displayed.

Once deleted, a claim no longer appears on FCEI and any subsequent daily
pend reports in RMDS (MCA NSB301 SIMPBILL DLY PEND RPT).

The Resources page contains a list of FASI,DELETE edit checks.

Notional charges

Providers may raise one charge to cover a multiple procedure. In these
cases, a charge of zero dollars identifies subsequent item lines as part
of grouped services that has a notional charge.

For example:

-   Item: 55274 – Charge: $600
-   Item: 55244 – Charge: $0

Note: in notional charge situations, the system automatically allocates
charges to the individual items and uses a reason code to advise the
charge has been apportioned over all items in the notional charge.

Scrolling History Details in FAPI

Where a potential conflict between the items being assessed and items
already paid on patient history exists within a manual Simplified
Billing claim, all conflicting lines of patient history are available
for viewing.

Where there is greater than 5 lines of patient history to view, Service
Officers must:

-   position the cursor in the conflicting patient history details
    displayed at the bottom of the screen
-   press PF8-FORWARDS to scroll through and view any additional history
    details

FAPI field descriptions

On the FAPC screen, line:

-   3 and 4 display details for the provider who rendered the services,
    including the provider number, name, address and qualifications
-   5 displays the Medicare card number, first 5 characters of the
    patient’s name and initial, and the operator reference
-   6 displays any Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) comments
    that has been recorded for the card number

The Resources page contains a list of FAPC screen field descriptions.

Pend processing of Simplified Billing EDI and ECLIPSE claims

All electronic Simplified Billing claims are to be processed via the
Work Distribution, Allocation and Management System (WDAM):

-   for ECLIPSE refer to Eclipse claims for Simplified Billing in
    Medicare
-   for EDI refer to Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for
    Simplified Billing in Medicare

For further information see the Resources page for the Work
Distribution, Allocation and Management System (WDAM) Operator Manual.

The Resources page contains a list of the transaction identifiers
associated with Simplified Billing pend processing, a list of
FASI,DELETE edit checks, a list of insert and delete line values in
FAPI, a list of FAPI screen field descriptions, FAPI key functions and
the Work Distribution, Allocation and Management System (WDAM) Operator
Manual.

Related links:

Work Distribution, Allocation and Management System (WDAM) for Medicare
claims

Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in
Medicare

Eclipse claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
