
Medicare claims for deceased persons 011-43010070

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Medicare claims for deceased
persons.

Determine the claimant

When processing a claim for a deceased patient Service Officers must
first establish who the claimant is.

The claimant is the person who incurred the cost of the service. The
claimant is not always the patient, for example, where a child is the
patient the parent/guardian incurs the cost and is therefore the
claimant.

Medicare benefits must be paid to the claimant and not the patient.

Standard claiming requirements apply when processing claims where the
deceased is not the claimant.

See Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits for more
information.

Claimant is not deceased

-   Pay Medicare benefits to the claimant, not the patient
-   Standard claiming requirements apply when processing claims if the
    deceased is not the claimant

See Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits for more
information.

Deceased (or their estate) is the claimant

Note: where initial notification that a person is deceased is received,
Service Officers must follow the instructions in Amend deceased persons
Medicare enrolment requirements.

The date of death must not be removed or lifted to process Medicare
claims for a deceased person.

When processing a claim for a deceased claimant (or their estate) the
Medicare benefit can be paid to the executor or the appointed
administrator’s nominated bank account.

Appropriate documentation is required to confirm the identity of the
executor or the appointed administrator. This includes a certified true
copy of either:

-   the Last Will and Testament naming the executor of the estate
-   the Letter of Administration naming the appointed administrator, or
-   probate from the courts

Service Officers must add a comment on the deceased’s record in CDMS to
record notification of documentation by the executor or appointed
administrator. The executor, or the appointed administrator, is not
required to provide a certified true copy of the Last Will and Testament
or the Letter of Administration each time they claim.

The executor or the appointed administrator must submit Medicare patient
invoices along with a completed Medicare Claim form (MS014) including
nominated bank account details.

When proof of identity for the executor or the appointed administrator
has not previously been provided to the department or with the claim,
Service Officers should attempt to phone the administrator or the
executor before returning the claim with the Medicare claim needs more
information (Z0828) letter. See Resources page for a link.

Bank account details

The executor or the appointed administrator must provide a temporary
bank account for the payment of the Medicare benefit.

Where a request is made to use the deceased’s bank account details,
Service Officers should inform the executor or the appointed
administrator that if the bank account has been closed by the financial
institution the electronic funds transfer (EFT) payment will
automatically be rejected. If the deceased’s bank account has not been
closed, the Medicare benefit may be paid into the bank account. However,
the executor or the appointed administrator should check with the
financial institution to confirm access to the funds will be possible.

When processing a Medicare claim and the executor or appointed
administrator advises to use the nominated bank account stored in CDMS
for the deceased, Service officers must check CDMS for bank account
details prior to the assessment of the claim.

Stored bank account details for the deceased are not automatically
populated into the Medicare mainframe screen from CDMS.

Where the deceased has recorded bank account details in CDMS, Service
Officers are to key these details into mainframe temporarily (T) when
assessing the claim to allow the Medicare benefit to be paid into the
nominated bank account.

Safety Net

Service Officers must check the Safety Net registration for the deceased
and ensure they are not listed as the Family contact. See Family
registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net for more
information.

Medicare benefits payable and not payable

Medicare benefits are payable to the claimant for eligible services
provided prior to the patient’s death.

Standard claim lodgement timeframes apply.

Medicare benefits are payable when a provider:

-   attends a patient who dies in their presence
-   is called to attend a patient who may or may not be dead
-   is called to attend a patient who was alive at the time of the call,
    but dies before the provider arrives
-   attends a patient and determines that their life is extinct, and
    subsequently issues a death certificate. A Medicare benefit may be
    claimed under an appropriate attendance item

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) Online website.

Medicare benefits are not payable when a provider:

-   attends a deceased person solely to issue a death certificate
-   issues a cremation certificate

Note: although Medicare benefits are not payable for the issue of a
death certificate, an attendance on a patient at which it is determine
that their life is extinct can be claimed under an appropriate
attendance item. The outcome of the attendance may be that a death
certificate is issued; however, Medicare benefits are only payable for
the attendance component of the service.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) Online website, Medicare claim form (MS014) and Medicare claim
needs more information (Z0828) letter.

Related links

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Claims processing in Medicare

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
