-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information on how vaccination providers use the
Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) site.

What is the AIR site

The AIR is a national register that records vaccinations given to
individuals of all ages in Australia. It includes National Immunisation
Program (NIP) schedule vaccines, COVID-19, flu and travel vaccines. The
AIR is administered under the Australian Immunisation Register Act 2015
(AIR Act) and AIR data is protected under the Privacy Act 1988.

Mandatory reporting

Amendments to the AIR Act require mandatory reporting of the following
vaccines by vaccination providers to the AIR:

-   from 20 February 2021 COVID-19 vaccines
-   from 1 March 2021 influenza vaccines
-   from 1 July 2021 all NIP vaccines
-   from 21 December 2022 Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) vaccines

Vaccination providers or their staff with delegated access can view,
submit or request vaccination data from the AIR through the online AIR
site.

The AIR site allows users to record:

-   vaccination information
-   medical contraindications and natural immunities (eligible medical
    practitioners only)
-   planned catch ups for overdue vaccines
-   returned mail
-   an additional vaccines required indicator

AIR site users can also:

-   update or correct some data already sent to the AIR
-   request reports to help identify individuals due or overdue for
    vaccination
-   print immunisation history statements and COVID-19 digital
    certificates

The Resources page has a link to the following Health professional
education resources:

-   Submitting information to the AIR (AIRM04) - eLearning
-   Overseas Immunisation (AIRM05) – eLearning
-   Immunisation Medical Exemptions (AIRM06) - eLearning

Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service – health professionals

The HI Service is a national system for uniquely identifying eligible
healthcare providers.

-   Healthcare Provider Identifier – Individual (HPI-I) numbers are for
    individual healthcare providers. This includes general
    practitioners, nurses, pharmacists, allied health professionals and
    dentists who provide patient care
-   Healthcare Provider Identifier – Organisation (HPI-O) numbers are
    for organisations that deliver health care, such as medical
    practices or hospitals

Vaccination providers can notify the AIR of their HPI-I or HPI-O number
when logging into the AIR site. They can also choose to skip this and
proceed to record vaccination information.

Recording immunisation medical exemptions and catch-up schedules on the AIR site

Eligible medical practitioners can record an immunisation medical
exemption for an individual on the AIR site.

For information about immunisation medical exemptions and eligible
medical practitioners, see Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR).

Vaccination providers can also record vaccination catch up schedules on
the AIR. The Process page contains information on how providers record
an immunisation medical exemption or catch-up on the AIR site.

Additional Vaccine Required (AVR) indicator

Vaccination providers can flag that an individual may require additional
vaccines if they are considered medically at risk or part of a special
risk group. Vaccination providers can do this on the AIR site by
selecting the 'Additional Vaccines Required (AVR)' indicator.

When an individual has an AVR indicator recorded:

on the AIR site:

-   the AVR tick box displays as selected
-   a ‘Special risk group’ alert box displays under the individual’s
    details

on Mainframe:

-   the AVR indicator displays a 'Y' value if selected and 'N' if not
    selected

Vaccination providers must have patient consent before adding or
removing the AVR indicator. The AVR indicator does not identify the
reason for the flag.

Any vaccination provider can apply or remove an AVR indicator. To remove
an indicator, it does not have to be the same vaccination provider who
applied it.

AIR site reports allow vaccination providers to select report output
options to identify individuals with an AVR indicator. When generating
reports, vaccination providers should:

-   tick the select all checkbox under the Include Individuals who have
-   tick the Additional Vaccine Required checkbox under the Details to
    include

Services Australia cannot provide clinical advice about when an AVR
indicator is to be used and should encourage vaccination providers to
self-service online such as through Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS) or their web services enabled Practice Management Software.

If vaccination providers are unable to use self-service options, Service
Officers can escalate to their team leader or PSO for help. For more
information about the AVR indicator, team leaders and PSOs can contact
AIR Programme Support, see Resources page for a link.

Vaccination providers can consult the Australian Immunisation Handbook
for advice and recommendations when vaccinating special risk groups.

Note: the AVR indicator does not:

-   automatically populate if an individual is identified as Indigenous
    on the AIR
-   affect Family Tax Benefit or Child Care Subsidy payments

See Resources page for:

-   links to AIR Programme Support contact details
-   screen shots of the AIR site and mainframe, and
-   links to the Department of Health and Aged Care’s website for the
    Australian Immunisation Handbook

AIR site reports

The AIR produces statistical and identified reports for vaccination
providers which can be accessed from the AIR site. The Resources page
contains a link to the Services Australia website for a list of reports
available.

The reports a vaccination provider can access is based on their
‘provider type’. The provider type is set when the provider registers
with Medicare or the AIR. Vaccination providers can customise the report
output options to include certain data elements in their reports. There
is also an option to select all output options and this is the
recommended default.

Report formats are in Comma Separated Value (CSV) which is a file format
that separates the information using commas. The information is viewed
in an Excel file.

AIR reports can be very large and may be spread over multiple Microsoft
Excel files. AIR site users can choose to view reports 2 ways:

-   CSV single file
-   CSV multiple file

The option to view reports in ‘single file’ format is only available
for:

-   AIR010A - Due/Overdue Report - by Immunisation Practice
-   AIR011A - Due/Overdue report - by Locality
-   AIR011B - Due/Overdue Report - by Vaccination Provider
-   AIR021A - Due/Overdue Report - by Medicare GP
-   AIR042A - COVID-19 Vaccination Report

The Process page contains information on how providers view, modify or
request AIR reports.

HPOS messages

HPOS messages can be used to contact the AIR to request a correction to
vaccination details. For example:

-   a request to amend the date of service or vaccine brand name for
    historical data, or
-   where the vaccination provider is unable to amend details because a
    payment has been received

HPOS messages is available to vaccination providers who access the AIR
site through HPOS log on using Provider Digital Access (PRODA).

Note: authentication files were switched off by provider type between
April to September 2021. From October 2021, vaccination providers can
only access the AIR site by logging on using PRODA. See Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR) site access in HPOS.

Vaccination providers should be encouraged to edit vaccination details
using the 'Update Encounter' function on the AIR site. This function is
available if the vaccination provider submitted the encounter and they
have not yet received an information or catch-up payment (where
payable). The Process page contains the process providers follow to
access AIR secure email and HPOS messages from the AIR site.

HPOS messages must not be used to submit vaccination data. New
vaccination details should be reported using Practice Management
Software:

-   through the Record Encounter function in the AIR site, or
-   by submitting an IM018 - AIR immunisation encounter form

See the Record, edit or delete an encounter table on the Process page.

AIR audit logs

The AIR site features audit logs for web services transactions. These
logs are searchable and viewable by provider number.

Only operators with 'Web Admin' access in the AIR site will have access
to the audit logs. For more information, contact AIR Program Support.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   reports available to providers
-   AIR site troubleshooting
-   AVR indicator screens
-   Australian Immunisation Handbook
-   Services Australia website
-   contact details
-   Health professional education resources

Related links

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) site access in HPOS

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Provider Digital Access (PRODA) organisations

Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian Immunisation Register
(AIR)

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Authentication and release of information for Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
