
Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines immunisation medical exemptions on the AIR. An
approved immunisation medical exemption recorded on the AIR updates an
individual's immunisation history. It also means they may have an
up-to-date immunisation status for COVID-19 and family assistance
payments for the exemption period.

Legislation information

A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999 and the Australian
Immunisation Register Act 2015 govern requirements for recording
immunisation medical exemptions on the AIR and for family assistance
purposes. The References page contains links to the Acts.

This legislation specifies that:

-   an individual must be up to date with immunisations, be on a
    catch-up schedule or have an immunisation medical exemption recorded
    on the AIR for the individual to meet immunisation requirements to
    be eligible for some family assistance payments
-   only certain medical practitioners are eligible to certify
    immunisation medical exemptions, and
-   that notification of immunisation medical exemptions must be made in
    the form and manner required by the Secretary, Department of Social
    Services (DSS)

Immunisation medical exemptions

The Secretary has determined that medical contraindications and natural
immunity notifications must be made in the form and manner, and be
accompanied by any documents, required by Centrelink.

Eligible medical practitioners must make notifications by using the AIR
site or the Australian Immunisation Register immunisation medical
exemption form (IM011). These forms cannot be backdated.

There are 2 types of immunisation medical exemptions:

-   medical contraindication, and
-   natural immunity

A laboratory test or physician based clinical diagnosis confirms natural
immunity to a disease. Natural immunities are recorded for diseases,
unlike medical contraindications, which are recorded for vaccines and
their components.

Temporary medical contraindications for COVID-19 vaccinations must not
be recorded for longer than 6 months. If Service Officers get an IM011
form for a period longer than 6 months for a combination of COVID-19 and
other vaccinations, they should:

-   not process the form
-   contact the provider

Note: Service Officers must not offer medical advice on immunisation
medical exemptions. Refer customers to their medical practitioner or
vaccination provider for advice. Medical practitioners can refer to the
Australian Immunisation Handbook or seek further advice from their state
or territory health department. See the Resources page for links.

Medical contraindications

Medical contraindications recorded on the AIR for a vaccine can be:

-   permanent – there is no end date
-   temporary – the end date is in the future

This means that the individual is not required to be vaccinated with
that vaccine, or equivalents, during the recorded contraindication
period. The Department of Health and Aged Care may also consider them up
to date with immunisations for the purposes of:

meeting requirements for:

-   family assistance payments
-   COVID-19 vaccination

overdue reminder letters and overdue reports for providers

child care or school enrolments

Valid reasons for Service Officers to record a permanent immunisation
medical exemption on the AIR due to a medical contraindication are:

-   previous anaphylaxis (to vaccine/vaccine component)
-   significant immunocompromise (for live attenuated vaccines only)

Valid reasons for Service Officers to record a temporary immunisation
medical exemption on the AIR due to a medical contraindication are:

-   acute major medical illness
-   significant immunocompromise of short duration (live attenuated
    vaccines only)
-   the individual is pregnant (live attenuated vaccines only)

Service Officers must record all the vaccine brands the medical
practitioner has ticked on the form. Even if they contain the same
antigens (components), inactivated and live.

Generic vaccine codes can be recorded. For example, generic diphtheria
(GF) or generic tetanus (GT). See Navigate AIR system for full list of
vaccine codes.

The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI)
recommends COVID-19 vaccinations for pregnant individuals:

-   the AIR - immunisation medical exemption form (IM011) has been
    updated to remove the reference to COVID-19 vaccines for pregnancy
-   medical contraindications already recorded for a COVID-19 vaccine
    for pregnancy will remain on the individual's record until the
    expiry date

The IM011 form includes the 4 COVID-19 vaccines approved by the
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) to be administered in Australia:

-   AstraZeneca Vaxzevria
-   Moderna Spikevax
-   Novavax NUVAXOVID
-   Pfizer Comirnaty

If an IM011 form:

-   has only one COVID-19 vaccine selected and ‘ALL COVID-19’ in the
    ‘Other' field, the contraindication should be recorded in the AIR
    for all COVID-19 vaccines
-   states the individual has had a previous anaphylaxis to other
    vaccinations, this would make them exempt to COVID-19 and the form
    can be processed regardless of date of previous anaphylaxis

AIR staff must not provide clinical advice, escalate any further
questions to a Programme Support Officer (PSO).

Note: from 10 December 2021, significant immunocompromise and
significant immunocompromise of short duration are not valid reasons for
any COVID-19 vaccines. If these reasons have been recorded before 10
December 2021, they will continue to be valid on the AIR until the
expiry date.

End dated speciality codes

A provider with an end dated specialty code is not eligible to record
contraindication or natural immunity.

In these cases, Service Officers cannot process Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR) - immunisation medical exemption forms (IM011) because:

-   the health professional who provided the services is no longer
    recognised by the Medical Board of Australia to provide a medical
    contraindication/natural immunity, and/or
-   when the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra)
    suspends or ceases a provider's registration, the provider cannot
    record an immunisation medical contraindication or natural immunity
    on the AIR

See the Action incomplete or invalid immunisation medical exemption
forms table on the Resources page.

Suspended provider

A medical contraindication or natural immunity may not be recorded
because the provider has been suspended.

See the Action incomplete or invalid immunisation medical exemption
forms table on the Resources page for details, including handling calls
from providers or customers.

Natural immunity

A natural immunity has no end date. Only hepatitis B, measles, mumps,
rubella and varicella can be recorded on the AIR.

Recording a natural immunity to a disease means the individual is not
required to receive that disease component of a vaccine to be considered
up to date with immunisations for the purposes of:

-   child care enrolments
-   overdue reminder letters
-   overdue reporting for providers, and
-   meeting requirements for family assistance payments
-   certificate for work

However, the Department of Health and Aged Care considers the individual
is still due/overdue for any remaining elements in the vaccine. For
example, if an individual has a recorded natural immunity to mumps, they
are still due/overdue for measles and rubella. This shows in their
immunisation status on the AIR.

Eligible medical practitioners

Under the Australian Immunisation Register Act 2015, the following
medical practitioners can record a medical contraindication on the AIR:

-   General practitioners - defined by the Health Insurance Act 1973 as
    Fellows of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners,
    Fellows of the Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine, or
    on Medicare’s Vocational Register of General Practitioners
-   General practice registrars on an approved 3GA training placement
-   Paediatricians
-   Public health physicians
-   Infectious diseases physicians
-   Clinical immunologists

See the Resources page for a list of specialty codes.

See the Process page for how to search for a provider's specialty code
in Provider Directory System (PDS).

Medical practitioners not eligible

The Health Insurance Act 1973 does not deem the following practitioners
to be equivalent to general practitioners. Therefore, the Australian
Immunisation Register Act 2015 deems them not eligible for recording
immunisation medical exemptions on the AIR:

-   Those with an oncology specialisation
-   Medical practitioners as defined under the Health Insurance Act 1973
-   Practitioners on an old specialist pathway
-   Prevocational practitioners
-   After hours medical practitioners
-   Those with no relevant provider registration

See Specialty codes list on the Resources page.

Notification via other channels

The AIR can only accept a medical contraindication or natural immunity
notification from an eligible medical practitioner via the AIR site or
from a completed Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) - immunisation
medical exemption form (IM011).

The AIR cannot accept medical contraindication or natural immunity
notifications sent via other channels. If Services Australia receive a
notification from a channel other than the AIR site or the IM011 form,
return the document to the eligible medical practitioner with a standard
letter. The Resources page has a link to letter templates.

Examples of other notification channels that the AIR does not accept
include:

-   other AIR forms, reports or statements
-   serology test results without a correctly completed IM011 form
-   provider/practice letterhead
-   unapproved/unofficial form, that is, a form that is not an IM011
    form
-   statutory declarations

Note: if unsure whether the AIR approves a document for use, escalate
the document to an AIR Programme Support Officer.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR) - immunisation medical exemption form (IM011).

Immunisation exemptions that cannot be recorded

State and territory medical contraindication forms

Some states and territories have developed a medical contraindication
form to grant exemptions for COVID-19. These forms:

-   are acceptable as evidence of medical contraindication to COVID-19
    vaccination under state and territory public health orders
-   cannot be processed in the AIR

If a caller asks about getting a state or territory COVID-19 vaccine
medical contraindication added to their immunisation record on the AIR,
Service Officers can tell the caller they need to speak to an eligible
vaccination provider about an immunisation medical exemption. If
eligible, the provider can record it:

-   online directly to the AIR through the AIR site
-   through their Practice Management Software
-   by completing an IM011 form

Note: the preferred method for recording medical exemptions is online.

See the Action incomplete or invalid immunisation medical exemption
forms table on the Resources page.

Vaccination objections

The Australian Immunisation Register Act 2015 removed the provisions for
conscientious objection to immunisation. Conscientious objection was
renamed ‘vaccination objections’.

On 1 January 2016, vaccination objections recorded on the AIR were end
dated. If an objection is end dated, a child’s immunisation status is
not up to date and they are not eligible for some family assistance
payments.

Service Officers must not end date permanent immunisation medical
exemptions or adjust a laboratory testing date for a natural immunity.
Escalate these requests to an AIR Programme Support Officer (PSO).

If an application meets all of the following criteria, an immunisation
medical exemption can be end dated:

-   The medical practitioner has a specialty code that is eligible to
    certify immunisation medical exemptions, and
-   The medical practitioner requesting the end date of a medical
    exemption or adjustment of a natural immunity laboratory test date,
    is the practitioner who recorded it on the AIR, and
-   The request has been made in writing, and
-   The medical practitioner has given a reason for the end date of the
    immunisation medical exemption

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Immunisation
Handbook and the Australian Immunisation Register immunisation medical
exemption (IM011) form.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to AIR contact details and provider letters
-   links to the Australian Immunisation Handbook and the Australian
    Immunisation Register (AIR) - immunisation medical exemption form
    (IM011)
-   lists of specialty, medical contraindication, vaccine and disease
    (antigen) codes
-   actions for incomplete or invalid immunisation medical exemption
    forms

Related links

Navigate Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
