
Release of claims information in Medicare 011-43010060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Policy

This policy provides information on when it is permitted to release
information about a claim to the:

-   claimant
-   patient
-   health professional or a member of their staff

The following information must not be released:

-   patient's address
-   bank account details
-   claimant's address
-   type of service claimed
-   referral details (referring health professional name/provider
    number, date of referral and length of referral)

Where an individual wishes to confirm their address or banking details,
they must provide this information to the Service Officer. The Service
Officer can then verify that the information provided matches what is
currently recorded in the system.

Release of claims information to a claimant that is not the patient

The claimant is the person who paid for, or is responsible for the
payment of the medical service. The Medicare benefit will be paid to
this person, including a business, organisation, executor,
administrator, power of attorney or legal guardian. The claimant is not
always the patient. See Release of claims information to a patient where
the claimant is also the patient.

Requirements before information can be released to claimant

After successfully confirming the claimant’s identity via a security
check, the claimant must be able to identify the following:

-   date the procedure was performed (or approximate date)
-   amount of the account in question (or approximate)
-   health professional details or practice location

If the information provided by the claimant does not match the
information recorded in the system, advise the person to either:

-   complete the ‘Request for Medicare claims information form’ located
    on the Resources page
-   visit a service centre to provide proof of identification

See also: Release of information for Medicare.

Claim information that can be released

Only information in relation to the progress of the claim can be
provided to the claimant. For example, a Medicare benefit has/has not
been issued.

The Resources page contains a table describing what claims information
can be disclosed to a claimant after security requirements have been
met.

Confirm bank account details

Where a claimant wishes to confirm the bank account details stored for
use by Medicare, the Service Officer:

-   must ask the claimant to provide the relevant bank account details
    to confirm that these are the details saved on the system
-   Service Officers are able to initiate an EFT dispute/trace at the
    request of the claimant where bank account details do not match

Note: Service Officers must not release bank account details.

Release of claims information to a patient

After successfully confirming the patient's identity via a security
check they can request:

-   Service line information about themselves for a particular service
    ([PF] keys can be used to gain further information). The Resources
    page contains further information about service line information
    definitions
-   Details about the progress of the claim, for example date of
    processing or status of claim

Payment information can only be released to the patient when they have
lodged their own claim for payment of a paid account and the Medicare
benefit has been made payable to them.

Customers can view their claims history or request a statement online
for themselves. For more information see Medicare claims history and
claims history statement online.

If the patient does not pass the security check, advise them to either:

-   submit the request in writing
-   visit a service centre to provide proof of identity

See also: Release of information for Medicare.

Requesting Medicare claims information in writing

If a customer is requesting their own information, they can either:

-   complete the ‘Request for Medicare claims information form’ located
    on the Resources page
-   write an email
-   send a letter with their request

To complete the customer’s written request (by email or a letter) the
request must include:

-   the customer’s name
-   date of birth
-   Medicare card number
-   address as recorded on the Medicare system

Written requests can be emailed to the Medicare Disclosure Team.

If the customer is requesting claims information for persons other than
themselves, the customer should complete the ‘Request for Medicare
claims information form’ located on the Resources page.

Release of claims information to a health professional or a member of their staff

Note: this policy relates to release of claims information only.

Claims information may be released to a health professional or a member
of their staff in relation to:

-   pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheque
-   bulk bill claim
-   identification of a patient name
-   Medicare card number or issue

After successfully confirming the caller's identity via a health
professional security check, Service Officers can disclose claim
eligibility information for the following purposes:

-   submitting Medicare claims for payment
-   making appropriate payments in relation to those claims
-   administering any other legislative provisions governing the
    Medicare program

For example, where a health professional contacts to enquire if the
patient is eligible for a Medicare item on a particular date the Service
Officer can provide a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer. Extra information can be
released for care plan and treatment services. See under:

-   Chronic Disease Management (CDM)
-   Better Access to mental health
-   Eating disorder treatment and management
-   Better Start for Children with Disability and Helping Children with
    Autism
-   Health assessments
-   Mental health treatment for people affected by bushfires

The Process pages for each of the initiatives listed above have
instructions on handling enquiries.

Note:

-   Information on the progress of bulk bill claims can only be made
    available to the health professional (or member of their staff) who
    lodged the claim
-   Service Officers can answer enquiries about the cheque and benefit
    amount when it has been made out in favour of the health
    professional PDVC cheque

When claims information cannot be released to a health professional or
member of their staff

Information cannot be released to a health professional or member of
their staff when:

-   a patient or claimant lodges their own claim for payment of benefits
    for a paid account
-   the Medicare benefit is made payable to the claimant.

Note: in these cases the payment of the Medicare benefits is strictly a
transaction between the patient and Services Australia.

Enquiries from practice staff or health professional representatives

Practice staff or health professional representatives can work for more
than 1 health professional at a medical practice.

When an enquiry is received from the practice staff or health
professional representative a health professional security check must be
completed to identify the health professional.

Note: if there are further enquiries that relate to other health
professional at the same location, additional security checks are not
required. Confirmation must only be sought to verify that all of the
health professionals work at the same location.

The Process page contains information on when to release Medicare card
numbers.

PDVC cheque enquiries

After confirming the person's identity Service Officers can release pay
doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheque information to the health professional
or member of their staff about services connected with that cheque only.

The Resources page contains a table providing details on the information
that can be released to health professionals for PDVC cheque enquiries,
information on definitions for finalised and not yet finalised claims,
and information that can be disclosed to a claimant and health
professionals for pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheque enquiries.

Release of concessional status to health professionals

A health professional can check a patients concession for claiming bulk
billing incentive payments through Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS) using a Medicare Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) Individual
Certificate or by contacting the Medicare provider enquiries line. The
Resources page provides contact details.

The agency can release a patient's concessional entitlement status to a
health professional if they have the patient's consent and have
explained to the patient why they need this information.

A patient’s concessional eligibility can be displayed in the patient
history enquiry screen (Mainframe) or for further details Service
Officers can query the PBS concessional information.

See also: Perform telephone security check for Medicare health
professionals.

To simplified billing agents and private health insurers

Simplified billing agents and private health insurers can request
patient Medicare card details as they are involved in facilitating a
claim. They will need to undergo a simplified billing or billing agent
security check and supply health professional details.

See also: Perform telephone security check for private health insurers
in Medicare.

Medicare card enquiries

To health professionals or members of their staff

Health professionals or members of their staff cannot verify or obtain
Medicare card details by telephone through the Provider general
enquiries line.

Health professionals or members of their staff are required to obtain or
verify Medicare card details using

HPOS.

Exemptions to the requirements for use of HPOS apply to the following
groups:

-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander practice sites
-   Health professionals working in rural and remote areas (MMM rurality
    classifications 4 - 7)
-   Child Protection Services staff
-   Health professionals experiencing issues with HPOS, e.g. internet
    connectivity or no unique match found
-   Public Hospitals (where callers supply a Public Hospital provider
    number that is then checked via QPVI)
-   Callers to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Access line

The Process page contains a table describing when to release Medicare
card numbers.

Once a health professionals details are confirmed and the patient's
details supplied by the health professional or their staff uniquely
match Medicare's records, the following information can be released:

-   Medicare card number and Individual Reference Number (IRN), if
    exempted
-   Medicare card expiry date, if exempted
-   confirmation that the patient is either eligible or not eligible for
    Medicare on the date of service (DOS)
-   restrictions in relation to Medicare benefits, for example,
    Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA)
-   for online claiming, provide the correct spelling of the name
    including any spaces or hyphens

Note: online claiming requires an exact match or the claim will be
rejected.

Previous address provided

If an old or new card number is found, but the address given does not
match, and a previous address can be supplied, Service Officers can give
the Medicare card number to the health professional and advise them to
inform the patient that the card details need updating.

Previous address not provided

If an old or new card number is found, and the address does not match,
and no previous address can be provided, the Medicare card number cannot
be given.

Service Officers must advise the health professional or the member of
their staff that the card number cannot be found, and the patient needs
to be advised to update their records at a Service Centre.

Homeless persons

Where the health professional or the member of their staff identifies
the patient as being a homeless person Service Officers can provide the
Medicare card number.

To simplified billing agents and private health insurers

Simplified billing agents and private health insurers can request
patient Medicare card details as they are involved in facilitating a
claim. They will need to undergo a simplified billing or billing agent
security check and supply health professional details.

See also: Perform telephone security check for private health insurers
in Medicare.

To patient or claimant on the same Medicare card

Service Officers can release a Medicare card number over the telephone
to a person identified as the cardholder or one of the adult card
members on the Medicare card. To identify themselves, the person
requesting a Medicare card number must pass a security check.

Note: for the purposes of Medicare claiming, an adult is someone 14
years and over.

If there are any discrepancies, including the person either:

-   being evasive
-   unwilling to undergo or unable to pass a security check

Service Officers are to advise the person that they must attend a
service centre with appropriate identification.

To a hospital

Hospitals should not use Services Australia as a primary source of
information about patients' Medicare card numbers. This type of enquiry
does not confirm a patient's identity. As a rule, hospitals must insist
patients produce their Medicare card.

The service to public hospitals should be limited to circumstances where
the hospital believes that the person presenting for admission is not an
eligible person.

Hospital staff are not to be provided with the patient's Medicare card
number. They should only be advised whether a person of a given name,
address and date of birth is registered as an eligible person. The
information provided can include:

-   eligibility dates
-   whether the person has restricted access due to the Reciprocal
    Health Care Agreements (RHCA visitor)
-   the particular type of Ministerial order giving eligibility (visa
    restriction)

This should provide hospitals with enough scope to resolve any real
concerns that they may have about ineligible people obtaining free
treatment.

Note:

-   a hospital security check is conducted through the Mainframe using
    QPVI hospital provider number, not through the Provider Directory
    Service (PDS)
-   staff from Queensland Hospitals working under the COAG 19.2
    agreement frequently call for patient card information on behalf of
    health professionals

Indigenous communities in remote areas only

-   Special arrangements are in place for health professionals or
    members of their staff working in remote Indigenous communities.
    Service Officers working with remote Indigenous communities may
    facilitate requests for Medicare card number information in order
    for the health professionals to bulk bill Indigenous Australians
-   Service Officers working with remote Indigenous communities are
    permitted to update Medicare card information in the form of
    community population sheets and other written or verbal requests.
    This measure is to ensure that necessary medical services are
    available to Indigenous Australians living in remote communities
-   Note: this resource is only available to Service Officers working
    directly with health professionals in remote Indigenous communities
    covered by the 19.2 Agreement which allows the Medicare card numbers
    to be released

The Resources page contains information on definitions for finalised and
not yet finalised claims, and information that can be disclosed to a
claimant and health professionals for PDVC cheque enquiries.

Related links

Release of information for Medicare

Medicare claims history and claims history statement online

Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
