
Medicare Claims Review Panel (MCRP) 011-43190000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of the Medicare Claims Review Panel
(MCRP) and identifies the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items that
still require prior approval from the MCRP. It also describes how to
apply for review of an MCRP decision.

On this Page:

Role of the MCRP

The MCRP was created to oversee the assessment of applications for
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items that required approval prior to
payment of a Medicare benefit.

The MCRP was an expert panel of medical advisors from the Department of
Health and Aged Care who assessed clinical evidence submitted by the
servicing provider to determine if the clinical requirements had been
met for the 26 MCRP MBS items.

The MCRP’s role was to perform pre-payment compliance on MBS services
that could be misused for cosmetic purposes. The MCRP required
practitioners to fully demonstrate the clinical nature of specific
services before Medicare benefits could be paid.

Medicare benefits are not payable for non-therapeutic cosmetic services.

Practitioners must still apply to the MCRP for services performed before
1 November 2018.

Dissolution of the Medicare Claims Review Panel (MCRP) - 1 November 2018 changes

The 2018-19 Budget included changes to the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) including the MCRP and the related 26 MBS items.

The MCRP has been dissolved as of 1 November 2018. Changes have been
made to the previous MCRP MBS to remove the requirement to obtain MCRP
approval.

Any claim for an MCRP item for services performed before 1 November 2018
still requires MCRP approval for a Medicare benefit to be paid.

Any service performed after 1 November 2018 must comply with the changes
made to the relevant MBS item. As with all other claims for Medicare
benefits, it is the responsibility of the medical practitioner to ensure
that the service is clinically relevant for the patient.

Continuation of the NSW MCRP Administrative Team and Secretariat

The MCRP Administrative Team in NSW and the MCRP Secretariat in National
Office will continue to process MCRP claims for services performed
before 1 November 2018 until it has been determined that the service is
no longer required.

For services performed before 1 November 2018 that were previously
assessed but not approved by the MCRP an appeal can be lodged through
the existing process.

New applications will only be accepted for services performed before 1
November 2018.

For further information on why the changes have been made to the MCRP
items, refer medical practitioner enquiries to Department of Health and
Aged Care, MBS Policy and Medical Specialist Services team. The
Resources page has a link to contact details, including email address.

Eligibility under Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA)

Patients enrolled in Medicare under a RHCA may not be eligible for an
MCRP item where the service was performed before 1 November 2018.

Information about eligibility for MCRP items where a patient is enrolled
under a RHCA can be found in QITI.

Under the RHCA, visitors from the countries that have RHCAs with
Australia are not eligible for Medicare benefits for services performed
on a private patient in public or private hospital. For more
information, see Reciprocal Health Care Agreement.

MCRP items

Prior to 1 November 2018 there were 26 items listed in the MBS that
required MCRP approval prior to the payment of Medicare benefits. These
items were identified by the statement 'where it can be demonstrated' in
the item descriptor. If a claim for 1 of these items has a date of
service prior to 1 November 2018, MCRP approval is required.

The items are:

-   11222, 11225, 12207, 12215, 12217, 21965, 21997, 30176, 30214,
    32501, 35534, 42783, 42786, 42789, 42792, 45019, 45020, 45051,
    45528, 45557, 45558, 45559, 45585, 45586, 45588 and 45639

The Process page contains information about the supporting documentation
required for each item type.

MCRP applications are ‘Sensitive’ documents and need to be treated as
such. When an application for one of these 26 items is received, Service
Officers must forward the application and supporting documentation to
the MCRP via Jobstream (internal mail), the appropriate channel, as
documented on the Process page.

Application process for MCRP items

Medical practitioners must apply for approval of payment of an MCRP item
where the date of service is before 1 November 2018.

The Process page contains information about how practitioners make an
application, including the supporting documentation required.

If a customer or medical practitioner applies for approval or claim an
MCRP item over the counter, Service Officers should follow the steps on
the Process page.

Assessment of MCRP applications

It is the responsibility of the treating practitioner to apply to
Medicare on behalf of their patient for approval of MCRP items where the
date of service is before 1 November 2018.

Practitioners are required to demonstrate with supporting clinical
documentation, and photographic evidence for some services, that all
eligibility and service requirements of the item descriptor have been
met.

Clinical documentation provided

The MCRP review all supporting clinical documentation supplied by the
practitioner and based on this evidence determine:

-   a Medicare benefit is payable as all eligibility requirements of the
    MBS item descriptor have been met, or
-   a Medicare benefit is not payable as the MCRP cannot conclude from
    the supporting clinical documentation that all eligibility
    requirements have been met

No clinical documentation provided

Where a claim for a MCRP service with a date of service before 1
November 2018 (not previously assessed), is received and the claim does
not have supporting clinical documentation from the practitioner, the
claim is to be rejected.

The practitioner will be required to resubmit the claim with supporting
clinical documentation before the claim is progressed to the MCRP for
approval.

Formal advice of the outcome is sent to the requesting practitioner
only, to discuss with their patient. The MCRP does not provide a formal
response to the patient.

Note: Services Australia does not provide advice to the practitioner on
the specific circumstance(s) around the outcome of a MCRP application.
This is to prevent the possibility of that information being misused for
future MCRP applications.

Rejected MCRP applications

Applications for MCRP items will be rejected where the MCRP cannot
conclude from the supporting clinical documentation that all eligibility
requirements of the MCRP item have been met.

Services Australia can only pay Medicare benefits in accordance with the
legislation governing the programme. There is no discretion to pay
benefits outside of the legislation. Services Australia administers
Medicare on behalf of the Department of Health and Aged Care who is
responsible for developing policy for the programme.

Note: it is the responsibility of the treating practitioner to determine
that their patient’s clinical circumstance meets any MBS eligibility
requirements in full, including adhering to all requirements detailed in
the service descriptor, before billing the service to Medicare.

Review of an MCRP decision (appeal)

A request for review of a decision can be lodged to the MCRP for any
service performed before 1 November 2018 that has previously been
reviewed by the MCRP and deemed not to meet the MBS item descriptor.

Review of an MCRP decision will only be considered where new information
is provided by the practitioner that further demonstrates the descriptor
of the MCRP item is met.

A review of decision will not be considered if no additional information
is provided by the practitioner.

An application for review of an MCRP decision should be posted to 'The
MCRP Officer' using the mailing address listed in Medicare Claims Review
Panel (MCRP).

Telephone enquiries

For information about handling telephone enquiries regarding
applications or rejected claims from customers and medical
practitioners, see the Process page.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Medicare Claims
Review Panel (MCRP).

Related links

General assessing information for Medicare

Medicare benefits for professional services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
