
Patient claims processing in Medicare 011-43010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the lodgement and processing of
claims for Medicare benefits.

Patient claims

A patient claim is when a medical service is provided to the patient and
a claim is being submitted for the payment of the Medicare benefit. The
Medicare benefit is paid to the person who incurs the cost (has fully
paid the account), and is known as the claimant. Where the account is
unpaid or partially paid the benefit is paid to the provider by cheque
(pay doctor via claimant (PDVC)).The patient and claimant do not have to
be the same person or be on the same Medicare card.

Patient and claimant

The following descriptions are provided to differentiate between patient
and claimant:

-   Patient - the person to whom a medical service has been provided.
    Note: the patient is identified on the provider's invoice
-   Claimant - the person who incurred, or is liable for, costs
    associated with the medical service rendered

As the claimant has paid for the service provided to themselves or
another person, they are entitled to receive the Medicare benefit.

A claimant may also be a business or organisation and, if on behalf of
the patient, they have incurred the expense they are entitled to receive
the Medicare benefit. For example a sporting body, see the Process page
for details on how to process a claim for a business or organisation.

An organisation funded for the provisions of medical services under
section 19(2) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 is unable to claim a
Medicare benefit.

Medicare benefits for Patient claims can be submitted by either:

-   post
-   in person at a service centre
-   digitally
-   phone
-   using an Access Point

Medicare benefits can be paid by:

-   Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) for fully paid accounts, or
-   At point of service, credit EFTPOS via Medicare Easyclaim
-   PDVC cheque

If claims are lodged digitally via self-service channels, the patient
must be on the same Medicare card as the claimant.

Progress of Medicare claim lodged

Where the claimant calls or enquires about the progress of a patient
claim lodged within the relevant timeframe, Service Officers are to
confirm receipt of the claim and status (received/paid/rejected etc.).
Service Officers are not to process the claim, advise the claimant we
will assess and pay any Medicare benefit owing as quickly as possible.

If a customer indicates they are in financial hardship, the Process page
explains how to process these claims.

See the Resources page for a link to the Services Australia website with
the relevant timeframe for claiming a Medicare benefit.

If the claim was received outside the relevant timeframe:

-   via online or through the App, see Enquiries received via telephone
    for digital self service claims
-   by mail or at a service centre, process the claim, see the Process
    page

Manual EFT payment

Manual EFT payments are required in the following instances:

-   Safety Net payments for outpatients with individual charges over
    $9999.99
-   Safety Net partial payments
-   State Safety Net cheques
-   stale cheques that cannot be processed on the system
-   stop on a cheque but BILI is not actioned and cheque goes stale
-   patient claim late lodgement over 7 years
-   cheques manually cancelled by finance operator number 08448

All manual EFT payment requests are prepared by Medicare Provider
Services (MPS) and actioned by Accounting Operations.

The Process page contains information on how to request a manual EFT
payment for MPS Service Officers.

Statement of benefit

A statement of benefit (printed in service centres, or a system
generated receipt) provides customers with a summary of their claims and
the total Medicare benefits paid. It is also confirmation of payment.

Service Officers should only issue a statement of benefit when requested
by the claimant or patient. This applies to all Medicare claiming
channels.

There are some exceptions; a statement of benefit must be issued when:

-   it has been ticked on a completed Medicare claims form
-   requested by the claimant during a telephone claim
-   when the customer attends a service centre or calls the Medicare
    enquiry line and requests one
-   for all Express Plus Medicare mobile app claims
-   to a business or organisation where they have incurred the cost
-   the claim includes in hospital services

When a claimant or patient requests a duplicate statement of benefit,
Service Officers must ensure the statement is issued only to the
claimant or patient for that service.

Manual statement of benefit

A manual statement of benefit is a letter Z2261 manually completed by
Service Officers and can be issued to customers for claims:

-   with a service date over 7 years
-   adjustments that cannot be actioned in mainframe or result in an
    overpayment
-   Safety Net adjustments
-   Safety Net payments for claims over $9999.99
-   for claims where a manual payment has been made

A requested manual statement of benefit letter is to be addressed to the
claimant/patient.

The letter contains a field where the applicable reason code is entered.

See, Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims
processing in Medicare for more information on reason codes.

If the manual statement of benefit is for an adjustment of any type,
then place information from the previous assessment lines with RSN 888
and the revised adjusted lines.

If the service(s) is for an inpatient service, if eligible, the claimant
can forward this statement to their Private Health Fund to claim further
gap benefits.

Where there are any outstanding overpayments recorded on a patient's
history related to this service, a Service Officer can issue a statement
of benefit to the claimant. Service Officers are not to withhold the
statement until the overpayment has been repaid or, contact debt
recovery to enquire on the status of the overpayment.

See Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing for
more information.

Accounts

The account or account receipt is the most important element when
processing patient claims. These documents contain the essential details
that allow a Medicare benefit to be paid.

For a claim to be processed the account and/or the account receipt must
be provided. The account can either be paid or partially paid
(confirmation of payment must be included either by receipt or noted on
the account) or unpaid (only the account is required).

For information on what is required on an account/receipt for the claim
to be processed, see Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims
processing.

Payment of benefits via EFT

Following the Government announcement in the 2015-16 Budget, payment of
Medicare benefits to claimants by cheque ceased from 1 July 2016. Pay
doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheques will continue as legislated in the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

Payment of benefits for paid accounts will be deposited into the
claimant’s nominated bank account. For a processed claim where the
claimant has not provided a bank account, the payment for the claim will
be held until EFT details have been provided.

If a claim is processed at a service centre or via phone claiming, the
claimant does not need to complete and sign a claim form. See Patient
claims requirements for payment of Medicare benefits.

Held EFT payments for children under 14 years of age (provider error)

If a provider submits a claim online and selects a child under 14 years
of age as the claimant and no EFT details are recorded, the benefit will
be held. The Service Officer is to determine who the correct claimant
is.

When a customer (other than the child) contacts Medicare and claims to
be the claimant, the Service Officer is to determine if the customer is
the actual claimant and the provider has transmitted the child as the
claimant incorrectly.

To determine if the customer is the claimant, the Service Officer must
ask the customer the following questions (following a security check):

-   what was the date of service
-   who was the provider
-   how much was paid for the service

If the customer successfully answers these questions, the claim should
be adjusted to reflect the correct claimant.

Unpaid or partially paid accounts

Medicare benefits for unpaid or partially paid accounts can only be paid
by cheque. The claimant must present both:

-   the account or account receipt
-   a completed and signed Medicare Claim form (MS014)

Medicare benefits for unpaid or partially paid accounts are paid via a
computer generated pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheque drawn in favour
of the provider who is entitled to the Medicare benefit.

The PDVC cheque is posted to the claimant at the address recorded
against the claimant or on the claim form (when the claimant nominates a
temporary address), together with a statement of benefit for retention
by the claimant and the provider.

The claimant is responsible for forwarding the benefit cheque to the
provider, together with the balance of the account, if applicable. They
can then present the account receipt at a service centre to show the
service has been paid in full. The claim can then be substantiated and
will accumulate towards the Medicare Safety Net threshold for all out of
hospital services.

See also: Verify services for Medicare Safety Net

These requirements cannot be varied as they are supported by the Health
Insurance Act 1973, Section 20(2).

See also: 90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

Incomplete claim forms or incorrect details

The information supplied on the account or account receipt should be
used to uniquely identify both the patient and the claimant.

When identification is not possible, return the original document to the
customer, together with the appropriate letter. Photocopy the original
account documents and retain onsite for future reference attached to a
photocopy of the letter.

The Resources page links to letter templates.

See also:

-   Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits
-   Incomplete or incorrect Medicare claim forms

Permanent address change during claim processing

When a permanent address change is actioned during claims processing, by
Medicare Claim form (MS014), telephone claiming or in person at a
Medicare Service Centre, and the claim is later reversed, the amended
address must not be reversed with the claim. The claimant's address must
remain updated in CDMS.

Payment times for Medicare benefits

There is a minimum turn-around time for Medicare benefits to be paid.
These minimum payment times vary according to the claim type and relate
to the number of days (including weekends) the benefit is held by
Services Australia prior to release for payment to the claimant or
provider.

Payment of claims when CICS is unavailable

This information is for situations where the Medicare Customer
Information Control System (CICS) mainframe is not available in service
centres. Customers should not be penalised when the Medicare system is
not available.

Service Officers should advise customers that the system is down and
they can either:

-   fill in a Medicare Claim form (MS014) and the claim will be
    processed as soon as the system is available into their nominated
    back account by electronic funds transfer (EFT)
-   lodge the claim through their myGov account if applicable or on the
    Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Medicare benefits for fully paid accounts can only be paid by EFT with
funds deposited into a nominated bank account. Where the claimant does
not have valid EFT details stored in the CDMS or cannot provide valid
temporary or permanent EFT details at the time the claim is submitted,
the payment for the claim will be held until EFT details have been
provided.

Helping claimants

See Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms.

Patient claims submitted more than 2 years after date of service

The Process page contains a table outlining the situations and the
action required when patient claims submitted for payment are over 2
years old from the date of service.

The Resources page has information for processing control lines and
links to forms, process map, letter and the Services Australia website.

Contents

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Adjustments for Medicare patient claims

Assistant surgeon accounts processing in Medicare

Provider charges $10,000 or more (greater than $9999.99) for Medicare
patient claims

Goods and Sales Tax (GST) charged to Medicare patient claim accounts

Greatest Permissible Gap (GPG)

Hospital Substitute Treatment (HST) claims for Medicare

Incomplete or incorrect Medicare Claim forms

Medicare benefits for professional services

Medicare claims for deceased persons

Medicare patient claims history or claims history statement has
incorrect or missing information

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Permanent address change during Medicare claims processing

Printed receipts confirming payment of Medicare benefit

Professional services related to Medicare patient claims

Radiation oncology accounts with multiple fields in Medicare claims

Release of claims information in Medicare

Quality assurance for external mail in Medicare

Medicare Two-way and claims processing

Related links

90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

Medicare benefits for professional services

Referrals for assessing Medicare

Process digital self service claims

Sensitive information indicators in the CDMS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
