
Bulk bill claims in Medicare 011-43030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19).

This document outlines information relating to bulk bill claims in
Medicare.

Temporary policy: Patient signatures for assignment of benefit during COVID-19 pandemic

The Department of Health have provided updated policy advice on how a
practitioner can obtain agreement from their patient for an assignment
of benefit for face-to-face services that are bulk billed during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Where a patient is seen face-to-face and the health professional chooses
to bulk bill, reasonable steps must be taken to obtain a signature
agreement. For example:

-   Written signature
-   Medicare easy claim, patient selects either the OK or yes button on
    the EFTPOS terminal
-   Email agreement, or
-   Signature of a responsible third party

However, if the patient refuses to sign the form, that is, does not want
to touch the pen or paper, the practitioner can obtain the agreement
verbally. To do this the health professional must:

-   Identify on the form that the patient is unable to sign the
    assignment of benefit and include the reason, for example, COVID-19,
    risk of exposure to COVID-19, Verbal agreement, Telehealth, Phone
    consult
-   Notate the verbal agreement of assignment of benefit in the
    patient’s clinical notes

Note: this policy is a temporary measure, currently effective until 31
December 2022.

Manual bulk bill claims

To support this temporary policy, bulk bill manual claims received with
a date of lodgement from 13 March 2020 can be accepted, where the
following has been provided:

-   A completed header, signed by the health professional and witness
-   An assignment of benefit form with:
-   patient’s signature, or
-   the reason why the patient is unable to sign the assignment of
    benefit form, for example, COVID-19, risk of exposure to COVID-19

Note: this policy only applies where the patient refuses to sign (that
is, does not want to touch the pen and/or paper). The above information
does not replace existing policy for all other ‘unable to sign/blank
signature’ scenarios.

For information specific to COVID-19 services see Temporary Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to Coronavirus (COVID-19).

Bulk billing

Bulk billing, also known as direct billing, is when a health
professional bills Medicare directly for any medical or allied health
service that a patient receives. Bulk billing is available to all
persons in Australia who are eligible for a Medicare benefit under the
Medicare program.

Where a health professional and a patient enter in to a bulk bill
arrangement, the:

-   Servicing health professional undertakes to accept the relevant
    Medicare benefit as full payment for the service. Additional charges
    for that service cannot be raised, and
-   Patient assigns their right to the Medicare benefit to the servicing
    health professional, allowing the benefit to be paid directly to the
    health professional

Health professionals must lodge claims for assigned benefits in
accordance with the approved forms and within a period of 2 years from
the date of service. See also: Bulk bill latter day adjustment (LDA)
claims in Medicare.

There is no minimum age restriction for a patient to assign their right
to a Medicare benefit to the servicing health professional. However, the
patient must have the capacity to understand what they are signing.
Health professionals must use their discretion to determine a patient's
capacity.

Bulk billing cannot be used as a form of debt collection for unpaid
accounts.

Note: section 20A of the Health Insurance Act 1973 allows a patient to
assign their right to a Medicare benefit to the health professional who
has rendered the service.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefit Schedule
(MBS) Online Explanatory Note GN.7.17, which has further information
about bulk billing.

Patient assigning their right to a Medicare benefit

A patient can assign their right to a Medicare benefit to the servicing
health professional by signing a completed and approved assignment of
benefit form for manual and online claiming. The patient or other
responsible person must not sign a blank or incomplete assignment of
benefit form.

Under section 20B (3) of the Health Insurance Act 1973, a copy of the
completed form must be given to the patient or other responsible person
after the patient has signed the form.

The Resources page contains a link to Medicare Online for health
professionals page on Services Australia’s website. This page includes
details about assignment of benefit documents.

Note: for online claiming, if a health professional offers Medicare
Easyclaim, a patient assigns their right to a Medicare benefit to the
servicing health professional by pressing the OK or YES button on the
EFTPOS terminal in the practice.

Assignment of benefit for pathology services

Under section 20A (2) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 a patient can
make an offer to assign their Medicare benefit to an approved health
professional.

Where the servicing health professional (for example, GP) requests
pathology services, but the patient does not physically attend the
Approved Pathology Practitioner (APP) as the pathology sample was
collected by the servicing health professional, the patient may complete
an assignment of benefit voucher at the time of the visit to the
requesting health professional (for example, GP) to assign benefits for
the APP's service.

The Resources page contains a link to Medicare Benefits Schedule –
PN.7.1 assignment of Medicare benefits - patient assignment.

Patient unable to sign Assignment of benefit form

If a patient is unable to sign an assignment of benefit form a signature
of one of the below is acceptable:

-   Patient’s parent
-   Guardian
-   Other responsible person

In the absence of a parent, guardian or responsible person, the ‘patient
signature’ section should be left blank.

Where the signature space is either left blank or another person signs
on the patient's behalf, the assignment of benefit form must include:

-   the notation 'Patient unable to sign', and
-   in the 'Practitioner's Use' section, the reason why the patient was
    unable to sign, for example, unconscious, injured hand

For Medicare Easyclaim, consent from the patient, the patient's parent,
guardian or other responsible person is acceptable by pressing the OK or
YES button on the EFTPOS terminal.

Responsible person

'Responsible person' refers to an adult person accompanying the patient
or in whose care the patient has been placed. A responsible person can
include someone who:

-   is the parent or guardian
-   holds power of attorney
-   holds a guardianship order
-   is the next of kin

This does not include the:

-   health professional who rendered the service
-   health professional's staff
-   hospital proprietor or staff, or
-   residential aged care facility proprietor or staff

Patient unable to sign - sensitive issue

If the health professional determines that the reason the patient is
unable to sign is of a highly sensitive nature, they can notate 'due to
medical condition' or ‘due to sensitive condition’ in the
'Practitioner's Use' section. This would only be the case if revealing
the reason would:

-   constitute an unacceptable breach of patient confidentiality, or
-   unduly embarrass or distress the recipient of the patient's copy of
    the assignment of benefit form

Note: This should not be routine practice, and ‘extenuating
circumstances’ is not acceptable notation for the lack of patient
signature.

If the claim is a resubmission of a previously submitted claim, refer to
the section Bulk bill resubmissions for further information.

Patient unable to sign- deceased

The health professional and patient must have entered into a bulk bill
agreement at the time of service including having the patient sign the
assignment of benefit form.

Where a signature is not obtained from a patient, a signature from a
responsible person is acceptable. A responsible person can be:

-   the executor of the will
-   an appointed administrator

Note: the notation ‘patient deceased’ is not a sufficient reason for a
health professional not obtaining a signature on the assignment of
benefit form. A signature must be provided on the assignment of benefit
form, from either the patient or the responsible person.

Electronic signatures

Where a health professional and a patient enter into an agreement under
section 20A of the Health Insurance Act 1973 the agency will accept a
patient’s signature electronically provided the below conditions are
met:

-   The electronic device used to capture the signature is able to
    replicate the existing form approved for the purposes of subsection
    20A(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973
-   The signature on the electronic device is reliable and identifies
    the patient and indicates that patient's intention to assign the
    Medicare benefit
-   The use of the device is in accordance with any information
    technology requirements specified by Medicare
-   For the purposes of section 127 of the Health Insurance Act 1973 the
    particulars relating to the professional service be set out on the
    approved assignment of benefit form before the patient signs the
    agreement, and
-   A copy of the assignment is given to the patient as soon as
    practicable after the patient signs the agreement

The References page contains a link to the Electronic Transmission Act
1999.

Patient refuses to sign

A patient's refusal to sign the assignment of benefit form is different
to a patient being unable to sign the form. Where a patient refuses to
sign the form, this is a matter between the patient and the health
professional. A patient's refusal to sign the assignment of benefit form
means that the patient and the health professional cannot enter into an
agreement for bulk billing.

Additional charges for bulk bill patients

If a health professional bulk bills for a service, the health
professional undertakes to accept the relevant Medicare benefit as full
payment for the service. Additional charges for that service cannot be
raised. This includes but is not limited to:

-   any consumables that would be reasonably necessary to perform the
    service, including bandages and dressings
-   record keeping fees
-   a booking fee to be paid before each service
-   an annual administration or registration fee

Exception

The only exception where an additional charge against a bulk billed
patient can be raised is where the patient is provided with a vaccine or
vaccines from the health professional's own supply held on the premises.

This exception only applies to general practitioners and other
non-specialist health professionals in association with attendance items
3 to 96 and 5000 to 5267 (inclusive). It only relates to vaccines that
are not available to the patient free of charge through Australian
Government or state government funding arrangements or available through
the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). The additional charge must
only be to cover the supply of the vaccine.

Where a health professional chooses not to bulk bill a patient, they may
privately raise an additional charge against a patient, such as for a
consumable.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefit Schedule
(MBS) Online Explanatory Note GN.7.17, which has further information
about bulk billing.

Manual bulk bill forms

Health professionals can submit their Medicare bulk bill claims
electronically through Medicare Bulk Bill Webclaim or by ordering manual
bulk bill forms by completing a Medicare stationery order form. Medicare
Bulk Bill Webclaim can be accessed using Health Professional Online
Services (HPOS). If the health professional does not have HPOS access,
they need to apply for Provider Digital Access (PRODA) to be able to
access HPOS.

Note: manual bulk bill forms were removed from the agency's website 15
May 2017.

Manual bulk bill claim header requirements

A valid claim must include the appropriate bulk bill claim header for
the assignment of benefit form(s) used. The header can only be signed by
the servicing health professional.

Services that were performed as in-patient and out-patient services
cannot be ‘batched’ together and submitted under the one claim. These
claims need to be submitted separately and the appropriate header
completed.

All fields on the manual bulk bill claim header are expected to be
completed by the health professional. However, there a few exceptions to
this, which are listed below:

-   witness name for sole health professionals
-   payee provider section (only completed where the payee and servicing
    health professional are not the same)
-   missing or incorrect information that may be confirmed over the
    phone. The Process page provides more information on this

Witness signature

A 'Signature of Witness' is required on all manual bulk bill claim
headers. An eligible witness is a person who works at the health
professionals practice but is not the person or health professional who
rendered the service and signed the declaration.

Note: sole health professionals that are unable to have a bulk bill
header witnessed with a signature must indicate this by notating 'sole
practitioner' in the witness signature field in order to have a bulk
bill claim processed.

Medicare card number required for bulk billing

Where a patient is unable to provide their Medicare card number to the
health professional, the health professional may obtain it by:

-   Using the Patient Verification facility through Health Professional
    Online Services (HPOS)
    Note: this facility is only available to health professionals with a
    Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) site certificate or with
    registration for PRODA
-   Calling the Medicare provider enquiries line for exempted groups
    only

For more information, see Medicare card enquiries in Release of claims
information in Medicare.

Medicare card close to expiry date or has expired

Where a bulk bill claim is lodged and the Medicare card used is within
75 days either before or after the expiry date, the health professional
is informed via the bulk bill statement that the card is about to, or
has, expired.

See also: Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims
processing in Medicare

Alterations on bulk bill claims not previously processed

When a bulk bill claim is received for initial assessment (that is, a
bulk bill claim not previously processed by the agency) and details on
the assignment of benefit form have been altered, the health
professional is not required to:

-   have the patient initial or endorse the alterations to indicate that
    they are aware of and agree to the alterations
-   complete a new assignment of benefit form with the correct details
    and have the patient sign the new form before submitting to the
    agency for processing

See also: Bulk bill claims - late lodgement, adjustment and omitted bulk
bill incentives

Inappropriate alterations to assignment of benefit forms

It is an offence under section 128A, 128B and 129 of the Health
Insurance Act 1973 for a servicing health professional to make a false
or misleading statement in relation to a Medicare claim. The servicing
health professional must not under any circumstances amend any details,
for example, an item number, simply because the agency rejected the
original claim.

The Resources page contains links to assignment of benefit and
Application for bulk bill claim adjustment forms.

Bulk bill claim lost in transit

Where the servicing health professional contacts the agency enquiring
about the payment of a manually submitted bulk bill claim and it is
identified that the agency is not in receipt of the claim (presumably
lost in transit), the Service Officer must ask the health professional
if they retained a copy of the claim.

Note: the copy of the claim retained by the health professional must
include a signature from the patient on the assignment of benefit form.

Health professional has retained a copy of the claim

If the health professional has retained a copy of the claim, they must
do the following:

-   photocopy all of the assignment of benefit forms within the claim
-   resend the claim to the agency
-   attach a brief covering letter explaining the reason for the
    photocopied claim being submitted

Note: if the photocopied assignment of benefit forms are missing any
details from the original forms, for example, if the details were
stamped on the original and this did not transfer to the practitioner
copy, it is acceptable for the servicing health professional to add
these details to the photocopied form(s).

The agency will accept the photocopied assignment of benefit forms
providing that the information on the form is clear, and there is no
evidence suggesting alterations have been made.

Health professional has not retained a copy of the claim

If the health professional has not retained a copy of the claim, they
must do the following:

-   complete the assignment of benefit form(s) with the original service
    details
-   obtain the patient's signature
-   complete a bulk bill claim header
-   send the claim to the agency for processing

Note: while health professionals are no longer required to retain a copy
of the bulk bill forms, the agency suggests the copies are retained
until the account has been reconciled.

The Resources page contains links to various bulk bill forms on the
Services Australia website.

Locating health professionals EFT payments

All heath professional bulk bill payments are made via EFT. A health
professional must have their bank details stored with the agency in the
Provider Directory System (PDS) in order to receive bulk bill payments.

Health professionals that have not registered their EFT details and
lodge bulk bill claims will have their payments HELD. Once the health
professional registers their nominated bank account, any HELD Medicare
benefits will be automatically released by the system.

A list of EFT payments can be viewed by keying control line BRNA. This
transaction will allow a view of specific Medicare deposits for a
provider number.

The data available via the BRNA transaction is updated daily, See
Medicare benefit not received (EFT dispute).

Bulk bill EFT dispute

A bulk bill EFT dispute is when a health professional states they have
not received a claimed Medicare benefit into their nominated bank
account and it is confirmed that the claim was processed and not
rejected.

Service Officers are to determine the reason the health professional has
not received their Medicare benefit as claimed. For example, HELD
payment, claim rejected or not processed.

Health professional error

If it is determined that the health professional updated or provided
incorrect bank details to the agency, Service Officers are to complete
an EFT dispute form and forward to MPS Assessing. If the claim was
processed against the wrong health professional and it can be identified
who received the payment, complete a Customer enquiry form and forward
to MPS Assessing, noting overpayment details.

If an EFT retrieval is unsuccessful where the health professional has
provided incorrect information, the agency is not obligated to repay the
funds.

Agency error

If it has been determined that the Medicare benefit was paid into a bank
account that was not the health professionals, due to an error made by
the agency, appropriately skilled Service Officers are to repay the
health professional at the first point of contact.

Service Officers must also complete a Medicare EFT Dispute Form and send
via email to MPS Assessing or if it is known, to whom the incorrect
payment was made, instead raise a debt through MPS Assessing.

Bulk bill resubmissions

Bulk bill resubmissions are Medicare bulk bill claims that have been
resubmitted by a health professional with additional or amended details.
Resubmissions generally occur after a claim header or assignment of
benefit form is returned or rejected due to missing or incorrect
information, such as:

-   Incomplete or incorrect Medicare card number or patient details
-   Bulk bill header or assignment of benefit form is incomplete, e.g.
    health professional and/or patient has not signed the assignment of
    benefit form
-   Claim information such as the item number or referral details

When resubmitting a bulk bill claim header or assignment of benefit form
that has been previously rejected by Medicare, the servicing health
professional must lodge the resubmitted claim with all the required
paperwork otherwise the claim cannot be processed.

Each type of resubmission has different requirements in order for the
claim to be processed. If there are missing documents or paperwork, the
claim must be returned with the appropriate letter.

Resubmitting rejected electronic bulk bill claims

Where an electronic bulk bill claim is rejected, a health professional
can resubmit the claim electronically for the same service, as the
patient has initially signed the assignment of benefit form.

Where the claim can’t be resubmitted electronically, Service Officers
must identify whether the claim is for an initial assessment or a
resubmission of a previously rejected service to accurately determine
the paperwork that is required as part of the bulk bill claim
resubmission.

Resubmission of a previously rejected claim for the same service

Where a practice cannot resubmit the claim electronically, they must
provide Medicare with the following documents:

a completed header, signed by the servicing health professional and
witness, and

an assignment of benefit form accompanied with either:

-   a patient signature
-   letter indicating the claim was originally submitted electronically,
    or
-   a notation that the ‘patient has signed the Medicare copy’, where
    there is evidence either on the patients mainframe history or PaNDA
    that the claim was payable at the time of the original submission

Note: this only applies where there has not been a change to the
original details of the claim (e.g. item number, DOS etc.).

Resubmission of a previously rejected claim for a different service

Where an online bulk bill claim is rejected and the practice is required
to resubmit the claim for a different service to the original; the
patient is required to sign a new assignment of benefit form, which
reflects the correct service.

If agreement is obtained from the patient for the correct service, the
practice can resubmit the claim for the service electronically.

Where the practice cannot submit the claim electronically, they must
provide Medicare with the following documents:

-   a completed header, signed by the servicing health professional and
    witness
-   a completed assignment of benefit form signed by the patient

Resubmission of a previously rejected Easyclaim bulk bill claim

For a resubmission of an Easyclaim, the following documents are
required:

-   a completed header, signed by the servicing health professional and
    witness
-   copies of the Easyclaim printout / slip, and
-   a signed letter on a practice letterhead stating that the original
    claim was submitted through the Easyclaim channel

Resubmitting rejected manual bulk bill claims

Where a manual claim has been rejected and the practitioner is required
to resubmit the claim, Service Officers must determine whether the claim
received is for the same service as the original or whether the
resubmission is for a different service.

Resubmission of a previously rejected claim for the same service:

a completed header, signed by the servicing health professional and
witness

assignment of benefit form accompanied with either:

-   a patient signature
-   a notation that the ‘patient has signed the Medicare copy’, where
    there is evidence either on the patients mainframe history or PaNDA
    that the claim was payable at the time of the original submission

Note: copies of the original forms are acceptable where the claim is
resubmitted for the same service

Resubmission of a previously rejected claim for a different service:

-   a completed header, signed by the servicing health professional and
    witness
-   a completed assignment of benefit form signed by the patient

Retaining Assignment of benefit forms - health professional

Health professionals are no longer required to keep a copy of the
assignment of benefit forms where the claims are lodged electronically.
Services Australia recommends that the copies are retained until the
account has been reconciled.

Health professionals that submit their claims manually are required to
retain the copy of the assignment of benefit form for up to 2 years

If the agency requires a health professional to demonstrate that a
service was provided to a patient for electronic claims, it can be
demonstrated through records such as notes in practice software,
appointment records or the practitioner copy of the assignment of
benefit form.

Where a health professional is unable to demonstrate, through any other
record, that a service was provided to a patient, the practitioner copy
must be retained for 2 years from the date of service.

The Resources page contains a table outlining disposal action of records
as stated in Entry 20173 of the National Archives of Australia - Records
Authority - Medicare.

Document storage and archival

The agency will retain bulk bill claim forms that have been submitted
for a period of 2 years, where a benefit is paid to the health
professional.

All assignment of benefit forms, accounts or account receipts for
processed claims must be retained by the agency for audit purposes.
These documents provide the only reliable audit evidence in support of
the payment of Medicare benefits.

See also:

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Archiving and document retrieval for Medicare and Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Alterations on bulk bill claims not previously processed

When a bulk bill claim is received for initial assessment (that is, a
bulk bill claim not previously processed by the agency) and details on
the assignment of benefit form have been altered, the health
professional is required to have either:

-   the patients initials endorsing the alternations to indicate they
    are aware of and agree to the alterations, or
-   complete a new assignment of benefit form with the correct details
    and have the patient sign the new form before submitting to Medicare
    for processing

Incorrect benefit assigned error code for bulk billing

A quality control error may be recorded against a Service Officer where
they have:

-   keyed a benefit assigned amount different to that detailed on the
    voucher
-   acknowledged [F9] that a benefit is different to the benefit on the
    voucher, or
-   altered the benefit assigned from the transmitted data to allow
    payment

Service Officers must adhere to the instructions detailed below.

Service officers can to [F9] to acknowledge a difference between the
benefit assigned and a system generated benefit up to a difference of:

-   $5 for a derived fee item
-   $10 for all other items

If the discrepancy between the benefit assigned to an item and the
amount detailed on the voucher exceeds the above amounts, Service
Officers are to reject the item with reason code '504 - charge keyed is
either incorrect or missing'.

Bulk bill Statements

Bulk bill statements are mailed to the payee provider at their current
preferred mailing address, as per their stem details in the Provider
Directory System (PDS). Manually requested statement are printed daily
and should be received within 10 working days.

Health professionals can subscribe to the Health Professional Online
Services (HPOS) Mail Centre to receive copies of statements or reports,
including Medicare bulk bill (manual claiming) reports. Health
professionals subscribed to the above statements on HPOS, or who lodged
the claim via HPOS, do not receive paper statements from Services
Australia. They must access their statements via HPOS.

See Related links for a link to ‘Requests for provider statements for
eBusiness/eServices’ for further information.

The Resources page contains a list of bulk billing control line
functions, acceptable resubmission documents, information on records
disposal, links to forms on the Services Australia Website and intranet,
and to the Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS). It also provides contact
details for Assessing and Benefits, Bulk bill claims and My Health
Record.

Contents

Bulk bill late lodgement claims in Medicare

Bulk bill incentive items in Medicare

Related links

Medicare - Claims - Your Health

Bulk bill latter day adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare

Requests for provider statements for eBusiness/eServices

Simplified billing claims in Medicare

Bulk bill claims - Late lodgement, adjustments and incentive items

Telehealth bulk bill claims in Medicare

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Account requirements for pathology services in Medicare

Medicare Easyclaim service

Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims processing in
Medicare

Archiving and document retrieval for Medicare and Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
