
Information required for a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient refund 011-60020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the information about what is required for a PBS
patient refund.

PBS patient refund

Section 87A of the National Health Act 1953 sets out the circumstances
in which a person is entitled to claim a refund for PBS medicines from
Services Australia.

A person can request a PBS patient refund if:

-   they did not show their Medicare card or concession card when they
    purchased the medicine at the pharmacy
-   they spent over their yearly PBS Safety Net threshold and have
    continued to pay more for their medicine than they are required to,
    or
-   they were entitled to receive their medicine at a discounted rate as
    an eligible patient under the Closing the Gap (CTG) – PBS Co-payment
    Measure

Note: all eligible visitors covered under the Reciprocal Health Care
Agreements (RHCA) are entitled to PBS patient refunds

In some situations, patient refunds have to be processed manually. For
example:

-   refunds outside the current PBS Safety Net year where a safety net
    card has not been issued
-   refunds for RHCA visitors from New Zealand or the Republic of
    Ireland (Southern Ireland), where a Medicare card cannot be issued

For information on how to process a PBS patient refund manually, see
Manually process a claim for PBS patient refund.

RHCA visitors are not entitled to claim section 100 In-Vitro
Fertilisation (IVF) medicines, with a date of supply on or after 1
November 2017, unless the patient has made an ‘exceptional
circumstances’ application to the Department of Health and Aged Care.

Calculating the refundable amount

Section 87A of the National Health Act 1953 states the refundable amount
is the difference between the patient's contribution and the
Commonwealth dispensed price, as listed in the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits.

When calculating the amount to refund for a claim with expenses over 2
years old, the Service Officer will need to email PBS Helpdesk and
request confirmation whether a previous refund was processed for the
expenses. This is because data is only visible for Service Officers for
the current 2 year period.

Note: if the 'duplicate claim' message displays while processing the
patient refund, the Service Officer must review the possible duplicate
claim prior to closing the message.

Charges that cannot be refunded

Patients applying for a refund are not reimbursed for any of the
following charges (or any part of these charges) which were included in
the price that they paid for their PBS/Repatriation Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (RPBS) medicine, as they do not form part of the
Commonwealth price:

-   Additional ready prepared (RP) fee
-   Additional extemporaneously prepared (EP) fee
-   Allowable extra fee

Note: the above charges are allowable fees that the pharmacist can
charge general patients paying up to the general patient contribution.

Brand price premium (price depends on the individual medicine)

Some brands of medicine cost more than others. When the patient receives
a more expensive brand, the refund is based on the price of the cheapest
brand, and the difference is not refundable.

Therapeutic premium (price depends on the individual medicine)

Some brands of medicine cost more than others. When the patient receives
the more expensive medicine, the refund is based on the price of the
cheapest similar medicine, and is not refundable.

Special patient contribution (SPC)

Selected PBS items attract a SPC that is payable by all patients in
addition to the relevant patient contribution and is not refundable.

The References page contains legislation relevant to calculating the
refundable amount for PBS.

PBS Patient Refund not received (EFT dispute)

If it is identified a refund has not been received or has been deposited
incorrectly into another bank account see Medicare benefit not received
(EFT dispute). This can be the result of an error made by the
patient/claimant or a Service Officer.

Discounting PBS Co-payment and patient refunds

Patients who submit a PBS refund and receive a discount on their
co-payment, will have their refund calculated using the discount
co-payment amount.

For example, when a concessional patient does not have their
concessional card at the pharmacy and the pharmacist then charges the
patient the general contribution rate minus the allowable discount of
$1.00, based on 2020 figures this would mean the patient paid $5.60
including the $1.00 discount. The patient is then entitled to a patient
refund from Services Australia for the actual contribution paid by the
patient being the discounted amount of $5.60 (less any premiums).

Pharmacy accounts and patient refunds

A patient cannot use a pharmacy account to obtain a patient refund. For
example, a private arrangement a pharmacy may have entered in with a
customer.

A pharmacist cannot claim a patient refund on behalf of a patient by
using a pharmacy account (putting their details in the claimant details
field).

A pharmacy invoice can be accepted if the invoice has been endorsed as:

-   paid in full, and
-   signed by the pharmacist, and
-   has the relevant information required to process a patient refund

The pharmacy cash register receipt is not acceptable for PBS patient
refund claiming, as this does not have the data required to process a
claim.

RHCA - visitors and PBS patient refunds

Visitors from Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) countries such as
the United Kingdom, Finland, Italy, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden and Belgium may or may not be issued a Medicare card, depending
on their length of stay in Australia.

All eligible visitors covered under the RHCA are entitled to patient
refunds.

Required information for claims

Visitors from an RHCA country must submit the following information when
applying for a patient refund:

-   A fully completed Patient claim for refund form obtained from a
    pharmacy, a service centre or the Services Australia website. The
    claimant must nominate a valid Australian bank account for the
    refund payment to be paid. The bank account does not have to be in
    the claimant's name
-   An S87A receipt on a pre-printed Medicare receipt form, or a PBS
    receipt produced from pharmacy software as printed on the S87A
    receipt. A link to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme receipt -
    S.87A, National Health Act 1953 form (PB011) is available on the
    Resources page

Visitors from Finland, Italy, Malta, The Netherlands, Sweden, Belgium
and the United Kingdom (including Northern Ireland) must show their
Medicare card when applying for a refund.

Note:

-   RHCA visitors are not entitled to claim a PBS subsidy (including via
    a refund) for section 100 In-Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) medicines
    with a date of supply on or after 1 November 2017, unless the
    patient has made an ‘exceptional circumstances’ application to the
    Department of Health and Aged Care
-   a digital copy of a Medicare card (digital wallet feature of the
    Medicare Express Plus application) may be offered when applying for
    a refund. See also, RHCA eligibility for Medicare and PBS.

RHCA - Republic of Ireland and New Zealand

Visitors from New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland are not issued
with a Medicare card whilst in Australia. When one of these claims is
received it must be escalated to the program team, who works with
Medicare to enable the refund to be paid.

Before escalating the claim, the Service Officer must collect all
relevant information from the claimant:

-   Email address of claimant
-   Claim form PB132
-   Pharmacy Receipt with sufficient details to process claim
-   Certified copy of passport including visa
-   Evidence of Australian address (time of dispensing of PBS medicine)
-   Details of current Australian bank account for payment of refund

The Service Officer must then submit all paperwork to the program team
via the PBS Operational Policy and Legacy Programme team positional
mailbox who will work with Medicare to raise a temporary Medicare
profile. Once a profile has been raised the claim will be returned to
the Service Officer to complete the refund.

Upon completion of the claim the Service Officer is to notify the PBS
Operational Policy and Legacy Programme team with payment details. The
program team will contact the patient (and cc Service Officer) and
advise of refund. The Service Officer should ensure all evidence and
this email are stored in PaNDA as part of the claim package.

The Medicare profile will be removed once payment to the nominated bank
account is confirmed.

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) cardholders

Over-the-threshold patient refunds

Over-the-threshold patient refunds for all DVA cardholders are processed
by Services Australia.

No-card patient refunds

In Smart Centres when processing a no-card claim, the Service Officer
must determine whether the patient holds a Pensioner Concession Card
(PCC), Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CHSC), or a Veteran’s Card
(White (STEC), Orange (RPBC) or Gold (PTEC)). The kind of entitlement
held by the patient is shown on the PATIENT ENQUIRIES - SELECTION
CRITERIA (RPQN) screen in the Patient Enquiry System.

Smart Centres can process no-card claims for DVA patients with a PCC or
CSHC entitlement only. If the DVA patient holds a White, Orange or Gold
card, do not process the claim. The claim must be returned to the
claimant to seek a refund from DVA.

PBS items supplied in public hospitals

Over-the-threshold patient refunds only

Whilst medicines supplied through hospitals can be counted towards a
person's PBS Safety Net threshold under the joint Safety Net
arrangements, these medicines are supplied under State hospital funding
arrangements and not supplied under the PBS.

Any requests for refunds for hospital-supplied medicines need to be
directed back to the relevant hospital. A copy of the Prescription
Record Form (PRF) must be returned to the claimant detailing the items
that may be eligible for a refund through the hospital.

PBS items supplied in reform public hospitals

PBS items supplied at reform public hospitals (public hospitals in
Queensland, Victoria, South Australia, Northern Territory, Tasmania and
Western Australia) can count towards a person's PBS Safety Net threshold
and can be included when calculating a request for an over the threshold
refund.

PBS items supplied at reform public hospitals can be refunded.

How a patient claims

Responsibility for claiming entitlements rests with the patient. When
items accumulated on a Prescription Record Form (PRF) have exceeded the
PBS Safety Net threshold, Services Australia can refund the cost to the
patient for those items in excess of the limit.

When a patient cannot satisfy a pharmacist of their eligibility, they
may be charged the full price of the medicine including allowable
pharmacy fees, which are non-refundable. The patient can then apply to
Services Australia, through a Medicare Service Centre or Smart Centre,
for a refund of the difference between the patient contribution amount
that they should have paid and the subsidy, or Commonwealth price of the
medicine (less any brand price or therapeutic group premium).

Services Australia can only pay refunds for PBS items supplied through
approved suppliers. Refunds for hospital supplied items should be
referred to the relevant State or Territory hospital or health
department.

Definition of a dependant for PBS Patient Refund Claiming

A Dependant for PBS claiming purposes is a person who is an Australian
resident within the meaning of the Health Insurance Act 1973 and:

the spouse of the person

a child under the age of 16 years who is in the custody, care and
control of the person or the spouse of the person; or

a person who:

-   has attained the age of 16 years but is under the age of 25 years
-   is receiving full time education at a school, college or university
-   is not being paid a disability support pension under the Social
    Security Act 1991; and
-   is wholly or substantially dependent on the person or on the spouse
    of the person

A refund cannot be claimed on behalf of someone else unless they are a
dependant or if they are able to receive payments on behalf of the
claimant.

The claimant is the person who the PBS medicine was supplied for or a
person eligible to receive the refund on behalf of the person who the
medicine was supplied for. For example, a family member listed on the
Medicare card or someone who can prove they paid for the medication on
behalf of the patient.

To make a PBS patient refund claim the person must be 14 years or older.
Claims submitted for a child under 14 years must be submitted by an
adult who is able to receive payments on behalf of the child.

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders, Executors

Power of Attorney (POA)

POA, Guardianship Orders and Administration Orders give people the legal
authority to act on behalf of someone else. The difference between these
types of documents is the way in which a person has been appointed to
act on behalf of another individual.

Type of appointments

An individual can appoint someone as a POA to act on their behalf in
specified circumstances.

A court or tribunal can appoint someone to act as the legal guardian or
administrator of an individual who is unable to manage all or some of
their affairs due to accident, illness, disability or mental incapacity.

POA, Guardianship Orders and Administration Orders will vary on a case
by case basis. This means each new document needs to be considered in
order to determine whether it allows a person to do business with
Services Australia on behalf of someone else.

Where documents for POA, Guardianship Order or Administration Order are
presented at a Services Australia for Medicare purposes, the details are
recorded in the POA details section in Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS). If the claimant has given permission to use this
information it can be used to confirm the POA arrangement. Only PBS
Service Officers with the established or experiences skill tag can add,
amend, or alter POA details in CDMS.

Note: POA documents sighted must be original or a certified copy of an
original.

A POA drawn up in one state is acceptable nationwide for the purposes of
a PBS patient refund, unless it is set out in the POA that it is
restricted to the state of origin.

If a POA has been drafted in another country, it must be verified and
confirmed by an Australian legal entity (lawyer, solicitor etc.).
Written advice by the legal entity must state that the POA is acceptable
in Australia and must accompany the POA document.

Executor

The Executor is a person or a company that has been appointed within the
terms of the patient’s last Will and Testament.

If the Executor provides the correct documentation with the claim, check
CDMS to see if the banking details match. If they match, process the
claim and it will be paid into the bank account details recorded with
Medicare. If the banking details are different, and the identity of the
executor has been confirmed (see Claiming for a deceased person),
proficient Service Officers who have the experienced or established
skill tag will add the details in CDMS.

Service Officers not trained in this process should unassign the work
item with the reason Proficiency Raised so that trained Service Officers
can update the CDMS record.

Note: Executor documents sighted must be original or a certified copy of
an original.

Definitions of terms

The following is a list of definitions related to POA, Guardianship
Orders, Administration Orders:

-   POA: a written document given by one person to another authorising
    them to act for him/her on their behalf
-   Executor: the role of the executor is to manage the estate within
    the terms of the Last Will and Testament, and protect the assets of
    the estate
-   Guardianship and Administration Orders: a written document given by
    a court or tribunal appointing a legal guardian or administrator to
    act on behalf of an individual
-   Attorney: the person authorised to act (also called donee)
-   Donor: the person who has given the POA, that is, the person for
    whom another person is acting
-   Donee: the person authorised to act (also called attorney)
-   Jointly and severally: the attorneys can make decisions together or
    separately
-   Severally: any one of the attorneys can make decisions independently
    of the other attorneys
-   Jointly: the attorneys must agree on all decisions

New POA

A certified copy of a POA is acceptable.

Where a person presents a POA to Services Australia, Service Officers
must examine the document to determine that the:

POA is not for a specific purpose, such as:

-   Health - this refers to medical treatment or a decision made in
    relation to medical treatment. This does not authorise a person to
    interact with Services Australia
-   Conveyancing - this refers to the sale, purchase or rental of a
    property. This does not authorise a person to interact with Services
    Australia

POA is enduring (permanent), general, financial or limited - usually
found on the front of the document

-   A general POA may be for specific periods or events and usually have
    an end date
-   Financial POA allows interaction with Services Australia

Donee:

-   Has expressly consented to act and accepts appointment as attorney.
    This is found in a signed statement, usually at the back of the POA
-   Signature is witnessed by a third party. In some cases, 2
    independent witnesses (cannot be witnessed by the donor)
-   Cannot witness the donor's signature

Donor's signature requires 2 independent witnesses. If there is only 1
witness and the form allows for 1 witness, this is acceptable to
Services Australia

Note: where the power has been given to more than one donee, these
details must be recorded in the POA field in CDMS for Services
Australia. A POA is not valid when the donor is deceased. Where a POA
states or indicates that it only becomes valid where the donor has
become incapacitated contact Health Service Delivery (HSD) Eligibility
for assistance. It is necessary to sight a letter from a medical
practitioner which attests to this fact. Where a letter is not provided,
the POA details will not be included on the donor's record in the
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Guardianship and Administration Orders

A certified copy of a Guardianship Order or an Administration Order is
acceptable.

Guardianship and Administration Orders must be noted under POA in the
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Where an individual is unable to manage all or some of their affairs a
court or tribunal can make orders appointing a legal guardian or
administrator to manage all or some of their affairs.

A person who has been appointed an administrator under a Guardianship
Order or an Administration Order is treated in the same manner as a
person appointed under a POA.

The legal guardian, administrator or manager may be either:

-   an individual
-   two or more people appointed together or separately
-   a legal entity such as the Public Trustee

Service Officers must examine documentation to determine:

-   whether the order is not for a specific purpose. If the order is for
    a specific purpose, then it does not affect Services Australia
-   if the order specifies a time period, limitation or conditions

Claiming for a deceased person

A claim for PBS patient refund can be made on behalf of a deceased
person where the appropriate documentation can be provided. Service
Officers must check the deceased’s personal comments in CDMS to see if
confirmation of identity for the executor or appointed administrator
have been previously provided.

If CDMS does not confirm this information then appropriate documentation
must be provided with the claim form. The person needs to prove their
identity and provide documentation showing they are the executor or the
appointed administrator for the deceased, such as:

-   the Last Will and Testament naming the Executor of the estate, or
-   the Letter of Administration naming the Appointed Administrator

Note: executor documents sighted must be original or a certified true
copy of an original.

When updating POA details in CDMS, Service Officers must add a comment
on the deceased’s record in CDMS to record notification of documentation
by the executor or appointed administrator. The executor, or the
appointed administrator, is not required to provide a certified true
copy of the Last Will and Testament or the Letter of Administration each
time they claim.

For more information about executors, see Power of Attorney,
Guardianship, Administrative Orders, Executor.

Where a request is made to use the deceased’s bank account details,
Service Officers should inform the executor or the appointed
administrator that if the bank account has been closed by the financial
institution the electronic funds transfer (EFT) payment will
automatically be rejected. If the deceased’s bank account has not been
closed, the Medicare benefit may be paid into the bank account. However,
the executor or the appointed administrator should check with the
financial institution to confirm access to the funds will be possible.

When processing a PBS patient refund and the executor or appointed
administrator advises to use the nominated bank account stored in CDMS
for the deceased, proceed with the refund steps as normal.

If the banking details provided by the executor or appointed
administrator differ from those recorded in CDMS, proficient Service
Officers who have the experienced or established skill tag will
add/amend the details in CDMS.

Service Officers not trained in this process should unassign the work
item with the reason Proficiency Raised so that trained Service Officers
can update the CDMS record.

Claiming for a foster child

A claim for a PBS patient refund can be made on behalf of a child in a
foster care arrangement by their appointed carer. If the surname and
address of the child do not match the person making the claim then proof
of the caring arrangement should be requested.

The PBS Patient claim for refund form (PB132)

Claimant details

This section provides identification details of the claimant and is used
to set up the claim identifier. The claimant is either:

-   the person who the PBS medicine was supplied for; or
-   a person aged 14 years or over who is eligible to receive the refund
    on behalf of the person who the medicine was supplied for. For
    example, a family member listed on the Medicare card, or someone who
    paid for the medication on behalf of the patient

It is important that these details are completed as the claim is created
in the name of the person listed on the claim form, as the claimant.

The details provided in this section are:

-   Medicare card number (when available)
-   Safety Net, Repatriation (DVA) or Centrelink card number
-   Family name
-   First given name
-   Second given name
-   Address
-   Postcode
-   Phone number (business hours)

Claim details

This section allows the claimant to select 1 of 3 options:

-   Entitlement card and/or Medicare card not shown at the pharmacy
-   The yearly Safety Net threshold has been exceeded
-   The Closing the Gap (CTG) annotation was not recorded on the
    prescription to receive co-payment when dispensed by the pharmacy

Patient details

This section provides identification details of the patient. It should
match details supplied on the receipt issued by the pharmacist. This
receipt should be attached to the claim form.

The details provided in this section are:

-   Medicare card number (including individual reference number). This
    is required for all claims submitted, where the patient payment
    level is keyed as P (Private). When one claim contains details for
    more than one patient, the full Medicare number of each individual
    patient, must be supplied next to each of the item details
-   Family name
-   First given name
-   Date of birth
-   Safety Net, Repatriation Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
    (required for all instances where the patient payment level is T
    (Threshold), G (General) or C (Concession)), or Centrelink card
    number

Privacy notice and claimant's declaration

This is the declaration the claimant makes and must be signed and dated.

This section is mandatory and a claim cannot be processed for payment
when the signature of the claimant or their agent is not provided or the
form is not dated.

Old or incorrect form provided

Where the claimant has submitted:

-   an out of date version of the PBS Patient claim for refund form
    (PB132), which includes new banking details or does not include
    required information to process the refund, or
-   an incorrect form, such as a Medicare refund form

request more information from the claimant by using letter Z1682 'We
need more information to refund your PBS claim'.

Note: old versions of the PBS Patient refund form can be accepted where
they include all the required information, and banking details are
identical to those already recorded for the claimant.

Prescription record forms

Over-the-threshold patient refunds only

Prescription Record Forms (PRFs) are generated by the pharmacy software.
Customers who don’t always go to the same pharmacy can download a
PBS/RPBS Safety Net prescription record form from the Services Australia
website to help keep a record of how much they spend on RPBS/PBS
medicines.

PRF’s submitted with a PB132 patient refund claim form must be signed by
the pharmacist. It is sufficient for the pharmacist to sign either the
first or last page if there are multiple pages.

One prescription record form can contain information for different
patients, so a check needs to be made against the patient details listed
on the claim form.

Patient receipts PBS

No-card patient refunds only

Services Australia supplies receipt forms to pharmacists. These forms do
not have to be used, but all required information must be supplied on an
official pharmacy receipt. Most pharmacy dispensing software can
generate receipts. Receipts printed from a register till are not
acceptable for a PBS patient refund. The Resources page contains a link
to the forms.

Note: certified documents can be accepted, for example, accounts, tax
statements or patient history, where the document has the date, the
pharmacist signature and the medication information. All certified
documents must be endorsed with 'Paid in full'.

To make data entry of receipt details easier, receipts for the same
patient should be kept together. One claim can contain information and
receipts for different patients, so a check needs to be made against the
patient details listed on the claim form and the receipts provided with
the claim.

Providing Medicare or Concession entitlement cards

A Service Officer must identify the patient's correct Medicare number
and/or entitlement number at the date of supply of the item.

The patient's Medicare number is only mandatory when the Patient Payment
Level obtained from the pharmacy receipt indicates that the patient was
charged at the private rate (that is, a Patient Payment Level of P). The
Medicare number quoted on the claim form must be the correct number at
the date of supply, including the card issue number and the patient
reference number.

When the Medicare number is provided, the patient is entitled to receive
PBS items at the general patient contribution rate less any brand price
or therapeutic group premiums.

Note: unknown Medicare numbers cannot be added to the patient refund
system, see PBS Safety Net processing and enquiries.

Patient reimbursement

When the patient wants to be reimbursed the difference between the
concession/free rate and private/general payment level paid, the patient
must provide a Concession entitlement identification number which was
current at the date of supply of the item.

Missing entitlement identification (ID)

When the entitlement ID is missing from a line entry on the claim form,
and when another entry on the form for the same patient has an
entitlement ID, the Service Officer can assume that ID relates to the
other entries. Confirm the date the entitlement was issued against the
date the item was supplied. Escalate to a PSO if required.

Refer to (RPQN) to check a patient's entitlement details, including
start and end date.

Medicare card numbers

The correct Medicare number (10 digits) must be provided at the date of
supply against the item in the patient refund system. Service Officers
cannot add unknown Medicare numbers to the patient refund system.

When the Medicare number keyed at the date of supply, for an item on the
claim form, is not current in the PBS system, the system displays error
messages. Service Officers can then enter or select a valid Medicare
card number or reject the claim.

See Special Medicare numbers.

Concession entitlement cards

The Concession entitlement card must be current at the date of supply.
When the number provided on the claim for patient refund is not held in
PBS eligibility records, and documentation provided states the
entitlement was current at the date of supply, escalate the details to
the PBS Helpdesk. For example, a letter from Services Australia. The PBS
Helpdesk confirms the validity of the entitlement and arranges for PBS
eligibility records to be updated when appropriate.

If the patient's entitlement is not valid, reject the claim and refer
the claimant to the agency which issued the card.

Updating bank account details in CDMS (Established/Experienced Service Officers only)

Service Officers with the established or experienced proficiency skill
tag may update bank account details in CDMS. Any other Service Officers
should unassign the work item with the reason Proficiency Raised so that
trained Service Officers can update the CDMS record.

Where the claimant provides new bank details to pay the claim, Service
Officers should only update bank account details if the claimant has
demonstrated that they are the POA, guardian, administrator or executor
for the patient.

In all other circumstances, Service Officers should send a Z1682 ‘We
need more information to refund your PBS claim’ letter, requesting that
the claimant update their banking details with Medicare.

Bank account details should be updated in accordance with Amend customer
details in CDMS for Medicare.

If an executor is claiming on behalf of a deceased patient, Service
Officers must also input an end date for the bank account of 6 months in
the future, and leave a clear note explaining why the bank account was
updated.

The Resources page contains information on the patient details required
for the prescription record form, the patient refund receipt form
(S87A), details of concession card entitlement refunds, PBS Joint Safety
Net arrangements and links to forms and letters, and the PBS general
enquiry phone number.

Related links

Process a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient refund

Making an enquiry on a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient
refund claim

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and enquiries

Special Medicare numbers for pharmacists

Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Closing the Gap (CTG) Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Co-payment
Measure

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
