
Simplified Billing claims in Medicare 011-43060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures relating to Simplified Billing
claims in Medicare.

Simplified Billing

Simplified Billing is an initiative of the Australian Government
Department of Health and Aged Care introduced in May 1995 as part of the
Private Health Insurance Reforms.

Simplified Billing plays an important role in connecting the health
sector by:

-   aggregating patient medical bills for in-hospital care into a single
    comprehensive account
-   providing informed financial consent to ensure the patient is aware
    of any out-of-pocket expenses, and
-   streamlining the claiming process for the patient by removing the
    need for patients to submit claims to Medicare and private health
    insurers themselves

The Simplified Billing claiming channel is available for in-patient
claiming where services are provided to patients admitted as a private
patient of a public or private hospital.

Simplified Billing enables a patient to assign their right to benefit to
the private health insurer or billing agent. An assignment of benefit
must occur in order to enable the billing agent/ health insurer to claim
benefit from Services Australia.

The assignment of benefit arrangement enables the agency to deal with
third party entities (billing agents/private health insurers) without
breaching privacy rules. Only the health professional, billing agent or
health insurer can enquire about a Simplified Billing claim. Where a
patient makes an enquiry, they must be referred to their billing agent
or private health insurer.

Simplified Billing Arrangements

There are 4 arrangement options available to hospitals and doctors, to
make patient claims through Simplified Billing. They include:

-   the establishment of a Medical Purchaser Provider Agreement (MPPA)
-   the establishment of a combined Practitioner Agreement with Hospital
    Purchaser Provider Agreement (HPPA)
-   the use of an Approved Billing Agent, and
-   a Gap Cover Scheme

Medical Purchaser Provider Agreement - MPPA

Legislation passed in May 1995 to allow private health insurers to claim
Medicare benefits on behalf of their members when they have an MPPA in
place with the health professional.

If an MPPA is in place, the private health insurer can make an agreement
to pay the health professional benefits above the Medical Benefits
Schedule fee.

Legislation prohibits any private health insurer from interfering with
the clinical freedom of doctors. This will address any concerns a health
professional may have with entering into a MPPA with a private health
insurer.

The patient need not be involved unless there is an agreed out-of-pocket
expense.

Agreements between the private health insurer and the health
professional may be expressed orally or in writing. They may be valid
for a fixed period of time, or allow either party to end the agreement
at will.

Hospital Purchaser Provider Agreement/Practitioner Agreement - HPPA/PA

When a HPPA/PA is in place, a doctor need not deal directly with a
private health insurer when submitting claims for Simplified Billing. An
HPPA/PA is a combination of agreements between the practitioner and the
hospital, and between the hospital and a private health insurer.

The patient need not be involved in the claim process unless there is an
agreed out-of-pocket expense.

Agreements between the private health insurer, hospital and medical
practitioner may be expressed orally or in writing, and may be valid for
a fixed period of time, or allow either party to end the agreement at
will.

Approved billing agent

This option allows Simplified Billing to occur without the need for any
form of agreement.

Changes were made to the Simplified Billing Guidelines in October 1998
that allow a billing agent to claim the Medicare benefit directly from
the agency and to claim any fund ‘gap’ benefit directly from the private
health insurers.

The billing agent must be approved by the agency and can be a private
health insurer, a hospital, an individual or an organisation.

Billing agents act on the patient’s behalf to claim Medicare benefits
and private health insurance medical benefits. The patient’s assignment
of benefit must be made in writing and must be provided to the billing
agent before the billing agent can act on the patient’s behalf. The
patient need not be involved unless there is an agreed out-of-pocket
expense.

Billing agents are entitled to collect the gap benefit from the private
health insurer, on behalf of the health professional, when the private
health insurer and health professional have a gap cover/scheme
arrangement.

See the Resources page for a list of Approved Billing Agents.

Gap Cover Scheme

Private health insurers have arrangements in place which may cover some
or all of the doctors’ fees for hospital treatment.

Unless the private health insurer has a gap cover scheme in place with
the doctor which will cover all of the doctor’s charge, the patient may
have to contribute towards the doctor’s bill out of their own pocket.

Private health insurer registration

All private health insurers must be registered organisations under the
Private Health Insurance Act 2007. Private health insurers wanting to
lodge Simplified Billing claims may be required to certify that
agreements exist in accordance with the legislation.

This certification is required to enable the agency to pay Medicare
benefits to a private health insurer under an MPPA or HPPA/PA.

See the Resources page for a list of private health insurers.

Payment of Medicare benefits under Simplified Billing

Medicare benefits will be paid directly into the bank account nominated,
via Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT).

Private health insurers should complete the Private health insurer
registrations and updates for ECLIPSE form (HW081) to register or update
their bank account details for the purposes of the electronic
transmission of Medicare claims and payments. Billing agents who need to
update their bank account details need to contact Simplified Billing
(ECLIPSE).

Simplified Billing claiming options

There are various claiming options available for health professionals,
private health insurers and billing agents under the Simplified Billing
scheme. These include:

-   Manual claiming
-   Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
-   Electronic Claim Lodgement and Information Processing Service
    Environment (ECLIPSE)
-   Late Lodgement of Simplified Billing claims
-   Simplified Billing/ECLIPSE latter day adjustment (LDA)

Note: all Medicare benefits are paid via EFT to the private health
insurer or billing agent who then passes it on to the health
professional inclusive of any private health insurer benefit.

Manual Simplified Billing claims

Simplified Billing manual processing is used when the private health
insurer or billing agent is unable to transmit a claim electronically
via the ECLIPSE or EDI channels. Usually the following types of claims
cannot be transmitted electronically and may need to be processed
manually:

-   Claim types not approved for electronic transmission by the private
    health insurer. These may include claim types like S4B(3) or
    services greater than 14 lines
-   Claims for deceased patients

Note: a manual claim can only be lodged with the agency by a private
health insurer or billing agent. All Simplified Billing manual claims
must be submitted on the Simplified Billing Manual Claims batch header
form (HW091) and should be accompanied with the accounts/invoices.
Service Officers (SO) can identify a manual Simplified Billing claim by
the Simplified Billing Manual Claims batch header.

A maximum of 50 items/services per batch header. This is inclusive of
referral/request details. For example, 1 item = 1 service and 2 items =
1 service including referral/request details. If the claim has more than
50 items/services per batch header, the Service Officer is to return the
claim back to the private health insurer or billing agent with a letter
of explanation (z2162). Service Officers should not split the claim
under a second date of lodgement.

The FEGI transaction suite enables Service Officers to manually key a
Simplified Billing claim. The Resources page links to supporting
information, batch header Simplified Billing and letter templates.

Late Lodgement of Simplified Billing claims

The Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) states that a claim for assigned
Medicare benefits must be lodged with the agency within 2 years from the
date of service.

The Act enables the Chief Executive Medicare (or their delegate) to
consider applications to extend this period having regard to all matters
considered relevant, including any hardship that may be caused if a
longer period is not allowed.

An application to extend the 2 year lodgement period is known as a late
lodgement. The decision of the Chief Executive Medicare or their
delegate is final.

For more details about acceptable or non-acceptable criteria and the
evidence required, see the Process page.

Simplified Billing contacts and enquiries

Simplified Billing

When contacting the agency with enquiries relating to Simplified
Billing, billing agents and private health insurers should have the
following details ready:

-   Minor ID or Registration number
-   claim ID
-   servicing provider number
-   patient details, including Medicare card number

When contacting the agency with enquiries relating to Simplified
Billing, health professionals should have the following details ready:

-   provider number
-   claim ID
-   servicing provider number
-   patient details, including Medicare card number

All emailed enquiries relating to the:

-   claiming process, assessment of claims or any administrative
    arrangements with Simplified Billing should be forwarded to Provider
    Services team
-   EDI transmissions, missing exception or EFT reports should be
    forwarded to the EDI Helpdesk
-   EDI errors must be forwarded to the Provider Services team

A screen dump can be attached to emails when reporting problems:

-   key SHIFT and Print Screen in the Mainframe screen displaying the
    problem
-   select New Email in Microsoft Outlook and use the paste function to
    attach the screen dump

See Simplified Billing (ECLIPSE) for contacts for the relevant channels.

Medicare patient history

Simplified Billing claims can be identified on the Medicare claims
history (NHOI/NHSI) screen.

Note: press:

-   PF2-CLAIM ID to identify exactly which line below to the 1 claim
-   PF4-FEE/SRC to check the date of lodgement

The Resources page lists the details displayed on Medicare claims
history for Simplified Billing claims.

Reason codes for Simplified Billing

An explanation of the reason codes quoted on Medicare statements is
available on the internet. The list can be viewed online or downloaded
to allow billing agents and private health insurers to include the codes
directly into reconciliation programs. The codes are located on the
Services Australia website.

Note: the reason codes shown on this web page exclude those for internal
use only and those used for latter day adjustments. This is updated
daily with the most current list of reason codes by Medicare.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website.

Data validation (RMDS) reports

The Resources page includes a link to the RMDS reports manual and lists
and describes the Report Management and Distribution System (RMDS)
reports available for Simplified Billing. These reports are used to
determine claims management.

BREFTE enquiries - BRNA

The BRNA transaction allows Service Officers to view specific deposits.
The data available via this transaction is updated daily.

Simplified Billing Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) payment details are
written to the Medicare BREFTE (BRNA) system so that information is
available for payment enquiries, payment history and payment status
update.

BREFTE enhancements from 12 June 2017

Bank Reconciliation Electronic Funds Transfer Enquiry (BREFTE) is an
enquiry system for electronic funds transfer (EFT) payments processed by
the Medicare payment systems. BREFTE:

-   records EFT payment status and text data associated with an EFT
    payment
-   reflects the actions performed in the claims processing transactions
    relating to EFT claims for paid accounts

Simplified Billing EFT enquiries only:

Enhance search criteria function to include Claim ID and amend screen to
include claim ID field

Enhance payment display to separate Simplified Billing EFT payments by
claim type:

-   ECLIPSE
-   EDI
-   Manual
-   Latter Day adjustment (LDA underpayments)

Enable access to payment history (BRNH) screen directly from BRNA screen

BREFTE access

For Simplified Billing, the BREFTE system is accessed by entering the
following in the relevant fields, for:

-   private health insurer payments - Payee type F and the payee ID
    (minor customer ID)
-   billing agent payments - Payee type B and the payee ID (minor
    customer ID)

The BRNA screen accepts and displays the payee type field (defaults to
N) which is unprotected to allow Service Officers to key either:

-   F (fund)
-   B (billing agent)

Note: accepts alpha and numeric characters.

The Resources page includes a link to the BREFTE manual.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to the RMDS reports manual and BREFTE manual
-   a list of the details displayed on Medicare claims history for
    Simplified Billing claims
-   status values for manual claims
-   a list and description of the RMDS reports available for Simplified
    Billing
-   Services Australia website links
-   a link to the Simplified Billing letter templates, and
-   links to contact details

Contents

Perform telephone security check for private health insurers in Medicare

Billing agents for Simplified Billing in Medicare (security check)

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

ECLIPSE claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in
Medicare

Operational Statistics System (OSS) for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Payments for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Pend processing of Simplified Billing manual claims for Medicare

Statement of benefit for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Simplified Billing reports in RMDS

Related links

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

Simplified Billing Latter Day Adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
