-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assessing information for discontinued
procedures, also known as abandoned surgery.

Abandoned surgery

Reasons for a procedure to be discontinued or abandoned can include:

-   medical reasons, such as a deterioration in the patient's condition
-   technical difficulties in performing intended surgery such as
    equipment failure

Medicare benefits are not payable unless the procedure has commenced,
meaning the patient is:

-   in the procedure room, on the bed or operation table where the
    procedure is to be performed
-   anaesthetised or operative site is sufficiently anaesthetised for
    the procedure to commence, and
-   positioned or the operative site is prepared with antiseptic or
    draping

Where surgery is completed, but is considered unsuccessful, then the
full MBS item number is payable.

Details of the proposed surgery or the reason for discontinuing are not
required to support claims submitted to Medicare. Health professionals
must maintain a clinical record of this information, which may be
subject to audit.

Text must be supplied with claims to advise which surgical items are
completed and which are abandoned.

The Resources page has a link to explanatory note TN.8.5 for further
information.

Surgical item 30001

Item 30001 is located in the MBS under Category 3 – Therapeutic
Procedures > Group T8 – Surgical Operations > Subgroup 1 – General.

Item 30001 must be co-claimed with an item from Group T8 – Surgical
operations, it is a derived fee item that applies 50% of the scheduled
fee for the co-claimed T8 item.

Text must be supplied with claims to advise which surgical items are
completed and which are abandoned.

In order for the system to calculate the correct scheduled fee the 2
items are required to be claimed in the correct order with item 30001
directly below the T8 procedure that was abandoned.

Depending on the proposed services and the progress of the operative
procedure different claiming scenarios will apply based on what stage
the procedure is abandoned:

-   When the operation is discontinued before an MBS item in Group T8
    has started, (regardless of whether a single operation or a multiple
    operation was proposed) the surgeon should only bill for the
    proposed item with the highest scheduled fee and it should be
    co-claimed with item 30001
-   When an MBS item in Group T8 has commenced, but the operative
    procedure is discontinued before any item number has been completed,
    all proposed items can be billed, and each item must be co-claimed
    with item 30001
-   When a service or services described in an MBS item in Group T8 are
    completed, but other proposed procedures are discontinued or
    abandoned then each item that was completed should be billed as
    normal and each item that was not completed should be co-claimed
    with item 30001

Out-of-hospital service, notional charge and multiple T8 items

Manual patient claims require an invoice/account from the practice
displaying the individual charges raised against each item. This will
ensure the patient’s Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) can be applied
correctly.

In-hospital service, notional charge and multiple T8 items

If a manual claim for in-hospital services has an invoice/account
showing a notional charge, this can be apportioned (split) over all the
services being claimed, excluding item(s) 30001.

The Resources page contains examples of how claims for discontinued or
abandoned surgery should be itemised.

Electronic claims for item 30001

Claims for abandoned surgery submitted via an electronic claiming
channel require an individual charge for each item, including item
30001. The minimum charge amount that is accepted is $1.00. The system
automatically rolls the charge for item 30001 into the charge for the T8
item directly above it.

Electronic claims require item 30001 immediately beneath any abandoned
surgical item.

Note: for further information on processing, see the QITI Assessing
Ruling for item 30001 plus the page for the relevant claiming channel:

-   Claims processing in Medicare
-   Simplified Billing claims in Medicare
-   ECLIPSE claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare
-   Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Anaesthetic item 21990

Item 21990 is located in the MBS under Category 3 – Therapeutic
Procedures > Group T10 – Relative Value Guide for Anaesthesia > Subgroup
18 – Miscellaneous.

Item 21990 is claimed for initiation of management of anaesthesia where
no procedure ensues. It should only be claimed where the procedure is
abandoned before surgery commences. If the procedure is abandoned after
surgery has commenced, the anaesthetist should claim the relevant
anatomical initiation item.

Item 21990 is only payable where an anaesthetist provides the service in
connection with an eligible surgical procedure, that is an MBS item that
includes “(Anaes)” in the item description. Item 21990 must be claimed
in conjunction with a time based item (23010 to 24136).

Modifier items (25000 to 25020) can also apply with 21990.

Item 21990 can also be paid with Subgroup 19 therapeutic and diagnostic
imaging service (22002 – 22075).

Assistant item numbers 51300 -51318

Items for assistance at operations are located in the MBS under Category
3 – Therapeutic Procedures > Group T9 – Assistance at Operations.

Where a T8 procedure, or combination of procedures, is discontinued
Medicare benefits are payable for the assistance. The assistant still
needs to meet the full requirements set out in the assistant item
description and the MBS explanatory notes.

The item number and schedule fee for assistance at operations is
determined by the fee for the T8 surgical item or series of surgical
items. When calculating the fee for the surgical operation, or aggregate
fee for a series of operations, the T8 surgical item/s that were
discontinued should be reduced by 50% to reflect the derived fee applied
to the discontinued procedure. The reduced fees are then used (within
the multiple operation rule) to calculate the correct assistant item
number and, if applicable, the fee for the assistant.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to external and internal websites, and
-   scenarios showing how to calculate assistant surgeon benefits

Related links

Anaesthetic services assessing rules in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

Assistance at operations assessing rules in Medicare

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Claims processing in Medicare

ECLIPSE claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Education resources for health professionals

Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare

Simplified Billing claims in Medicare

Surgical operations assessing rules in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
