
Medicare patient claims history or claims history statement has incorrect or missing information 011-43010130

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to do when a customer advises that their
Medicare claims history or claims history statement contains incorrect
or missing information. All references to the claims history in this
document also apply to the claims history statement.

Medicare claims history incorrect

A customer may become aware that their Medicare claims history is either
incorrect and/or is missing information by viewing their history via:

-   their Medicare online account
-   their Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   their digital health record in the My Health Record system
-   a statement received from Release of information

Note: Medicare online account and Medicare Express plus app history can
ONLY be viewed for the current Medicare card. If they require history
from the previous card, they will need to request this from Release of
Information (ROI).

See also:

Health Professional Online Services

Customer enquiry by phone or in person at a Service Centre

The Process page contains information on how to respond when a customer
makes an enquiry by phone or at a Service Centre about incorrect and/or
missing information on their Medicare claims history.

Note: there are restrictions on who can request information relating to
claims history.

See also: Release of claims information in Medicare.

Investigation of incorrect or missing information

Where a Service Officer has been unable to resolve a customer enquiry,
Service Officers complete a Customer enquiry form and email to MPS
Assessing. See the Resources page for a link to the Customer enquiry
form.

The Process page contains information on the procedures that Tier 2
staff undertake regarding claims history that contains incorrect or is
missing information.

Missing items on claims history

The Process page contains a table outlining the different ways for
gathering information based on the claiming method.

If the claim affects other service lines, or the maximum number of
adjustments has been made on that claim, refer to Medicare Claims
Helpdesk.

See also: Adjust Medicare patient claim on a previously adjusted
service.

The Resources page contains contact details, and a link to the Customer
enquiry form, mySupport and the Medicare Digital Services intranet page.

Related links

Release of claims information in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
