
Concessional Safety Net (CSN) threshold for Medicare 011-43080010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Concessional Safety Net (CSN) threshold for
Medicare. Concessional entitlement is determined by data sent to
Medicare from Centrelink.

Concessional Safety Net (CSN) threshold

The CSN threshold is a lower Medicare Safety Net threshold for
Commonwealth concession card holders and is indexed by the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) on 1 January each year.

The CSN threshold amounts can be found in Medicare Safety Net
thresholds.

Eligibility for the Concessional Safety Net (CSN) threshold

A person may be eligible for the CSN threshold if they are a:

-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holder
-   Health Care Card holder
-   Pensioner Concession Card holder

A person’s eligibility for the CSN commences from the first date that
the concessional entitlement payment is received during the calendar
year.

A person only has to be concessional for one day in a calendar year to
be eligible to receive the CSN threshold for the rest of that calendar
year, even if their concessional entitlement ceases.

Eligibility for the CSN threshold can be for an individual or for a
family.

Eligibility information is stored within Services Australia’s
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient database. This data is sent
to Medicare nightly from Centrelink.

Gold or White Cards issued by DVA are not eligible for the CSN. However,
if a Gold or White Card holder also holds a recognised Commonwealth
concession card and chooses to be treated under the Medicare
arrangements, then that patient is an eligible concession card holder.

The Process page contains the procedure on how to check concessional
status.

Concessional individual

If a family is registered for the Medicare Safety Net (MSN) and a person
within that registered family has a concessional entitlement, that
concessional person is eligible for the Concessional Safety Net (CSN)
threshold amount as an individual.

The concessional person's out-of-pocket (OOP) amounts will accumulate to
the CSN threshold, however, the concessional persons OOP will also
accumulate towards the registered EMSN family threshold.

When a concessional individual within a non-concessional MSN family
reaches the CSN threshold, that individual will be paid the additional
Medicare benefits (that is, an additional 80% of the OOP or the EMSN
benefit cap) for all future claims where the necessary criteria is met
and the remaining 20% OOP will attribute to the family's EMSN threshold.

See the Resources page for an example of an eligible concessional
individual.

Concessional family

To be considered a family for the Concessional Safety Net (CSN), the CSN
family must consist of:

-   2 or more people in the registered Medicare Safety Net (MSN) family
    have an eligible concession card, and
-   1 of the people with a concession card must be the MSN family
    contact (FC) or spouse (SP)

Only registered MSN family members with a concession card are eligible
for the CSN threshold. All other members of the registered MSN family
without a concession card aren’t part of the concessional family. This
means they’re not eligible for the Concessional threshold.

Where 1 or more dependents within a MSN family are concessional, and the
FC or SP are not, then the dependants are treated as individuals for the
CSN.

Where an individual in a registered family is concessional and another
member within the same family becomes concessional at a later date, the
two concessional members will form a CSN family (provided at least one
individual is not a child or student dependant).

The family concessional status will only be recognised from the date the
second family member became concessional, and not from the date the
first individual became concessional.

See the Resources page for an example of an eligible concessional
family.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Assessing and
Benefits team, examples of eligibility, and links to the Medicare Safety
Net query form and Medicare Safety Net - Inquire on Medicare Card Number
user help guide.

Related links

Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN)

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Medicare Safety Net thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
