[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Medicare Patient History
screens.

Medicare patient claim history

Medicare patient claim history displays the services that have been
processed for an individual patient. The information:

-   displays in a line-by-line format
-   is limited to nine lines per screen

The details of the group contact display above the service details.

The service details display as;

Columns

-   Patient name
-   Item
-   Date of service, referral or request
-   Referral end date
-   Provider number
-   Payee code
-   Charge
-   Benefit
-   Processing indicator used (if any)
-   Reason code applied (if any)
-   Processing date
-   Operator’s P# of the person, or state system that processed the
    service.

Rows

Each row relates to one service request, referral or information line.

The Resources page contains detailed explanation of each field.

Accessing Medicare patient claim history

Medicare patient claim history can be displayed using either the
Medicare card number or individual’s PIN.

Medicare card

Use the Medicare card number to display services processed under that
card for the customer. This includes payment details. Use Medicare cards
to locate customers when enquiring about payment details.

Medicare Pin

Use the Medicare PIN to display services for the customer across any
Medicare card enrolment. It will not show the payment details for the
customer. Use the Medicare PIN when enquiring into patient item
eligibility.

Access Medicare patient claim history in Medicare mainframe using the
NHOI or NHSI control line.

NHOI displays basic level Medicare patient claim history in mainframe

-   Displays 6 months of Medicare patient claim history

NHSI displays supervisor level Medicare patient claim history in
mainframe

-   Displays Medicare patient claim history up to the cull period
-   Displays adjustment transactions
-   Allows additional search modifiers

NHSI and NHOI are view only screens. No updates to a patient’s record
can be made from these screens.

Use NHSI for enquires regarding Medicare patient claim history. It
displays a more complete and detailed view.

The Resources page contains detailed information on viewing and
understanding Medicare patient claim history. The page also contains
explanations of fields and headings.

Related links

Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims processing in
Medicare

Medicare - Claims - Your Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
