
Derived fee items assessing in Medicare 011-42120020

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines derived fee items assessing in Medicare.

On this Page:

Derived fee items

There are two types of derived fee items in the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS):

-   The MBS includes a number of items which only apply when associated
    with another item. These items are commonly referred to as derived
    fee or aggregate items. The associated services are known as base
    items
-   Some items in the MBS do not have set schedule fees but are payable
    on their own. These include consultations for which the fee is
    derived based on the number of patients seen

Assessing derived item fees

Derived fee items do not have an individual schedule fee or benefit, as
other items listed in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) do. These
particular items 'modify' the fee and benefit for the service they are
associated with by applying a fixed loading or factor. Derived fee items
are readily identified by their description of service. Particular
computer processing methods are used to identify these services and
process the payment of benefits.

Where a particular service involves the use of an aggregate item, the
service is still regarded as a single service with 1 fee and 1 benefit
payable. The schedule fee to apply in that instance must be calculated
according to the rule or formula stated in the derived item.

In addition, the combining of the 2 items for payment purposes allows
for the gap to be applied once only.

The Resources page contains tables with examples showing derived fees
for consultation items.

Processing derived fee items

When service details have been keyed in the correct order and no error
conditions apply, the system calculates the Medicare benefit payable and
the payment process continues in the normal manner.

The Resources page contains tables with examples showing derived fees
for consultation items.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
