
Medicare benefit not received (EFT dispute) 011-43120010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about resolving enquiries where
Medicare benefit payments have not been received into a claimant’s
nominated bank account.

Check claim details in Mainframe

Before any details about a Medicare benefit can be provided, ensure that
the correct claimant is identified and a security check is completed.

There could be multiple reasons why a claimant may not have received
their Medicare benefit(s) as claimed. An initial investigation must be
undertaken to determine why the claimant may not have received their
Medicare benefit at the first point of contact.

Check:

-   if the claim for the Medicare service is on the patient’s history
-   the status of the Medicare benefit payment (for example paid, held,
    rejected, or redirected)
-   if the correct claimant was selected when the claim was submitted
-   if the correct bank account details were used when the claim was
    submitted

Note: if the claimant involved in the EFT dispute has an active Invest
and/or CMBO PIN flag on their account, all EFT disputes must be referred
to MPS Assessing.

EFT payment paid into bank account other than the claimant's

If a claimant makes contact with Services Australia and advises they
have received an EFT payment into their bank account and they have not
lodged a Medicare claim, see the EFT benefit not received by claimant
table on the Process page.

Where Medicare benefits have been successfully paid into a bank account
but the claimant states that it is not their bank account, add up all
payments in dispute (in total) and determine if the EFT dispute is:

-   less than $100, or
-   more than $100

View Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) to confirm if there
has been 2 other EFT disputes in the previous 12 months.

If the total amount is greater than or equal to $100 or the claimant has
had more than 2 disputes in 12 months, determine if the correct claimant
was recorded.

See the Process page for information about managing:

-   Dispute for benefit amount below $100
-   Dispute for benefit amount $100 and over – Claimant or third party
    error
-   Dispute for benefit amount $100 and over – Departmental error
-   Dispute for benefit amount $100 and over – MPS Assessing
-   Dispute for benefit amount $100 and over – Claimant claims bank
    account details not updated online or active invest flag

EFT disputes less than $100 (total Medicare benefit payment)

If there is suspected fraudulent activity complete an EFT dispute form,
notating comments ‘possible fraudulent payment’ and forward the form to
MPS Assessing.

View CDMS comments to confirm that the claimant has not previously had 2
EFT disputes within the last twelve month period. If the claimant has
had 2 EFT disputes within this period, follow the process for EFT
disputes greater than $100.

If the EFT dispute is valid and is not a suspected fraudulent claim or
the claimant has not had 2 previous EFT disputes within a twelve month
period, the department will repay the claimant at the first point of
contact. See the Dispute for benefit amount below $100 table on the
Process page.

Ensure that the disputed bank account details have been end dated and
record updated or new bank account details if applicable.

Note: no EFT retrievals are undertaken for Medicare benefit amounts
totalling less than $100.

EFT disputes greater than or equal to $100

Where the total Medicare benefit amount of the dispute is greater than
or equal to $100 or the claimant has had 2 previous EFT disputes in the
previous twelve months, investigate to determine who is at fault for the
incorrect payment.

The ways in which payments can be made incorrectly include:

-   Claimant or third party error
-   Departmental error

Claimant error

Raise an overpayment if it can be determined who incorrectly received
the Medicare benefit, and an EFT retrieval should not be undertaken. For
example, not notifying change of bank account details due to a change in
family circumstances (separation).

If it has been determined that the Medicare benefit was paid to an
incorrect bank account because of a claimant error, an EFT retrieval for
disputes equal to or greater than $100 can be undertaken by the
department if the claimant requests one.

Complete an EFT dispute form and forward send to MPS Assessing. If the
EFT retrieval is unsuccessful where the claimant has provided incorrect
information, the department is not obliged to repay the funds.

The Resources page has a link to the EFT dispute form and contact
details for MPS Assessing.

Examples of claimant error

If it has been established that the claimant confirmed their bank
details:

-   by signing a receipt in the Service Centre and the Service Officer
    has circled the bank details for the claimant to confirm that the
    bank details were correct
-   comments recorded in CDMS that the bank account details had been
    read back to the claimant and the claimant confirmed bank details
    recorded were correct
-   a signed Medicare claim form from the claimant including bank
    account details where the EFT payment is to be made
-   a signed copy/transfer or enrolment form from the claimant
-   a signed bank account details collection form from the claimant

Note: for bank account details updated online, see Bank details updated
online.

Departmental error

If the department made an error when processing the claim or recording
bank account details, Service Officers must repay the claim at the first
point of contact.

Examples of departmental error

-   Transposing of bank account numbers
-   Processing errors, such as selecting the wrong claimant
-   Not updating bank details as per claimant’s instructions on bank
    detail, claim, enrolment or copy/transfer forms
-   Not circling bank details on thermal/printed receipts when claimant
    is signing at a Service centre
-   Not noting in CDMS that when updating bank details the details have
    been read back for the claimant to confirm

Third party error

Wrong bank account

If bank account details have been collected by a third party, for
example a medical practice, it is the claimant’s responsibility to
verify the bank account details are recorded correctly. The department
will undertake an EFT retrieval for payments made to an incorrect bank
account, but the department will not reimburse funds if the EFT
retrieval is unsuccessful.

Wrong patient, claimant or Medicare card

When a medical practice transmits a claim online using the wrong
patient, claimant or Medicare card, contact the health professional to
obtain correct details either:

-   verbally and notate information received
-   by requesting an invoice to be faxed for processing

Child on 2 Medicare cards

When a medical practice transmits a claim online for a child and the
child is on 2 Medicare cards, check if bank details have been recorded
for the child. Check if the payment has gone to anyone other than the
person identified as the correct claimant, for example the payment has
been incorrectly paid to the other parent.

If the payment has been paid to someone other than the person identified
as the correct claimant, for example benefit paid to other parent, the
claim must be reprocessed with the correct claimant and a debt raised
for the person whose bank account details were recorded.

In this case, no EFT retrieval or trace is to be carried out by the
department.

The Process page contains information about how to action an incorrect
EFT payment where the cause of the incorrect payment was a child being
on 2 Medicare cards.

Unable to determine who made the error

Where a determination cannot be made whether the incorrect payment was
due to claimant or departmental error this could be because the
department no longer has the original document/s, the error is deemed a
departmental error and the claimant is to be paid the Medicare benefit.

An EFT retrieval must be requested where the payment amount is over $100
(in total).

Note: this excludes when bank account details have been changed online.

Bank account updated more than 2 years ago or claim is over 2 years old

When the claim or an update to bank account details for the claimant is
more than 2 years old, an investigation must be done to try and
determine if it can be identified if the benefit went into the wrong
bank account, and whether it was departmental or claimant error.

This investigation can include:

-   checking Government Direct Entry Service (GDES)
-   looking at CDMS bank account history
-   checking to see if other payments have been made

Where a determination cannot be made whether it was claimant or
departmental error as we no longer hold the original document/s, and the
investigation could not determine otherwise, the claimant is to be
repaid.

For example, bank account details were updated in 2011, no payments can
be verified as having been paid into this account as the claimant has
since been bulk billed or the patient history has been culled.

An EFT retrieval should be requested where the payment amount is over
$100.

The Process page contains instructions to refer EFT disputes to MPS
Assessing.

Note: this excludes when bank account details have been changed online.

Confirmation of new bank account details

Where an EFT dispute is being resolved within a service centre, the
claimant must complete the bank details collection form. The form is to
be added to the Service Officer daily batch work. The Resources page
contains a link to the form.

Where new bank details have been provided via telephony, ensure that
comments have been recorded in CDMS confirming the bank details have
been read back to the claimant to confirm. This will ensure the
department has evidence of the details being verified with the claimant.

For more information, see Store, confirm and end date bank account
details for Medicare EFT payments.

Rejected EFT payment and the Government Direct Entry Service (GDES) report

Where a bank deposit has been rejected by the financial institution
(account closed or does not exist) the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA)
provides the department with a GDES report identifying details of any
Medicare EFT payment failures.

The time that elapses between the department depositing the funds and
when the financial institution accepts and releases the funds to the
claimant or rejects and returns the funds to the department will vary
depending on the internal process of the financial institution.

Financial institutions do not always return benefits to the RBA that
cannot be deposited into a bank account. In some cases the financial
institutions retain these benefits in their internal suspense accounts.
These funds will be identified by a trace request.

Note: the department deposits funds into a claimant’s bank account
according to the information on their records or as per the claimant’s
instructions. The claimant’s financial institution will either accept or
reject the deposit. If the financial institution rejects the deposit, it
is the claimant’s responsibility to ensure correct bank account details
are provided and that the account can be used for electronic funds
transfers.

GDES report

The GDES report is automatically run and will update the status of the
payments listed on the report from PAID to REJECTED and apply the
appropriate reason code within the Mainframe BRNA screen.

This then automatically updates the status of the banking details that
relate to the payment in CDMS. For example, bank account closed. The
bank details in CDMS are not end dated, but the Status will be updated
to reflect the rejection code on the GDES report.

If bank account details are updated in the system after the money is
returned to the department from the RBA, any claims that have rejected
in the claiming details will need to be repaid by the Service Officer.
See the Process page for more information.

Note: a claim that has redirect showing should not be changed to reject
by a Service Officer or the claimant will receive the payment twice.

BRNA screen

BRNA has the functionality to allow users to:

-   search for a specific EFT payment record
-   access BRNE and BRNS screens for a selected EFT payment record

The Process page contains instructions for a BRNA search.

Bank details updated online

When bank account details have been collected online, Service Officers
must try to determine if it was fraudulent activity or claimant error.

Examples of claimant error can include:

-   incorrectly transposing bank account details
-   not updating their details after a change in family circumstances
    (separation)
-   their previous bank account has closed

If the claimant advises that the bank account details were updated
without their knowledge, the dispute is to be referred to MPS Assessing
to investigate further. Complete an EFT dispute form adding comments
that the claimant is advising the account has been changed without their
knowledge.

If MPS Assessing can determine there is enough evidence to support the
claimant’s statement that the bank account had been updated without
their knowledge, the department will repay the claimant and then refer
the matter to Medicare Payments Integrity (MPI) section to review and
refer to compliance for further investigation.

If there is not enough evidence, the matter will be referred to the MPI
section to review and refer to compliance for further investigation
before any decision on repayment to the claimant is made.

For further information, also see Medicare suspected fraud and Business
Integrity (BI) flags.

The Resources page contains a link to historical information, a list of
BREFTE RETN codes and descriptions, links to Medicare forms and the
Services Australia Website.

The provider has an automated debt recovery in place

If a provider has a debt recovery arrangement in place, they may notice
that the amount shown on their EFT bulk bill statement is different to
the amount actually deposited into their nominated bank account. For
example, the provider’s EFT bulk bill statement may show $100 as being
paid by Medicare, but after 20% is taken by debt recovery only $80 will
be deposited into the provider’s nominated bank account.

The Commonwealth department or agency recovering the debt is responsible
for notifying the provider of their debt recovery arrangement, as well
as providing all ongoing communication. For this reason, minimal
enquiries are expected to be received by Service Officers.

Providers or a member of their staff may still contact the department
regarding the discrepancy between their EFT bulk bill statement and the
actual amount deposited into their bank account. If this happens, a
provider’s debt recovery information can be viewed in the Provider
Directory System (PDS) and Mainframe (CICS).

Note: when a debt has been fully paid the debt instruction will no
longer appear in the PDS but the debt recovery history and corresponding
agencies will remain in Mainframe (CICS)

There will be no impact or changes to internal adjustments or recoveries
processed as a result of the compliance debt recovery system. If a
provider who has had a payment garnished contacts the department to
advise the claim (from which a deduction was taken) was incorrect and
they wish to instigate a voluntary recovery, ignore the fact there was a
reduced benefit paid and recover the amount paid by Medicare (That is,
the full Medicare benefit, as is current process).

Do not discuss details of the debt recovery arrangement (for example how
much is being recovered) with the provider or their staff. Refer the
provider to the relevant department or agency that is recovering the
debt.

Automated recovery arrangements are in place to recover debt/s on behalf
of the following Commonwealth departments or agencies:

-   Australian Financial Securities Authority (AFSA)
-   Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
-   Cash management (CM/DHS)
-   Child Support Agency (CSA/DHS)
-   Department of Health and Aged Care (DoH)

The Resources page contains contact details, a list of BREFTE RETN
codes, descriptions and screenshot example, links to Medicare forms, the
Services Australia Website and external websites.

Related links

Claims processing in Medicare

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Latter day adjustments (LDA) and HELD payments for patient claims.

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
