
Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS) 011-60070000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS). The SAS
provides stoma related products (aids and appliances) free of charge to
members of stoma associations.

On this Page:

Administration of SAS

The Department of Health and Aged Care:

-   develops guidelines and policies for the Scheme
-   administers the Scheme's product pricing and listing process
-   approves new stoma associations

Services Australia:

-   registers stoma associations
-   collects member applications to participate in the Scheme
-   processes claims made by stoma associations

Overview of SAS

Stoma products are provided free of charge to members through 21
regional stoma associations across Australia (sometimes referred to as
Ostomy associations). The associations purchase stoma products from
suppliers and distribute to members as required. Members may be charged
a membership fee by the association and are required to pay for the
costs of distribution.

Stoma associations submit claims to Services Australia for reimbursement
of the cost of the products. A 2.75% handling fee is paid on the total
value of the claim. GST is not payable on any items listed on the SAS
Schedule. GST is only payable on the 2.75% handling fee.

Stoma associations can submit claims:

-   electronically, via Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) or
    USB
-   manually (paper claims)

Associations submitting claims electronically can use software versions
1.1 and 2.0 to upload their claim file into HPOS:

Associations using software version 2.0 do not need to submit claim
paperwork as the new version provides an increase in data capture.
Associations are required to manage their paperwork under normal record
keeping practices for audit purposes

Associations using software version 1.1 must submit the following claim
paperwork to Services Australia for quality assurance processing:

Completed Stoma Appliance Scheme Claim for payment form (PB043/4027)
which notes the association’s details and must be signed by an approved
or authorised person at the association

Completed Supply of stoma appliances and pharmaceutical preparations
forms (PB046/4095) which notes the products supplied per patient and
must be signed by the patient or their authorised person, or annotated
with ‘certified despatched’ if the products were mailed to the patient

Completed Stoma Appliance Scheme application for additional supplies for
clinical and other reasons forms (PB050) for any additional supplies
provided to patients. These forms must be signed by:

-   each patient or their authorised person
-   the patient’s medical practitioner or stomal therapy nurse (STN),
    and
-   the association supplying the products

Manual claims provide the above paperwork for manual processing by the
Aged Care Allied Health staff.

The Resources page provides a link to the claim forms and ordering
process.

Eligibility to the SAS

To be eligible for the Scheme, the patient must:

-   be an Australian resident
-   be eligible for Medicare or Department of Veterans’ Affairs benefits
    (including those eligible under reciprocal health care arrangements)
-   have a temporary or permanent artificial body opening which
    facilitates the removal of urine or products of the gastrointestinal
    tract where they do not have normal gastrointestinal tract or
    bladder function
-   be a member of a stoma association in Australia

The patient and their referring stomal therapy nurse (STN) or medical
practitioner must complete the Stoma Appliance Scheme application form
(PB049) and send it to their nominated stoma association. The
association is responsible to confirm a person’s eligibility and issues
a Stoma Appliance Scheme entitlement card/s once they have registered
with the association.

Patients with more than one stoma will be provided with a Stoma
Appliance Scheme Dual Stoma Entitlement card (PB045).

Note: Stoma products are not available to Australian citizens who live
outside Australia or who have spent more than 6 months overseas.

The Resources page provides a link to the form.

Additional products

Patients can receive additional supplies if:

-   the monthly allocation does not meet their needs
-   they are living in remote locations including Norfolk Island
-   they are going on holiday

To get more than the maximum monthly allowance of products, the patient
and their stoma therapy nurse (STN) or medical practitioner must
complete the Stoma Appliance Scheme application for additional supplies
for clinical and other reasons form (PB050). The form must clearly
state:

-   the type of additional supplies required, i.e. clinical, holiday,
    Norfolk Island or remote
-   the items and quantity needed
-   period of time the supply is required

For clinical and remote additional supplies, the medical practitioner or
STN nurse must also include written justification for the increased
quantity.

Once the form is completed by the patient and medical practitioner/STN
it is forwarded to the patient’s nominated stoma association and then to
Services Australia as part of the associations’ monthly claim. The
additional supplies are valid for 6 months.

Stoma Appliance Scheme claims processing

Processing of Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS) and Paraplegic & Quadriplegic
Program (ParaQuad) claims are the same.

Stoma and Paraquad claims are submitted to Services Australia
electronically via the Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) claim
upload function or via mail (USB or manual paper claim). The HPOS Stoma
Appliance Scheme and Paraplegic & Quadriplegic Program claim upload
function was introduced in June 2020 and removes the requirement for
associations to provide their claims file via USB.

There are two software versions associations can use to upload their
claims via HPOS.

Software version 1.1

When using version 1.1, claim paperwork must be submitted to Services
Australia for quality assurance. Once the claim is submitted via HPOS,
the PBS Online System automatically puts a ‘Hold Payment’ indicator on
the claim to allow time for the paperwork to arrive. The payment due
date is 15 days from the date the paperwork is received by Services
Australia and the 'Hold Payment' indicator is removed by the Service
Officer.

Software version 2.0

When using version 2.0, claim paperwork does not need to be submitted to
Services Australia, as there is increase in the data capture. Once the
claim is submitted via HPOS, the payment due date is 7 days from the
date the claim file is received. Associations are required to manage
their paperwork under normal record keeping practices for audit
purposes.

For claims received by mail, mailroom staff write the date of receipt on
the claim. This is the date the claim is registered in the PBS Online
Claims Processing System. The payment due date for manual claims is 30
days from the date the claim package is received.

As part of the automated claim assessment process, the PBS Online Claims
Processing System creates a PBS Payment ID for the ostomy items
processed during the day. For claims submitted electronically, the
overnight claim load is represented under one PBS Payment ID. If any
adjustments are made to the claim after the load, a new PBS Payment is
created for that day. Both PBS Payment ID’s are on the payment
statements.

ParaQuad claim forms

ParaQuad associations using software version 1.1 use the same
application form as SAS (PB049) and the same claim forms as SAS – the
Claim for payment form (PB043/4027) and Supply of stoma appliances and
pharmaceutical preparations supply forms (PB046/4095). These forms must
be submitted to Services Australia for quality assurance processing.

For information on processing ParaQuad claims see Paraplegic and
Quadriplegic (ParaQuad) Program.

Stoma Appliance Scheme payments and statements

Payments:

Once the payment due date is reached, the PBS Claims Processing System
releases the payment data to the Common Payment System for payment to
the Reserve Bank of Australia and then to associations.

Statements:

The statements include the PBS Payment ID’s allocated to the claim. The
first payment ID represents the overnight claim load and the subsequent
payment ID’s reflect any adjustments made to the claim. A PBS Payment ID
is also automatically created for every 10,000 rows generated in a claim
and this appears on the payment statements. This is a control to prevent
system performance issues.

Associations receive 3 payment statements once their claim has been
processed:

-   Payment Advice
-   Recipient Created Tax Invoice
-   Reconciliation Statement

The purpose of the Payment Advice is to confirm the association’s claim
has been processed and advise the amount the association can expect to
receive. The advice notes the total SAS benefits paid and the SAS
handling fee. Any bulk adjustments made for the association are included
on this statement, which notes the relevant claim period.

The purpose of the Recipient Created Tax Invoice/Tax Invoice notifies
associations of the GST applicable information to assist with financial
reporting and reconciling payments. The invoice includes the total SAS
benefits paid and the SAS handling fee.

The purpose of the Reconciliation Statement is to assist associations
with reconciling payments. Items are listed individually and detail the
supplies paid, rejected, or adjusted by Services Australia. The
statement will list the serial numbers, item codes, reason codes and
payment amounts. Any adjustments made on items within the claim or
different claims are noted on the statement in the Adjustments table.

Stoma and ParaQuad call enquiries and escalation

Direct customers or medical staff wanting to know how to access stoma
products or how to join the Stoma Appliance Scheme to the Stoma
Appliance Scheme webpage on the Services Australia website.

For calls about Stoma or ParaQuad claims, payments, reason codes,
statements, and stationery forms (claim forms), email details to the
Stoma Processing Team using the Stoma and ParaQuad Escalation email
template. Please include as much detail as possible in the template to
assist with the enquiry.

The Stoma and ParaQuad processing team will get back to the association
within 24 hours. Service Officers can also refer callers to the Services
Australia Stoma Appliance Scheme webpage.

Escalate calls about Provider Digital Access (PRODA) / Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) organisation linking issues or
complaints and feedback to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) -
Helpdesk.

See the Resources page for links to the Services Australia website,
Stoma and ParaQuad Escalation email template and contact details for The
Camerons Group.

Ordering stoma and paraquad claim forms

Claim forms and SAS entitlement cards are ordered online via the PBS
Stationery Online Portal in Health Professional Online Services (HPOS).

Contact information

Stoma association contact details are available on the Department of
Health and Aged Care website. See the Resources page for a link.

For enquiries relating to the processing and payment of stoma
association claims and all other enquiries, see Stoma Appliance Scheme
(SAS) and ParaQuad.

The Resources page contains links to contact information, Stoma
Appliance Scheme (SAS) forms, the Services Australia and the Department
of Health and Aged Care websites, reason codes and fix instructions for
processing Stoma or ParaQuad claims, the escalation template and
frequently asked questions.

Contents

Enquiries regarding Stoma or ParaQuad claims

Financial delegation checking of a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

Loading and registering a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

Processing a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Paraplegic and Quadriplegic (ParaQuad) Program

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
