
Amend Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 011-03010070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers amend an IHI of a
non-Medicare enrolled individual when asked to by an authorised person.

Amend an IHI

A security check must be performed on the individual asking for the
amendment to ensure they are authorised to amend the demographic details
on the IHI record.

Only IHI information for non-Medicare enrolment records can be updated
using this process. Medicare enrolment records must not be updated.

Service Officers can make amendments to address or contact details
without evidence of the change, these changes should only be made if the
consumer has been able to confirm a previous address or contact details
that currently display in CDMS. An address or contact details change can
be accepted and the change made over the phone. See the Process page for
how to amend an IHI.

Amendments to name or date of birth may not be made by request over the
phone.

Requests to amend the name or date of birth must be made in writing to
the HI Service and sent by email, post or fax to Services Australia,
eBusiness Service Centre (option 2 – consumer enquiries).

The request must include certified evidence of the change. Any primary
document listed on the 'Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier form
(MS003)' can be used to verify a name change. See the Resources page for
links to the MS003 form and how to get certified copies.

Any requests received to update name or date of birth must be escalated
to Tier 3 for processing.

Request to reprint an IHI letter

After processing is complete and an IHI has been successfully generated,
a letter is sent to the applicant at the mailing address supplied. If
the letter was not received or lost, a person may request a reprint of
the letter. See Step 3 on the Process page for how to reprint the
letter.

Request to amend an IHI by an authorised person

A child or person deemed not to have the capacity to act on their own
behalf requires a person who has the authority to represent them in
their interactions with the HI Service. The authorised person can
request updates to the demographic details of the individual they
represent.

The likely types of authorised persons include:

-   a parent representing their child
-   a person who has power of attorney for another adult
-   another legal directive exists

Requests to amend the name or date of birth on behalf of another person
must be made in writing to the HI Service and sent by post or fax to
Services Australia, eBusiness Service Centre (option 2 – consumer
enquiries).

The request must include certified evidence of the change.

Any requests received to update name or date of birth must be escalated
to Tier 3 for processing.

Change of identifying details for a child

Proof must be provided when a parent or legal guardian seeks to change
identifying personal details for a child, such as:

-   name - a passport, birth certificate, change of name certificate
-   date of birth - a passport or birth certificate

The parent or legal guardian must prove that they have parental
responsibility for the child. Having the child’s evidence of identity
documentation would indicate they have parental responsibility.

Note: only IHI information for non-Medicare enrolled individuals can be
updated using this process.

Change of address

Change of address information can be made on behalf of another
individual where:

-   it can be proven that the requesting adult has parental
    responsibility for the child/ren the request is being made for
-   a power of attorney or other legal directive is provided at the time
    of the request

Change of identifying details for an adult who has diminished capacity

Proof must be provided where a person acting on behalf of an adult seeks
to change personal details for an individual, such as:

-   a passport, birth certificate, or change of name certificate, and
-   a Power of Attorney or other legal directive

Note: without legal authority, changes cannot be made to another adult
individual's IHI demographic details.

The Resources page contains:

-   a table of allowable amendments to IHIs
-   links to the Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier form
    (MS003) and how to get certified copies on the Services Australia
    website

Related links

Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Rapid Addressing for Medicare

Amend a person’s Medicare enrolment details

Change legal name on Medicare record

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
