
Australian citizens eligibility for Medicare 011-44010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Medicare eligibility for
Australian citizens.

Medical eligibility for residents of Australian dependencies

Cocos (Keeling) Islands

Residents of Cocos (Keeling) Islands are eligible for Medicare for
services provided in Australia if their citizenship or permanent
residency status is established.

Christmas Island

Residents of Christmas Island are eligible for Medicare for services
provided in Australia if their citizenship or permanent residency status
is established.

Lord Howe Island

For the purposes of Medicare, Lord Howe Island is regarded as part of
New South Wales.

Norfolk Island

From 1 July 2016, Medicare eligibility was extended to Norfolk Island,
and all eligible Norfolk Island residents can be enrolled in Medicare or
their personal details updated if already enrolled.

Norfolk Island - Provisional Resident Return (subclass 159) visa holders

Norfolk Island Provisional Resident Return (subclass 159) visa holders
are eligible to be enrolled in Medicare for the duration of their visa
or until the 31 December 2023 - whichever date is earliest.

-   Entitlement Type - Provisional Resident Return (subclass 159) -
    Temporary
-   Start Date - 1 July 2016 (or if they arrived after this date, the
    start date is their entry date)
-   End Date - the expiry date of the Provisional Resident Return visa
    (subclass 159) or the 31 December 2023 - whichever date is earliest

Norfolk Island residents can have their Medicare eligibility extended
where they provide:

a completed Medicare enrolment application form

a copy of the photo ID page of their passport, and

evidence they hold a Provisional Resident Return visa (subclass 159) by
way of:

-   written communication from the Department of Home Affairs which
    confirms the applicant holds a valid visa subclass 159, or
-   Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) confirmation

Itinerant workers

An itinerant is a person who travels from place to place, usually to
perform work or a duty.

Follow normal enrolment procedures when enrolling itinerants, and
request eligibility and identification documents as for a standard
Medicare enrolment, see Document types for Medicare eligibility and
enrolment.

If an itinerant person could reasonably be expected to be in possession
of, or to obtain, the required documentation, the person should provide
this documentation to enrol.

If an itinerant person is unable to provide enrolment or identification
documents due to extenuating circumstances, either:

-   request an identifying letter, or
-   refer to Alternative Identity for more information and options

Request an identifying letter

If an itinerant person is unable to provide enrolment or identification
documents due to extenuating circumstances, they can provide a letter
from a responsible representative of a welfare, religious or charitable
organisation that identifies the itinerant.

Refer application to Services Australia Canberra

If an itinerant, who appears to be eligible, is unable to provide the
required eligibility and identification documentation, or an identifying
letter, refer to Medicare Public Eligibility for consideration.

When referring the application, detailed information must be provided as
to why eligibility and identification documentation, or an identifying
letter were unavailable or not provided.

Commonwealth visitors before 1974

People who entered Australia from Commonwealth countries prior to 1974
are considered legal residents and are entitled to Medicare. A person
presenting for enrolment on this basis should be asked to obtain a
certificate of status from the Department of Home Affairs to verify
their entitlement and normal enrolment procedures should then be
followed.

Two original documents are required to establish the identity of
non-Australian citizens, 1 of which must be a document that includes a
photograph.

Services rendered on board ships

Section 10 of the Health Insurance Act provides for Medicare benefits to
be payable for medical expenses incurred for a medical service rendered
in Australia to an eligible person.

There is no reference as to whether the seas around Australia or the
airspace above Australia are to be regarded as part of Australia for the
purposes of the Act.

Medicare eligibility for sea journeys

If an eligible person is travelling between 2 Australian ports then
Medicare benefits are payable for services rendered by registered
medical practitioners on board the ship. Medical practitioners must be
registered in Australia for benefits to be payable.

Medicare eligibility is not affected if the ship leaves Australian
waters en-route.

Medicare benefits are not payable if an eligible person is travelling
between

-   an Australian port and a foreign port, or
-   2 foreign ports

Homeless persons

Homeless persons are given special consideration whereby the usual
enrolment considerations are relaxed. Applications for enrolment for a
homeless person are to be made by the homeless person.

A homeless person can request enrolment in Medicare.

For persons under the age of 15 years, see Homeless child enrolments in
Medicare.

Identification documents available

Where a homeless person requests enrolment in Medicare, standard
eligibility and identification documents should be requested, such as:

-   birth certificate, birth extract or birth card in the person's
    current name
-   passport

Identification documents unavailable

Where identification documents are not available, the person can be
enrolled (or an existing enrolment updated) on the basis of a letter
from one of the following confirming the person's eligibility and
identity, and advising that they are unable to meet the usual enrolment
requirements due to their personal circumstances:

-   social worker
-   minister of religion
-   police
-   member of the legal profession
-   Salvation Army officer

Note: eligibility refers to the person’s status as an Australian citizen
or holder of permanent resident status.

A mailing address must be provided to enable receipt of the Medicare
card. If authorised by the applicant, the mailing address can be the
address of one of the above who have provided information in support of
the application for enrolment.

Enrolment check

From the personal details provided, the Service Officer must search the
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for an existing enrolment,
and either update an existing enrolment or effect a new Medicare
enrolment.

Enrolment restrictions

Homeless persons cannot be enrolled in Medicare if they:

-   refuse to give their correct name to enable their identification on
    the enrolment file
-   provide no documentation in support of their application to enrol in
    Medicare

Note: Service Officers must assure the person that Services Australia
maintains complete confidentiality and that their whereabouts will not
be disclosed.

Witness protection

Persons in witness protection programs should be aware of the correct
channels to conduct business relating to their enrolment circumstances.

In the unlikely event a person requests information or services relating
to witness protection, that person must be advised to contact the
witness protection unit within the sponsoring agency.

If the person either:

-   does not understand this advice
-   is seeking to protect their identity independently of an official
    program

The person should be advised to seek legal advice, for example, through
the police or an appropriate Legal Aid Office.

Service Officers must not, under any circumstances, identify or contact
business areas responsible for witness protection within Services
Australia.

Medicare enrolments must continue to be processed in accordance with
current policy. A person must not be enrolled and issued a Medicare card
without supporting documentation.

The agency has established a Witness Protection help line for staff
assisted enquiries only. For contact details, see Witness protection
information.

Residing outside of Australia

Australian citizens are not eligible for Medicare if they:

-   have been absent from Australia for 5 years or more (from their
    initial departure), and
-   have not returned to reside in Australia

Note: the 5 year period does not re-start on return visits to Australia
if it is not to reside.

This does not include government and defence force personnel posted
overseas.

The agency accepts advice confirming that a person is residing overseas
from the following sources:

-   over the phone or
-   in person or
-   in writing (letter or email)

Where advice is received that the person intends to or is residing
overseas, enter the departure date (if known), in the Comments field in
Personal.

Where a person’s absence from the country for 5 years or more has been
confirmed but the exact date they left the country is unknown,
eligibility can be end dated with the date advised or date the written
advice was received.

Note: an end date should not be applied to a customer’s record until
they have been residing outside Australia for 5 or more years.

Defence Force personnel

Defence force personnel remain Australian residents for the purposes of
the Health Insurance Act 1973 and are not required to satisfy the usual
process for residency. This includes if they have been absent from
Australia for more than 5 years.

Defence force personnel need the following to enrol or re-enrol in
Medicare:

Completed Medicare Enrolment Form (MS004)

Identification, which can include:

-   current Australian driver’s licence
-   Australian birth certificate
-   current Australian passport

Residential document, which can include:

-   discharge papers
-   evidence of employment
-   a completed statutory declaration to support their application where
    documents cannot be provided

Entitlement details to assist if not previously enrolled in Medicare

Start date can be 1 of the following:

-   date of birth
-   if date of birth is prior to 01/02/1984 use this date 01/02/1984
-   date of permanent residency or citizenship was granted

End date - leave open

Entitlement type - Australian Citizen

Government personnel

Government agencies post permanent officers overseas for varying periods
of time to act as agency representatives. These representatives are
Australian citizens who will return to their Australian employment at
the conclusion of their overseas postings.

Overseas representatives are only temporarily absent from Australia and
remain Australian residents for the purposes of the Health Insurance Act
1973. Medicare benefits are therefore payable during any short term
return visit to Australia.

If a government employee has been absent from Australia for more than 5
years, they remain eligible for medical benefits incurred in Australia
and are not required to satisfy the usual process for residency. They
must provide documents to support they are a government employee.

Government employee will need the following to re-enrol in Medicare:

Completed Medicare Enrolment Form (MS004)

Identification, which can include:

-   current Australian driver’s licence
-   Australian birth certificate
-   current Australian passport

Residential document, which can include:

-   evidence of employment
-   a completed statutory declaration to support their application where
    documents cannot be provided

Missionaries

The residency requirements for Australian citizens and permanent
residents/New Zealand citizens applies to Missionaries.

A Missionary who has resided outside of Australia for longer than the
allowable period of time is not eligible for Medicare unless they can
provide evidence that they reside in Australia.

See: Ministerial Orders and Medicare eligibility and Permanent residents
eligibility for Medicare.

Australian citizen - Australian Declaratory Visa

An Australian Declaratory Visa (ADV) is issued in limited circumstances
to Australian citizens who hold dual nationality. It is an
administrative document that resembles a visa.

An Australian citizen may hold an Australian Declaratory Visa if they:

-   have dual nationality and are under the age of 18 years or
-   are in an emergency or
-   are in a situation preventing travel on an Australia passport

When entering Australia on this visa type, the policy for Australian
citizens returning to reside applies.

Prisoners and inmates Medicare eligibility

For information on Medicare eligibility for prisoners, initial enrolment
processes and replacement card requests received by or on behalf of
prisoners, see Medicare number and Medicare card requests for prisoners.

The Resources page contains contact details.

Contents

Access VEVO (Visa Entitlement Verification Online) program

Related links

Medicare - Eligibility - Your Health

Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
