
Legal and requests for information for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about legal and requests for
information for Medicare Compensation Recovery, court orders, class
action cases and apportionment of liability.

On this Page:

Court orders for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Subpoenas

A subpoena is a type of court order requesting a person to either attend
court to give evidence or to produce relevant documentation.

All subpoenas must be directed to the Subpoena Team for assessment. Once
assessed, the Subpoena Team will send a follow up request to Programme
Management for further action.

See: Handling subpoenas and Commonwealth Information Location Orders
served on the department.

Receiving and implementing court orders

Court orders or notices are legal documents outlining decisions made by
a court directing something be done, or not be done. Services Australia
can receive court orders or notices, either:

-   advising or requesting that information regarding a compensation
    claim be released, or
-   ordering that monies be released to external agencies

The Privacy Act 1988 prevents the agency from releasing information to a
third party or organisation that has not been authorised by the injured
person. The References page contains a link to the Privacy Act 1988.

Release of information

A court order for the release of information (and possible monies) will
nominate a specific person or organisation for the information to be
directed to.

Types of court orders or notices received

The agency can receive a variety of court orders or notices including a:

-   Court order which provides the agency with information, for example,
    confirming a claim for compensation has been dismissed
-   Subpoena which requires the agency to provide information. All
    subpoenas are immediately directed to the Subpoena Team for
    assessment, or
-   Garnishee notice which directs the agency to deduct monies from any
    refund owing to the injured person. Such a request must immediately
    be directed to Programme Management

Requirements of court orders or notices

All court orders or notices must:

-   specify the name of the person concerned
-   provide necessary information as set by the courts, and
-   specify the amount owed and/or where any amount payable by the
    agency should be sent

Enquiries regarding release of monies to a nominated organisation

If the injured person makes an enquiry regarding the release of monies
to a nominated organisation, agency or person in accordance with a court
order or notice, the injured person can be referred to the organisation,
agency or person responsible.

Bulk Payment Agreements

Under section 34 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act
1995 a compensation payer or insurer can request a Bulk Payment
Agreement (BPA).

A BPA is an arrangement entered into by the Chief Executive Medicare and
a person who pays compensation for injury or illness in respect of which
Medicare benefits, or nursing home residential or home care subsidies
may have been paid (the Bulk Payer).

Questions from the injured person or an authorised third party regarding
a BPA cannot be answered because they are not a party to the agreement.
Such enquiries should be directed to the bulk payer.

Cases believed to be covered by a BPA should not be registered in the
Compensation Case Management System. Check the list of bulk payers and
comments on the current BPA list on the Resources page. Unless indicated
otherwise, if the notifiable person appears on the list, the case must
be referred to Programme Management on the ‘Escalation to Programme
Management – via TL5 or PSO’ email template.

Queries from bulk payers or requests from compensation payers to enter
into a BPA should be directed to Programme Management via email.

The References page contains a link to the legislation.

Class action cases for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Determining if a case is a class action

The compensation payer or injured person’s solicitor may provide
Services Australia with written notification of a class action. On
receipt of this notification, the case is to be referred to a Programme
Support Officer (PSO) for escalation to Programme Management for further
consideration.

Processing a class action

Where it is identified that a compensation case relates to a class
action and the compensation payer or insurer does not want to enter into
a bulk payment agreement, the documentation will be returned to Service
Delivery Operations to be registered in the normal manner.

In some of these class action cases, the solicitor acting for the
compensation payer, might also be the same solicitor authorised by the
claimant by a Medicare Compensation Recovery Third party authority
(MO021) form. In these situations there is no conflict of interest in
the same solicitor representing both sides.

Do not:

-   raise a privacy breach where a solicitor is representing both the
    injured person and the compensation payer
-   flag as class action unless instructed by Programme Management

Staff must:

register these class action cases as per normal practices using the
details on:

-   'Notice of judgment or settlement' (MO022) form, and
-   'Third Party Authority' (MO021) form

Contact a Programme Support Officer if required.

See also:

-   Register Medicare Compensation Recovery Claims
-   Authority to release information and acting on a person's behalf for
    Medicare Compensation Recovery

Finalising a class action

A notice of judgment or settlement and any other legal documents from a
solicitor acting on behalf of the compensation payer or insurer must be
submitted to Services Australia before the class action can be
finalised.

See:Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Compensation Recovery
Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022) and Medicare Compensation
Recovery Third party authority (MO021) form.

Apportionment of liability for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Apportionment of liability is a formal agreement or finding and a legal
consideration that must be treated as such. Services Australia applies
apportionment of liability where the total amount payable to the agency
is reduced by the proportion of liability for the injury or illness
attributed to the injured person as indicated in the judgment or
settlement documents if:

-   the judgment or settlement fixes the amount of compensation on the
    basis that liability for the injury has been apportioned between the
    injured person and compensation payer, and
-   as a result, the amount of compensation is less than it would have
    been if liability had not been apportioned

The agency must only be satisfied that settlement has been fixed on the
basis that the original amount of compensation has been reduced as a
result of an apportionment of liability.

Evidence of liability

The provisions will have been satisfied if the ‘Medicare Compensation
Recovery Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022)’ or settlement
documents include the percentage of apportionment attributed to the
injured person.

Acceptable documentation to support an apportionment if the ‘Medicare
Compensation Recovery Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022)’ is
not provided are:

-   judgment or court order
-   consent order
-   terms of settlement
-   deed of release or discharge

Note: the agency will accept hand written amendments to documents as
long as they are initialled and signed by all relevant parties.

Reducing the amount owed

When the amount of compensation is reduced because an apportionment of
liability has been applied for contributory negligence, the amount owed
to the agency is reduced by the proportion of liability attributed to
the injured person.

For example, if the amount owing is $1,000 but 20% liability has been
apportioned to the injured person in the case, the recoverable amount is
reduced by 20% to $800.

When the notice of charge is issued, the reduced amount owed to the
agency is automatically calculated in the Compensation Case Management
System (CCMS). However, the notice of charge and the attached listing of
Medicare benefits, nursing home benefits and residential and home care
subsidies will not reflect the reduction.

If the notice of charge was issued without the apportionment being
applied because supporting documentation was not provided, an amendment
can be carried out within the 2 year reviewable period if supporting
documentation is provided.

To escalate a case to Programme Management, use the 'Escalation to
Programme Management via TL5 or PSO’ email template. The Resources page
contains a link to the email template.

See also: Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation
Recovery.

Child Support Program and Medicare Compensation Recovery

Release of information

Section 120 of the Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988,
allows the Child Support Program to request the following details in
respect of an injured person from Services Australia:

-   name
-   address
-   amount of advance payment refunded
-   the date the refund was issued
-   whether the refund has been presented for payment, and
-   the name of the compensation payer and the total amount of
    settlement

Note: a request must include the correct section of the Child Support
(Registration and Collection) Act 1988 under which it is being made, and
must be signed by a person holding the delegation to request such
information.

The References page contains links to relevant legislation.

Release of money

Section 72A of the Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988,
allows the Child Support Program to issue a notice to the agency for the
garnishee of money being held on behalf of the injured person.

When the agency has received an advance payment and a refund is payable
to the injured person, the Child Support Program may request all or part
of the refund be forwarded to their nominated office to assist with the
recovery of an amount owed in arrears for child support payments by the
injured person.

The agency can only release an advance payment refund to Child Support
after it has deducted all amounts due for past Medicare benefits,
nursing home benefits, residential care subsidies and home care
subsidies relating to the compensable injury or illness.

The References page contain links to relevant legislation.

The Resources page contains links to forms, email templates and contact
details.

Contents

Authority to release information and acting on a person's behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Deceased estates and Medicare Compensation Recovery

Minors and Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notifiable and not notifiable claims for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Signature requirements for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Related links

Handling subpoenas and Commonwealth Information Location Orders served
on the department

Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
