
Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details 011-44110000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on amending a person's Medicare
enrolment details.

Minor discrepancies in Medicare Enrolment File

Legal advice has been received from the Principal Legal Adviser that
minor changes to the Medicare Enrolment File may be made without
supporting documentation.

These amendments do not change the substance of a person's details. They
correct minor spelling or typographical errors that may have been made
by Service Officers in the normal course of their duties. It is
acceptable to make these amendments, particularly as the agency has an
obligation to ensure that the personal information we hold about
customers is up-to-date and accurate.

Misspelt name

If advised that a name has been spelt incorrectly or needs updating, see
Change legal name on Medicare record for more information.

Assumed Date of Births

In some situations refugees and other people born overseas cannot verify
their date of birth. For people who are born overseas and whose DOB is
unknown, the Department of Home Affairs policy is to assume a date of
birth. For applicants who cannot verify their DOB, visa documents
presented may display as:

-   31/12/yyyy
-   01/01/yyyy
-   XX XX/yyyy

Those applicants who have been given an assumed DOB and displays as XX
XX/yyyy, the DOB to be keyed is 31/12/yyyy.

See Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility for help

Date of birth incorrectly recorded

Minor date of birth variations

These are examples only and - not limited to the following:

-   the day of the month and the month are transposed
-   at the beginning of the year, the operator keys the previous year
-   the day is one day out

Major date of birth variations

Where the date of birth is not a minor variation to their recorded date,
customers are required to provide supporting documentation to verify the
required changes.

Customers' can do major variation to their date of birth by:

-   calling us
-   email or mail the request and supporting document, or
-   in a Service Centre

See Table 2 on the Process page.

Note: a current restriction within the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS) prevents an incorrect date of birth from being amended
where the Entitlement Start Date is prior to the date of birth. This
could occur due to a system error or Service Officer error. For example:

-   a person who was initially enrolled on an existing Medicare record
    automatically adopted the same entitlement start date as the person
    already enrolled on the existing card, or
-   a person is being enrolled with an incorrect date of birth which is
    prior to the entitlement start date and the correct date of birth is
    after the entitlement start date

Examples such as these will require specific process steps to be
followed when amending a date of birth.

The Process page has instructions for amending an incorrect date of
birth when the error message 12300 DATE OF BIRTH>MEDICARE ENTITLEMENT
START DATE is displayed.

For help, see Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility

Registering or updating 'titles' in CDMS

The Resources page contains information describing when a title must be
updated on existing enrolment records.

Gender incorrectly recorded

Where a customer has been enrolled in Medicare and at a later date
either a claim that is a gender specific item has been rejected,
documentation or advice received from the customer indicates that gender
recorded on Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) is incorrect,
the gender field can be changed without supporting documents in the
below instances:

-   an item on claims history has been overridden which may indicate
    that the gender field is incorrect
-   a person has received documentation to participate in a particular
    trial and the applicant advises that they are not of the gender
    required for participation in the program
-   where the title on a group contact does not correspond with the
    enrolment information (for example, in longstanding enrolments)

Where there does not appear to be any logical explanation for the error,
documentation must be provided to support a change in the gender field.
Customers can do this by:

-   calling us
-   email or mail the request and supporting documents, or
-   in a service centre

Note: Evidence standards are to be met for requests to change sex and/or
gender on CDMS, see Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments and
Gender Guidelines Implementation.

Document verification

Identification documents provided need to be verified in Document
Verification System (DVS). The process page contains details on how to
verify and record this information.

The Resources page contains contact details and information about
updating titles in Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Contents

Change legal name on Medicare record

Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments

Change of address for Medicare enrolments

Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment requirements

Related links

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments

Authenticating a Medicare customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
