
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about Power of Attorney (POA),
Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised Representatives for
Medicare.

POA, Guardianship Orders and Administration Orders

POA, Guardianship Orders and Administration Orders give people, or
entities, the legal authority to act on behalf of someone else. The
difference between these types of arrangements is the way in which a
person has been appointed to act on behalf of another individual.

Authorised Representative arrangements give people the authority to act
on behalf of someone else for Medicare purposes, but they are not legal
documents.

For release of Medicare and PBS claims history information requests
under POA see Release of information for Medicare.

Note: POA and Authorised Representative arrangements are not
transferable across the agency. See the 'Someone to deal with us on your
behalf' page on the Services Australia website for specific programme
requirements. The Resources page has a link to this page.

Type of appointments

-   an individual can appoint someone as a POA to act on their behalf in
    specified circumstances
-   a court or tribunal can appoint someone to act as the legal guardian
    or administrator of an individual who is unable to manage all or
    some of their affairs due to accident, illness, disability or mental
    incapacity

POA, Guardianship Orders and Administration Orders will vary on a case
by case basis. This means each new document needs to be considered in
order to determine whether it allows a person to do business with the
agency on behalf of someone else.

Note:

-   POA documents sighted must be original or a certified copy of an
    original
-   Advance personal plans in the Northern Territory replaces enduring
    power of attorney

A POA drawn up in one state is acceptable nationwide for the purposes of
Medicare, unless the POA clearly states it is restricted to the state of
origin. If clauses are present in the POA, see Escalation process for
Medicare Eligibility.

If a POA has been drafted in another country, it must be verified and
confirmed by an Australian legal entity (lawyer, solicitor etc.).
Written advice by the legal entity must state that the POA is acceptable
in Australia and must accompany the POA document.

Definitions of terms

The following is a list of definitions related to POA, Guardianship
Orders, Administration Orders and Authorised Representative
arrangements:

-   POA: a written document given by one person to another authorising
    them to act for him/her on their behalf
-   Guardianship and Administration Orders: a written document given by
    a court or tribunal appointing a legal guardian or administrator to
    act on behalf of an individual
-   Authorised Representative: arrangements which allow a person to act
    on behalf of an individual for Medicare purposes who is unable to
    manage their own affairs or make decisions
-   Public Trustees: are government departments established to provide a
    range of services to the public in their particular state or
    territory. The legal entity provides financial and administrative
    services to those who cannot manage their own affairs under
    Financial Management Orders (FMO) issued by a court or tribunal
-   Attorney: the person authorised to act (also called donee)
-   Donor: the person who has given the POA, that is, the person for
    whom another person is acting
-   Donee: the person authorised to act (also called attorney)
-   Jointly and severally: the attorneys can make decisions together or
    separately
-   Severally: any one of the attorneys can make decisions independently
    of the other attorneys
-   Jointly: the attorneys must agree on all decisions
-   General: is valid until the principal becomes incapacitated
-   Enduring: is valid even if the principal is incapacitated

Family and domestic violence

Family and domestic violence is conduct that is:

-   violent
-   threatening
-   coercive or controlling
-   intended to cause the family or household member to be fearful
-   abuse of older Australians (also known as elder abuse) is a form of
    family and domestic violence

Family and domestic violence can include, but is not limited to:

-   physical violence
-   sexual assault and other sexually abusive behaviour
-   economic (financial) abuse
-   emotional or psychological abuse
-   stalking
-   serious neglect where there is a relationship of dependence
-   verbal abuse
-   spiritual or cultural abuse

Consideration must be given when assessing a Power of Attorney,
Guardianship, Administrative Order or Authorised Representative for
Medicare where family and domestic violence (including abuse of older
Australians) may be a concern. If family and domestic violence appears
to be evident, a referral to the social worker must be made. Go to
Family and domestic violence for more details.

New POA

The attorney (donee) must provide the following:

-   an original or a certified copy of the POA document
-   a written letter of request which includes the attorney/donee's
    Medicare number and signature
-   photo ID such as a drivers licence of the attorney/donee

They can provide the documents:

-   by mail
-   by email, or
-   at a service centre

Service Officers must examine the document to determine that the:

POA is not for a specific purpose, such as:

-   Health - this refers to medical treatment or a decision made in
    relation to medical treatment. This does not authorise a person to
    interact with the agency
-   Conveyancing - this refers to the sale, purchase or rental of a
    property. This does not authorise a person to interact with the
    agency

POA is enduring (permanent), general, financial or limited - usually
found on the front of the document

-   A general POA may be for specific periods or events and usually has
    an end date. Note: end dates are recorded by the agency
-   Financial POA allows interaction with the agency

Attorney/donee:

-   Has expressly consented to act and accepts appointment as
    attorney/donee. This is found in a signed statement, usually at the
    back of the POA
-   Signature is witnessed by a third party. In some cases, two
    independent witnesses (cannot be witnessed by the donor)
-   Cannot witness the donor's signature

Donor's signature requires two independent witnesses. Note: if there is
only one witness and the form allows for one witness, this is acceptable
by the agency

When processing a new POA, relevant details of the POA must be included
in the CDMS. In particular:

-   General POA - do not record an end date unless it is recorded in the
    document
-   Enduring POA, Guardianship and Administration Orders - do not record
    an end date
-   Limited POA - record an end date

POA documents do not need to be sighted annually once they are recorded
in the CDMS. The Sight POA due date field is now obsolete and is not to
be completed.

There is a risk to the agency of the POA being revoked without its
knowledge, but this is considered a low.

Note: where the power has been given jointly to more than one
attorney/donee, photo identity for all attorneys/donees must be provided
and details of each attorney/donee must be recorded in the POA field in
CDMS. A POA is not valid when the donor is deceased.

Where a POA indicates it only becomes valid when the donor becomes
incapacitated, a letter from a medical practitioner which states this
information must be sighted. If a letter is not provided, the POA
details will not be included on the donor's record in CDMS. See
Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility.

If a POA is presented at a Service centre, Service Officers scan all
documentation, together with a certified copy of the POA into PaNDA, by
selecting the Medicare Eligibility Enrolment work type.

The Process page contains details on processing a new POA.

Existing POA, Guardianship and Administration Orders

Where an enquiry from an attorney/donee or entity is received:

-   in person - sight identification of the attorney/donee
-   over the telephone - perform a public security check on both the
    donor and attorney/donee

An information message will display on the personal record of a customer
if a POA, Guardianship and Administration order is registered in CDMS.
The Check POA message will alert the service officer to click the
entitlement button to access the POA tab.

Confirmation must be checked, by asking if:

-   the POA still operative, or
-   they are still the attorney for x

Note: the attorney/donee must provide sufficient details to adequately
perform a security check on both the donor and the attorney/donee. The
details to be provided to the attorney/donee is dependent on the type of
Power of Attorney in place. See Release of information for Medicare. It
is no longer necessary to sight an enduring POA each 12 months.

For quality assurance purposes, when details relating to a POA has
previously been recorded in CDMS with a sight POA due date, Service
Officers are to remove details in the Sight POA due date field.

Any transactions with the agency after the death of the donor should be
conducted by the executor or administrator of the deceased's estate.
This applies to all POAs and Guardianship Orders.

Guardianship and Administration Orders

Guardianship and administration orders are legal documents that give
power to the guardian/s or administrator/s to make decisions on behalf
of another person.

Where an individual is unable to manage all or some of their affairs, a
court or tribunal can make orders appointing a legal guardian or
administrator to manage all or some of their affairs.

A person who has been appointed an administrator under a Guardianship
Order or an Administration Order is treated in the same manner as a
person appointed under a POA.

The legal guardian, administrator or manager may be either:

-   an individual
-   two or more people appointed together or separately
-   a legal entity such as the Public Trustee

The person appointed will need to provide the following:

-   an original or a certified copy of the Guardianship or
    Administration Order
-   a written letter of request which includes the appointed person’s
    Medicare number
-   original or a certified copy of their photo identity

Guardianship and Administration Orders must be noted under POA in CDMS.

Service Officers must examine documentation to determine if:

-   the order is not for a specific purpose. In this case, the order
    does not affect the agency
-   the order specifies a time period, limitation or conditions

Requests to store banking details permanently from a guardian must not
be recorded in CDMS. See Store, confirm and end date bank account
details for Medicare EFT payments.

The Process page contains more details on processing a new order and
amending or deleting Guardianship and Administrative Orders.

If a Guardianship Order or Administration Order is presented at a
service centre, Service Officers scan all documentation, together with a
certified copy of the POA into PaNDA, by selecting the Medicare
Eligibility Enrolment work type.

Public Trustee entity

Where an organisation (Public Trustee) is appointed as the legal entity
under a Guardianship or Administration Order, they need to provide the
following:

-   an original or a certified copy of the Guardianship or
    Administration Order
-   a written letter on the legal entity's letterhead which includes the
    appointed person’s Medicare number

Where a legal entity such as a Public Trustee has been appointed to
manage the affairs of an individual under a Guardianship or
Administrative Order, and that individual is enrolled on a Medicare card
with other people, the individual must be copied onto a card of their
own.

A letter must be sent to the legal entity (for example, Public Trustee)
requesting the completion of the Application to copy or transfer from
one Medicare card to another form, for the person for whom they hold
Power of Attorney (POA). The Resources page contains link to this form.

A second letter is sent to the legal entity to advise of their client's
Medicare number and expiration date once the POA has been recorded. See
Registration of Public Trustee letter.

The guardian/trustee's address is recorded at group (card) level and the
personal (consumer) mailing address is recorded as the person’s mailing
address. This allows for the customer to change their address at the
personal level. This will not cause the group address to change and will
not affect the guardian/trustee receiving correspondence.

Customer who are under a Financial Management or other guardianship
orders cannot change their bank account details without first consulting
with the relevant legal entity. Service officers should seek advice
before updating or storing bank account details. Request to store
banking details permanently from a trustee can be recorded in CDMS. See
Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT
payments.

The Process page contains details on how to record this information.

Authorised Representative Arrangements

A person (aged 14 years and over) who is unable to manage their own
affairs, make sound decisions or give reasonable instructions, may be
able to have an Authorised Representative to act on their behalf for
Medicare purposes. Evidence must be shown that the customer is unable to
manage their own affairs due to their intellectual or physical
disability.

Note: if a person already has a Power of Attorney, Guardianship Order or
Administration Order, they have the legal authority to act on behalf of
the customer. The Power of Attorney, Guardianship Order or
Administration Order should be registered (if not already) with the
agency. A person cannot apply (nor is there any reason to apply) to be
an authorised representative if a legal authority is already in place.

Authorised Representative arrangements allow an Authorised
Representative to interact with the agency on behalf of a customer as if
they were the customer themselves.

To act on behalf of another person for Medicare purposes, an Authorised
Representative must be:

-   over 18 years of age
-   be an individual who is a close friend or relation to the customer
-   must not have a paid job as their carer, and
-   have evidence the person requires assistance because of a medical
    condition

Note: only one authorised representative per customer is allowed.

The authorised representative arrangement can be cancelled by:

customer request (verbally or in writing)

authorised representative request (verbally or in writing)

Services Australia when the authorised representative is:

-   unable to be contacted (for example, mail has been returned from the
    authorised representative's address and attempts to contact the
    authorised representative by telephone have been unsuccessful)
-   not acting in the customer's best interest (for example, allegations
    of misuse have been made or the authorised representative
    arrangement is inappropriate)

The person who is applying to be an authorised representative must
provide:

-   proof of Identification
-   statutory declaration
-   evidence if similar arrangements
-   evidence of the person’s medical condition

Provide the documents:

-   by mail
-   by email, or
-   at a service centre

All document types listed below must be provided:

Proof of identification

Can be:

-   Australian Drivers licence
-   Australian or foreign Passport
-   Australian Birth Certificate or marriage certificate
-   Immicard
-   birth certificates for Northern Territory (NT) with Aboriginal
    Population Record (APR)

Identification documents need to be verified in Document Verification
System (DVS) before processing the application. The Process page
contains details on how to verify and record this information.

Statutory declaration

The authorised representative must state their relationship with the
person and what their existing responsibility is, for example, day to
day support, on the statutory declaration.

Evidence of similar arrangement

This can include one of the following:

-   evidence of Authorised Representative appointment to receive
    Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS) on the person’s behalf
-   evidence of Centrelink nominee arrangement
-   evidence of similar arrangements with another organisation or
    government agency, for example, bank or financial institution, or
-   evidence of NDIS nominee arrangement

Evidence of the person’s medical condition

This can include one of the following:

-   specialist report
-   any recent assessment of the customer’s condition or intellectual
    function from the specialist, or psychologist, or
-   a letter from the treating doctor

The evidence must be dated within the last month and include:

-   diagnosing medical professional’s name
-   provider number
-   qualification
-   contact details

Details for Authorised Representatives are recorded in CDMS. The Process
page contain details on adding an Authorised Representative.

The Resources page contains a link to the ‘Authorisation to act on an
incapacitated person’s behalf for Medicare purposes’ form, Commonwealth
statutory declaration form and 'Someone to deal with us on your behalf'
on the Services Australia website.

Delegation of Powers

An authorised person who acts on behalf of another person can delegate
their powers. The delegation would need to be evidenced by another
acceptable document, for example, a Deed Poll.

Note: requests to delegate powers must be escalated, see Escalation
process for Medicare Eligibility.

Medicare online accounts

Service Officers must be aware that if a customer has a POA recorded in
CDMS, this doesn't apply to their Medicare online account. This only
gives them the legal right to act on behalf of the customer with
Medicare.

There is no Nominated Representative process for Medicare online
accounts. If a person is provided access through POA, there is no way of
knowing who is using the online account.

It's a major privacy and security breach if a third party is given
access to a customer's Medicare online account.

Release of information for Medicare

Release of information for Medicare contains details on:

third party request for information scenarios

details of additional supporting documents that may be needed for a

-   deceased person, or
-   a person incapable of managing their own affairs information request

summary of the most common types of requests and where to forward them
for action

explains the type of requests which are actioned by Information Release
Officers in Brisbane, Parramatta and DHS Canberra

The Resources page contains:

-   links to a list of state and territory Public Trustees
-   letters
-   Data tables for Births, Deaths and Marriages
-   Country codes
-   the ‘Authorisation to act on a person’s behalf for Medicare
    purposes’ form
-   the Commonwealth statutory declaration form
-   Application to copy or transfer from one Medicare card to another
    form
-   a link to contact details for Medicare and Aged Care - Local Peer
    Support (LPS)
-   links to Someone to deal with us on your behalf
-   write, email or fax us on the Services Australia website

Related links

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Change of address for Medicare enrolments

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

Release of information for Medicare

Medicare cards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
