
External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) 011-13000000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement
Program (EBPRP).

Government intent

The EBPRP aims to improve the quality of life for women who have
undergone breast surgery as a result of breast cancer. The program,
which commenced in 2008, provides reimbursement towards the cost of new
or replacement prostheses up to the amount of $400 for each breast.
Customers can claim a reimbursement for a prosthesis for each breast
once every 2 years.

The program does not provide reimbursement for bras, post breast surgery
swimwear, internal prostheses or nipple inserts. The program is not
available to individuals with genetic breast malformations or breast
surgery due to reasons other than breast cancer.

The EBPRP is administered by Services Australia on behalf of the
Department of Health and Aged Care (Health).

Note: only prostheses purchased on or after 1 July 2008 can be claimed.

Retailer or supplier restrictions

The EBPRP does not have any specific requirements regarding the choice
of breast prosthesis retailer or supplier. The claimant can choose their
own retailer or supplier. Reimbursement can only be made where the
account for the purchase has been paid.

The Resources page contains contact details for the External Breast
Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP), letters and forms relating to
the EBPRP, and a link to Services Australia website.

Contents

Eligibility for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

Enquiries for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

Claims for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) 2 year claim
again period

Payments for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

Forms and stationery for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement
Program (EBPRP)

Related links

Amend/update customer details in CDMS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
