
Provider eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare 011-41030040

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about provider eligibility for Child
Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare.

Private dentists, representative public dental practitioner, oral health therapists, dental hygienists and dental therapists

To provide services under the CDBS, a dental practitioner must have
general or specialist registration with the Dental Board of Australia.

A service or part of a service may be provided by an oral health
therapist, dental hygienist, dental therapist or dental prosthetist on
behalf of a dentist or dental specialist and must be billed under the
dentist’s provider number.

Note:

-   oral health therapists, dental hygienists and dental therapists can
    now register with the Services Australia for a Medicare provider
    number
-   dental prosthetists can register for a Medicare provider number
    however; they cannot use their own provider number for Medicare
    billing
-   when referring patients for diagnostic imaging, pathology tests or
    prescribing under Medicare for either, private, public and
    representative public dentists they must use their own Medicare
    provider number

Private practice

Private practice dentists must have both:

-   general or specialist registration with the Dental Board of
    Australia, and
-   a valid provider number issued by the Services Australia for the
    practice location where the service is provided

Note: if a provider number is already issued, the dentist can use the
existing provider number for that location as long as it is current.

Public sector

Representative public dentist

A representative public dentist model exists for services provided
within public sector clinics. This model has been agreed by the
Department of Health and Aged Care, Services Australia and the state and
territory health departments, and includes a nominated 'trusted source'
who must confirm the representative public dentist.

Representative public dentists must bill the service against the
representative dentist's provider number.

One or more representative public dentists can be nominated for each
state and territory.

Representative public dentists must have both:

-   general or specialist registration with the Dental Board of
    Australia, and
-   a provider number for each public sector clinic location they are
    responsible for under the representative public dentist model

Note: enquiries and applications for provider numbers for representative
public dentists must be directed to the Services Australia, Canberra
Provider Eligibility and Accreditation.

Non representative public dentists

A dentist working in an eligible public sector clinic who is not the
authorised representative public dentist must use the provider number of
the representative public dentist for the location where they are
providing the service.

Public dentist participation in the CDBS

The Department of Health and Aged Care, Services Australia and the state
and territory health departments have agreed to separate provider
registration and Medicare service billing arrangements for
representative public dentists.

Representative public dentist participation in CDBS is contingent on the
state and territory health departments maintaining their existing
activity levels and expenditure on dental services as well as meeting
certain other conditions. Access to CDBS is expected to be granted for a
period of 3 years. The Department of Health and Aged Care can advise
Services Australia to remove access to an individual public dentist
clinic and/or representative public dentist.

Note: the Provider Eligibility and Accreditation Section will action
advice received from the Department of Health and Aged Care.

Informed consent

Before performing services, a dental provider must obtain consent from a
patient or their parent/guardian for the:

-   proposed services, and
-   associated costs for the proposed services

This consent can be obtained verbally but must be recorded on a patient
consent form and include a signature from the child/teenager or
parent/guardian for confirmation.

For:

-   Private billing, a Non-Bulk Billing patient consent form must be
    completed on each day a service is provided
-   Bulk billing, a Bulk Billing patient consent form only needs to be
    completed on the first day of service in the calendar year. Once the
    patient has signed the form, consent does not need to be documented
    again for future bulk billed services that year. Consent must be
    documented again on the first day the patient receives services in a
    subsequent year.

Note: for bulk billed services, an Informed Financial Consent - Bulk
Billing Patient Consent Form is only required on the first visit in each
calendar year. If the patient is seeing multiple dentists within a
practice, 1 form is required to be completed per provider, not 1 form
per practice. Consent must be documented again on the first day the
patient receives services in a subsequent year.

The Resources page contains a link to the health professionals forms
page on the Services Australia website, on which the Non-Bulk Billing
patient consent form, the Bulk Billing patient consent form are located,
and a link to the Department of Health and Aged Care Child Dental
Benefits Schedule page, on which the Informed Financial Consent - Bulk
Billing Patient Consent form can be found.

Record keeping

Dental providers must maintain adequate records for 4 years from the
date of service including:

-   patient consent form/s, and
-   clinical notes (including noting the particular tooth or teeth a
    CDBS service relates to, where relevant)

Any other relevant document/s such as itemised accounts or receipts,
verifying the service/s claimed were provided, should be retained.

The Resources page contains links to the Health Professionals forms
page, Child Dental Benefits Schedule for Health professionals page on
the Services Australia website and the Child Dental Benefits Schedule
page on the Department of Health and Aged Care website.

Related links

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
