
Register children (including children in care) for Medicare Safety Net 011-43080070

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to register children, including children in
care, for Medicare Safety Net. Note: from 1 July 2016, Norfolk Island is
covered under Medicare provisions.

National consistency for dependant (child) registration for Medicare Safety Net

This information provides national consistency for situations where a
dependant child is being registered for the Medicare Safety Net.

Definition of a child dependant

For Medicare Safety Net purposes a dependant is defined as:

a child who is:

-   less than 16 years of age, and
-   in custody, care and control of the family contact or their
    spouse/de facto partner

a full-time student who is:

-   less than 25 years of age, and
-   in custody, care and control of the family contact or their
    spouse/de facto partner

A child can be registered in a maximum of two Medicare Safety Nets
provided the families share custody and decision making concerning the
daily care and control of the child.

If a child is registered on two Medicare Safety Nets, the out-of-pocket
expenses associated with any service the child receives is attributed to
the Medicare Safety Net family of the family who incurred the expense.

As each family approaches the Safety Net threshold, the family is asked
for confirmation of the family composition. If there are any changes to
the family composition these must be updated. This may involve removing
the child from an earlier registered family, if the child is no longer
in their custody, care or control.

No existing Medicare Safety Net family registration

Do not create a new Medicare Safety Net family registration without the
customer’s consent where a request is received by Services Australia to
enrol a child in Medicare and either:

-   there is no existing Medicare Safety Net family registration, and/or
-   the Medicare Safety Net question has been left blank on the form

Register a child for the Medicare Safety Net after Medicare enrolment

A child must be registered in a Medicare Safety Net family registration
from the calendar year in which the child became eligible and enrolled
in Medicare. For example, if a child was born in December, but not
enrolled in Medicare until the following calendar year (Medicare
enrolment will be back dated to date of birth), they must be added to
the existing Medicare Safety Net family registration for both the
current and previous calendar years.

If the customer requests a child be added to their Medicare Safety Net
family and the child is enrolled in Medicare but has not been registered
in an existing Medicare Safety Net family and was:

-   born in Australia, then the child is added to the registration from
    the calendar year in which the child was born
-   born overseas, then the child is added to the registration from the
    date the child became eligible for Medicare

Note: if the date the child is being added to the Medicare Safety Net
family registration is greater than 12 months from the date the child
was born, the enquiry must be emailed to MPS Assessing for
determination.

See Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net to:

-   add a child to an existing registration
-   register a new Medicare Safety Net Family

End of year carry-over of Medicare Safety Net registrations

The end of the year roll-over allows for all Medicare Safety Net
registrations to be carried over to 1 January the following year. This
means that families already registered do not need to re-register for
the Medicare Safety Net for the following calendar year however they
need to confirm the family when reaching the threshold.

Any queries about additional Medicare Safety Net benefits being payable
for the child must be referred to MPS Assessing.

Medicare Safety Net Registrations and newborns

For families who have a newborn and have not previously registered as an
MSN family, the registration date will be the newborn’s date of birth.

Adjust Service Lines where Medicare Safety Net threshold has been reached

Adjustments to Medicare claims need to be made to service lines if:

-   there was an existing Medicare Safety Net family registration and
    the child was not registered in the Medicare Safety Net family at
    the time of enrolment, or
-   a new registration should have been created at the time of the
    child's enrolment for example mother and child, and
-   claims for Medicare benefits have been processed for the child since
    the date of enrolment

See Medicare Safety Net threshold has been reached.

Record the contact details of the customer and their situation on the
Medicare Safety Net query form and email the form along with any other
relevant scanned documents the customer may have provided for example
birth certificate to MPS Assessing.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Safety Net query
form.

Register children in care in a family Medicare Safety Net family

This policy covers the situation where a family caring for a child in
care, state ward or a child under a care/guardianship order or in
kinship care requests the addition of the child/ren to their Medicare
Safety Net family registration.

Children in care are considered 'dependant children' provided they
fulfil the conditions of 'dependant'. See Definition of a child
dependant.

Any queries regarding the registration of children in care are to be
directed to MPS Assessing. See Child Protection Agency – Medicare card
number requests for children and young people in out-of-home care
(OOHC).

Children in care registered in two Medicare Safety Nets families

When a request has been made to add a child/ren who is in care to a
Medicare Safety Net family and child/ren are already registered on two
Medicare Safety Nets, the customer must provide proof that the child/ren
are in their full custody, care and control.

This evidence should be either a court order or documentation from a
state child protection agency. For:

-   NSW Department of Communities and Justice
-   VIC Department of Human Services
-   QLD Department of Communities (Child Safety)
-   SA Department of Health and Aged Care and Human Services
-   WA Department of Child Protection
-   ACT Office for Children, Youth and Family Support, Care and
    Protection
-   NT Department of Health and Aged Care and Families

Applications from agencies such as Barnardos, Catholic Care and
Anglicare are acceptable providing all required documents are provided.

Once evidence has been provided that the child/ren are in full custody
of the foster parent or guardian, the child/ren are to be removed from
two existing Medicare Safety Net family registrations (provided and
added to the foster parent/guardians Medicare Safety Net family

Reimbursement of medical costs by state departments or agencies

Medicare benefits are not payable for services (reimbursement of medical
costs) to children in care. That is, if the carer has a financial
agreement with a:

-   state department, or
-   agency

The Resources page has:

-   contact details for the Assessing and Benefits team
-   a link to the VG4 form
-   the Medicare Safety Net query form PP041
-   a link to the Tier-3 Medicare Safety Net escalation form
-   the Medicare Safety Net Registration and Amendment for Couples and
    Families form (MS016), and
-   links to Medicare Safety Net user help guides

Related links

Phone registrations for Medicare Safety Net

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Child enrolments in Medicare

Child Protection Agency – Medicare card number requests for children and
young people in out-of-home care (OOHC)

Adjust Medicare patient claim on a previously adjusted service

Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims processing in
Medicare

Medicare Safety Net letters

Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
