-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This process is impacted by the coronavirus (COVID-19) response. Read
the Operational Messages under COVID-19 Vaccines on Coronavirus
(COVID-19) response.

This document explains information and processes for Service Officers
about International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC).

Purpose

The ICVC is one of 3 types of proof of vaccination produced by the
Australian Immunisation Register (AIR). It provides a secure record of
COVID-19 vaccinations that is recognised internationally.

The ICVC:

-   helps customers prove their COVID-19 vaccinations when travelling
    overseas
-   cannot be used for personal identification
-   does not replace the requirement for other travel documents such as
    passports, visas or additional proof of vaccination
-   is available to customers who have at least one COVID-19 vaccine
    recorded on the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
-   is not available if the customer has a medical contraindication
    recorded on the AIR. These customers can access a COVID-19 digital
    certificate or immunisation history statement for proof of their
    vaccinations

For details on travel requirements, customers can visit Smart Traveller
and check the destination country government website.

Note: Services Australia only issue ICVCs to customers traveling to or
from Australia. If a customer is residing overseas and not travelling to
Australia, refer them to their:

-   local health department, or
-   traveling authority

Eligibility

Customers can get an ICVC if they:

-   have a passport, and
-   have had at least one dose of an approved or recognised COVID-19
    vaccine recorded on the AIR

ICVCs are free. Customers do not have to be enrolled with Medicare to
request one.

Access for Medicare eligible customers

Customers enrolled in Medicare can request an ICVC online through myGov
using their linked:

-   Medicare online account
-   Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Once the customer has downloaded their ICVC, they can:

save it:

-   to their computer or mobile device
-   in their Express Plus Medicare mobile app to use offline
-   to Google Pay or Apple Wallet

print a copy

If customers do not save their ICVC, they will have to enter their
information again to re-request one.

Service Officers can print a copy of an ICVC already received by the
customer, if:

-   the passport, personal and vaccination details have not changed, and
-   the last ICVC was requested no more than 3 months earlier

Download the most recent ICVC version, and re-issue a copy from the
Immunisation Document Screen (IDS) in the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR).

Access for non-Medicare eligible customers

Customers not eligible for Medicare can request an ICVC online through
myGov using their linked Individual Healthcare Identifiers (IHI)
service.

Once the customer has downloaded their ICVC, they can:

-   save it on their computer or mobile device, or
-   print a copy

If customers do not save their ICVC, they will have to enter their
information again to re-request one.

If customers cannot go online, they can get an ICVC by:

-   contacting the AIR public line between Monday to Friday, 8 am to 5
    pm
-   attending a service centre

The following information is required:

-   the passport they wish to use to enter a foreign country
-   identity documents if they need to update their name or date of
    birth details. For example, birth certificate or change of name
    certificate

Note: the AIR International Certificate phone line is open from 8 am to
5 pm, Monday to Friday (local time). At all other times it is closed.
Out of Hours staff should only service customers that are warm
transferred by the Australian Consulate. Customers can get their ICVC
online by going to myGov or the Express Plus Medicare mobile app.

Details shown on ICVCs

The ICVC shows:

the customer’s personal details recorded with Services Australia

their passport information

details of the COVID-19 vaccine/s received, such as the:

-   brand and the date it was given
-   country code of the country it was received in, and
-   vaccine batch number

a globally recognised QR code

See the Resources page for details of the fields on ICVCs.

Missing country code

When a vaccine administered overseas is recorded on the AIR, country of
vaccination must be recorded.

If the country code is missing the vaccination will not display on the
ICVC and the ICVC will not be available.

In these cases, the customer must contact their Australian vaccination
provider and ask that they update the AIR with their overseas country of
vaccination.

ICVC requests for children in Out of Home Care (OOHC)

A care agency can request a manual ICVC on behalf of a child under 14
years of age in Out of Home Care.

Service Officers can only release information about an individual 14
years of age and over to a third party (including caseworkers) if:

the individual provides verbal consent. If verbal consent is given:

-   it is valid for that instance only, and
-   the individual must pass authentication

the parent or guardian has a legal arrangement in place, and it is:

-   registered with Medicare, and
-   recorded on Medicare CDMS. This includes Power of Attorney (POA) for
    health matters, or a guardianship order

the parent or guardian has:

-   completed an Authorisation to act on an incapacitated person’s
    behalf for Medicare purposes form (MO050), and
-   their authority is recorded on Medicare CDMS

The Resources contains a link to the MO050 form.

Long names and only names

Customers with a long name or an ‘only name’ can request an ICVC.

Long names and only names should display correctly on ICVCs. An 'only
name' enrolment is where the applicant has one name only. There is no
first and last name.

The ICVC has an increased character limit for long names and can record
only names to match the personal details on passports. See Table 4 on
the Process page for details.

Note: ICVCs cannot be used in Australia as proof of vaccination, they
are for international travel only. Do not tell a customer to request an
ICVC if their name does not display correctly on their immunisation
history statement or COVID-19 digital certificate.

DVS outages and ICVC requests

The Document Verification Service (DVS) has scheduled and unscheduled
outages. When these occur:

-   customers and staff may be unable to request an International
    COVID-19 Vaccination Certificate
-   an urgent Network News Update (NNU) Newsflash is published under
    'Category : System Availability and Outages'
-   staff will get an ‘S’ response in the DVS, see the DVS results table
    on the Resources page

Scheduled outages

Scheduled outages can be either full or intermittent.

Staff will get an ‘S' response for the documents specified in the NNU
Newsflash for:

-   full outages, during the whole period
-   intermittent outages, at any time during the outage

The specified documents may be available when staff try and can be
requested as normal.

Unscheduled outages

When there is an unscheduled outage, it is unknown when the outage will
be resolved.

Staff should check NNU Newsflash for updates.

Emailing ICVCs for DFAT referrals and customers overseas

Service Officers should help customers with online options before
actioning requests to email ICVCs.

Service Officers can request an ICVC and email it to a customer where
the customer:

-   has been warm transferred from the Department of Foreign Affairs and
    Trade (DFAT), or
-   is overseas and is unable to access online services

See the Table 6 on the Process page for how to email ICVCs.

Emailing ICVCs for customers in Australia

Service Officers should help customers with online options before
actioning requests to email ICVCs.

ICVCs are only emailed to customers in Australia in exceptional
circumstances.

In the first instance, Service Officers should ask customers to try to
access their proof by:

-   logging onto their Medicare online account through myGov or the
    Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   signing into the IHI service or My Health Record through myGov
-   asking for one to be mailed. It can take up to 14 days for it to
    arrive
-   visiting a service centre. See Resources page for a link to Office
    Locator

See the Table 6 on the Process page for how to email ICVCs.

The Resources page contains details shown on ICVCs and for actioning
messages when requesting an ICVC in AIR site. It also has:

-   links to AIR contacts, standard letters, Office Locator, forms and
    NNU Newsflash Messages
-   Services Australia and external websites links
-   sample ICVCs
-   frequently asked questions
-   DVS results

Related links

Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccines

Proof of vaccination and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Enquiries for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
