[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what forms are available for the AIR, where to
access them and how they are used.

AIR forms

The quickest and easiest way for vaccination providers to record
immunisation information on the AIR is online using:

-   the AIR site, or
-   their Practice Management Software (PMS)

Service Officers should recommend that vaccination providers record
immunisation information using online options.

All AIR forms for vaccination providers:

-   are on the Services Australia website, and
-   can be uploaded via the HPOS Messages Form Upload function

HPOS provides a secure, timely and authenticated way for the agency to
get this information.

AIR forms are in PDF format and can be:

-   downloaded and completed on a device, or
-   printed and completed by hand

The Resources page contains links to:

-   AIR forms, and
-   AIR for health professionals

Note: AIR stationery order forms are no longer available for vaccination
providers. AIR Service Officers should advise vaccination providers they
can:

-   get AIR forms online, or
-   record immunisation information using the AIR site, or their PMS

Signatures

There are 3 types of signatures that can be accepted by the AIR:

-   Digital signature
-   Electronic, and
-   Physical

Digital signatures

Digital signatures use a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), a standard
format that provides high security and acceptance to a document. The
combination of a public key and a private key is what makes a digital
signature safe.

Examples:

-   Adobe Acrobat: digital signature default characteristics are the
    Adobe logo watermark, with the words ‘Digitally signed by, name.’ It
    can be accompanied by a typed name, digitally drawn name, or a
    scanned image. If those 2 features display, it is a digital version
    of the signature
-   DocuSign Digital signatures: a DocuSign digital signature is
    accompanied by the encryption ID. This ID may be around the name
    itself, or the envelope ID found at the top of the document
-   If a DocuSign Envelope ID (found at the top of the document)
    displays, the signature with an image, typed or other kind of
    marking is considered an encrypted version

Electronic signatures

The signature is electronic if there is no other information to suggest
the signature is:

-   digital, or
-   encrypted

If the signature does not have watermarks, or encryption IDs to suggest
the signature has been encrypted, these signatures are classified as
electronic

Physical

This is where the document/letter/form has been printed and signed by
hand.

The Resources page contains AIR forms and signature requirements
details.

The Resources page contains:

-   AIR forms and descriptions
-   troubleshooting and standard comments for the Provider Directory
    System
-   Service Officer and Programme Support Officer referral templates
-   FAQs, and
-   AIR form signature requirements

Related links

Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian Immunisation Register
(AIR)

Process claims in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Overseas immunisations and processing history forms in the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
