
Understanding Pathology assessing rules in Medicare 011-42090000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

This document outlines information about the pathology assessing rules
in Medicare.

Pathology Overview

Pathology is a medical speciality that determines the cause and nature
of diseases by examining and testing:

-   Body tissue biopsies for examples, pap smears
-   Bodily fluids

Pathology test results assist health professionals to diagnose and treat
patients correctly.

Pathology services are located in Category 6 of the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS).

The Resources page has a table that lists the item groups in Category 6
and their requirements. This list is a guide only, the system will check
the item requirements. If the requirements have not been met, the system
will automatically reject or pend the claim for manual assessment.

Eligibility for pathology benefits

A health professional must register with Medicare as an Approved
Pathology Practitioner (APP).

Pathology benefits are payable if:

either:

-   performed by an APP who has an agreement, arrangement or contract of
    employment with the laboratory proprietor
-   performed within an Accredited Pathology Laboratory (APL) and the
    laboratory proprietor must be an Approved Pathology Authority (APA)

requested by the patient’s treating health professional

self-determined if the APP is the patient’s treating health professional

a prescribed self-determined service by the APP as a result of a
requested service

Non-approved pathology practitioners are limited to performing simple
basic pathology tests. These tests are referred to as prescribed
pathology services and listed in Group P9 of the Pathology Schedule.

APPs can also render prescribed pathology services in Group P9, but they
usually itemise equivalent services from Group P1 to Group P8 of the
Pathology Schedule.

Note: the system will check the item requirements. If the requirements
have not been met, the system will automatically reject or pend the
claim for manual assessment.

See Pathology processing in Medicare for more information on pathology
accreditation and eligibility.

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online.

Approved collection centres

A collection centre must be approved in order to receive Medicare
benefits.

An Approved Collection Centre (ACC) is allocated a Specimen Collection
Point (SCP) identifier, which must be quoted on account documents when
specimens are collected at that centre. For more information see
Approved Collection Centres (ACC).

Pathology services

There are specific conditions for both requesting and providing
pathology services.

Request for service

A pathology service can only be provided:

-   In response to a request from the treating health professional or
    from another Approved Pathology Practitioner (APP). The request must
    be in writing (or, if oral, confirmed in writing within 14 days)
-   In response to a request made or confirmed (within 14 days) by
    electronic means
-   If determined to be necessary by an APP who is treating the patient

Services not attracting benefits

Some tests are part of a normal consultation and do not attract an
additional benefit. For example:

-   blood glucose estimation using Dextrostix and reflectance meter
-   blood urea estimation using Azostix or Testex reagents

Some tests do not qualify for benefits, for example:

-   certain tests of public health significance
-   tests for the purposes of control estimation, and
-   repeat tests (for example, for confirmation of earlier tests on the
    same specimen)

These services are available in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
online explanatory notes for Category 6.

Benefits are not payable for a pathologist standing by during an
operation where a specific service is not rendered.

Required service details

Benefits are not payable unless specified details are provided on the
account, receipt or assignment form from the APP.

Request for pathology services

Before Medicare benefits are payable to an Approved Pathology
Practitioner (APP), they must be:

-   requested in writing by a medical practitioner, dental practitioner,
    participating nurse practitioner or a participating midwife, or
-   determined as necessary by the pathologist when treating their own
    patient

Request guidelines

A treating health professional can request a pathology service either
orally, in writing or electronically. Oral requests must be confirmed in
writing or electronically within 14 days of the request.

Requests must include:

-   the patient’s details (name, address, date of birth, sex, Medicare
    card number, hospital status)
-   the requesting health professionals name and practice address or
    provider number
-   the tests required
-   the date of request

If a specific pathologist is not clinically necessary to provide the
service, the patient can choose which they use. This includes Rule 3
exempt repeated tests.

The Resources page has links to MBS explanatory note PN.2.2 and Services
Australia website – Referring and requesting Medicare services.

Electronic request guidelines

Electronic requests must include information as per written requests.

Required IT standards for electronic transmission, and storage of
requests for pathology are published on the Services Australia website.

Retention of requests

An APP must have a request in writing for all services before billing a
patient.

An APP must retain requests and confirmation of requests for pathology
services for a period of 2 years from the date of service.

Where tests are referred from one APP to another APP, the following
applies:

-   where only some of the tests are referred to a second APP the first
    APP retains the request
-   where all the tests are referred, the second APP would retain the
    original request

Pathology Rules in legislation

The Pathology Service Table (PST) is governed by rules.

-   Each rule is designed as per legislation and more than one rule can
    apply to a claim
-   Some rules allow services to be exempt from other rules under
    certain circumstances

Understanding these rules assists with assessing pathology claims. The
assessing system automatically applies most pathology rules to claims.

Interpretation of the rules for the Pathology Services Table

Pathology rules 1, 2 and 3 collectively prevent the same pathology test
item being claimed more than once per patient episode. Note: this is
unless it is subject to pathology rule 4, rule 6(4) or section 4B(3) of
the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Patient episode

A patient episode is one of the fundamental pathology rules.

A patient episode is one or more pathology services as described in one
or more MBS pathology items and:

for a single patient requested on:

-   the same day by one or more health professional, or
-   the same or different days for tests on the same specimen within 14
    days

provided by one or more Approved Pathology Practitioners (APP) on one
day or over several days

Patient episode initiation

A Patient Episode Initiation (PEI) fee is payable for all the specimens
required to perform the tests requested in the patient episode.
Generally only one PEI is payable per patient episode.

PEI fees are for the collection and management of specimens, not for the
pathology tests themselves.

For example, if a health professional requests 3 pathology tests for a
patient on the one day:

-   Medicare benefits will be payable for each test
-   Only one PEI will be applicable

However, certain rules allow for multiple PEIs on the one date of
request. Four exceptions allow for the payment of more than one PEI
service per patient episode:

PEI item is claimed with Rule 3 Exemption (R3EX) endorsed eligible items

PEI item is claimed with Section 4B(3) endorsed eligible items

Group P5 (Tissue Pathology) items are billed by one APA, and:

-   another APA bills for items not in Group P5

Group P6 (Cytology) items are billed by one APA, and:

-   another APA bills for items not in Group P6

Note: the PEI payable under Rule 3 Exemption includes all items in the
same patient episode, including Rule 3 exempt and non-Rule 3 exempt
items. If further tests are required for the Rule 3 exempt item, then a
subsequent PEI is payable for each of the subsequent payable tests.

The Resources page has a link to explanatory notes explanatory note
PN.6.2 - Patient Episode Initiation Fees (PEIs).

Episode Coning

The Patient Episode Coning (PEC) rule places an upper limit on the
number of items that Medicare benefits are payable in a patient episode.

Under the PEC rule Medicare benefits are only payable for the 3
pathology items with the highest schedule fee.

PEC applies even when the pathology services in a patient episode are
performed by 2 or more Approved Pathology Authorities (APA).

The rule:

-   only applies to non-admitted patient services requested by a medical
    practitioner who is not a specialist or consultant physician
-   applies after the normal, existing assessing rules apply. For
    example, in-built multiple services rule, composites and
    restrictions must be applied before the PEC rule
-   applies whether the services were rendered by 2 or more approved
    pathology authorities

Exception to the coning rules:

services that are self-determined by the treating health professional
who is also the APA

services requested by specialists or consultant physicians

rule 3 exemption items and S4B(3) exemption items

all the items in:

-   Group P10 (Patient Episode Initiation (PEI))
-   Group P11 (Specimen Referred)
-   Group P12 (Management of Bulk Billed Services)
-   Group P13 (Bulk-Billing incentive)

cervical screening (items 73070- 73076)

designated pathology services

supplementary test for Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C (item 69484)

carbon-labelled urea breath test to confirm or monitor Helicobacter
pylori (item 66900)

Pathology services requested for hospital in-patients are not subject to
these coning arrangements.

Episode coning arrangements are in the Pathology Services Category
section of the MBS.

See Assessment of Pathology claims for more information.

The Resources page contains a table that lists all items exempt from
coning and a link to the MBS.

Multiple items for same test or service

Health professionals must use the Medicare item that specifically
describes the service they provided.

Where 2 or more pathology items describe the same test or service, only
the item with the lowest fee is payable.

If a pathology item includes a service that is described in another
pathology item, only one of the items is claimable. This is regardless
of whether they were requested together or separately in the same
patient episode.

Pathology Multiple Services Rule

Benefits are only payable where 2 or more pathology services are
requested:

-   in the same patient episode (same Date of Request), and
-   these services are listed under the one pathology item number

For example, a patient sees a GP in the morning and later that day has a
separate midwife consultation. Both health professionals send a request
for a hepatitis antibody test. Item 69475 applies and is only claimed
and payable once in this patient episode.

Exemption for pathology rules

Multiple services rule exemptions

The pathology multiple services rule has 2 categories of exemptions:

-   Rule 3 exemption (R3EX)
-   Section 4B(3) exemption (S4B(3))

These exemptions mainly apply for seriously or chronically ill patients

Where an exemption applies, the services are paid individually and the
pathology multiple services rule is not applied.

Rule 3 exemption

The term ‘Rule 3 exemption’ (R3EX) describes an arrangement that allow
for certain tests from the same request to be repeated over a 24 hour or
6 month period.

R3EX applies to specific MBS pathology items.

A health professional must endorse their account 'Rule 3 exempt' (or
similar) when they deem additional pathology services necessary to:

-   make or confirm a diagnosis
-   or to determine if a course of treatment is working

Rule 3 exemptions cannot be used to overcome an item restriction in the
same episode. Restrictions between ‘Rule 3 exempt’ endorsed and non-Rule
3 exempt endorsed items must still be enforced. See Resources page for
some services exceptions.

If the account documents contain the notation ‘Rule 3 exemption’ or
‘R3EX’, the services can be paid individually. Note: this is only if the
criteria for Rule 3 exemptions are met.

-   The claim pays automatically when a 'Rule 3 exemption' flag is
    transmitted via an electronic claim channel and there are no
    errors/warnings
-   Where text is transmitted/notated with the claim endorsing ‘Rule 3’
    or ‘R3EX’ will pay using reason code 366

The Resources page contains a table with Rule 3 exemption item rules. It
includes which items are eligible for this exemption.

S4B (3) exemption

Section 4B (3) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 allows for a pathology
test to be performed more than once in a patient episode. This is for a
clinically relevant service in exceptional circumstances.

S4B (3) can apply to any MBS pathology item. This exemption overrides
any relevant same day, time dependent or composite restrictions.

If account claim contains the notation ‘S4B (3)’, the claim must be
escalated. This allows a delegate to determine whether the individual
items are payable.

Who is the Delegate?

APS Level 5 and all higher levels for making decisions under Section 4B
of the Health Insurance Act.

A Services Australia delegate is required to assess the information
provided by the APP. The APP is required to provide text/notation
stating why the tests were necessary.

Reasons that may be taken into consideration by the Agency’s delegate
when reviewing requests for S4B(3) exemption are:

-   The patient is seriously ill
-   Substantial additional expense was incurred
-   More than one test is clinically required

See Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) online Category 6 explanatory notes
for information on the pathology multiple services rule and exemption
criteria.

Rule 6 - Designated tests referred from 1 APP to another APP

Where an APP has performed some tests but not all in a coned item, the
remaining tests can be referred to a second APP. The second APP must be
in a separate APA.

-   APP (a) claims the appropriate item/s for the service they provided
    and the patient episode initiation fee
-   APP (b) claims the corresponding designated service and a specimen
    referred fee

Designated pathology services are exempt from coning. They are payable
in addition to the 3 other pathology tests from the same patient episode
(multiple services rule).

See Assessment of Pathology claims for a list of designated pathology
items.

The Resources page has a link to the MBS explanation note N.0.11-
Designated pathology.

Services not listed in schedule

Pathology services that are not listed in the MBS do not attract a
Medicare benefit. A health professional cannot use an existing item for
a service which differs from the MBS item description.

A health professional or organisation seeking changes to the Schedule
can make a submission to the Pathology Services Table Committee.

Enquiries should be directed to the Secretariat at the Department of
Health.

Pathology submissions for new medical services and technologies should
be forwarded to the Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC).

The Resources page contains a link to the MSAC.

Pathology services committees

Pathology Services Table Committe

The Pathology Services Table Committee (PSTC) is an advisory committee.
It considers and makes recommendations to the Minister on the need for
changes to the structure and content of the Pathology Services Table and
fee levels. The Committee has representatives from relevant professional
bodies and the Government.

Pathology submissions about new medical services and technologies should
go to the Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC). For more
information about MSAC, see General assessing information for Medicare.

Pathology Consultative Committee

The Pathology Consultative Committee (PCC) provides a forum for the
Australian Government and the Pathology profession. The PCC discuss
major strategic issues and financing about pathology services.

The Pathology Services Table Committee (PSTC) deals with specific issues
about the Schedule. The PCC deals with main strategic development
including any major restructuring of pathology services.

The PCC includes representatives from:

-   the Department of Health
-   Services Australia
-   the Royal College of Pathologists Australia (RCPA)
-   the Australian Association of Pathology Practices (AAPP), and
-   the National Coalition of Public Pathology

Serial examinations or cultures

Specific rules apply to the collection of materials for microbiology
items in Group P3.

Serial examination means a series of examinations requested on 1
occasion. This is regardless if the Approved Pathology Practitioner
(APP) receives the materials on different days.

The examinations or cultures can be on 1 or more request forms by the
treating health professional.

The Resources page has a link to MBS explanatory note PN.0.16 - Faecal
Occult Blood.

Tissue pathology - Group P5 items

Tissue pathology services were previously known as histopathology and
are located in Group P5 of Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Category 6.

Item 72813-72838 in Group P5 are the basic tissue examinations. These
items are generic in nature and are defined in terms of complexity
levels and the number of specimens involved.

There are a range of complexity levels and each type of tissue pathology
procedure is separately identified and given a complexity rating. The
item being claimed depends on:

-   the complexity level rating of the tissue pathology service being
    performed and
-   the number of separate specimens involved

For example, Group P5 – Tissue pathology: item 72816.

Examination of complexity level 3 biopsy material on 1 or separately
identified specimen with 1 or more tissue blocks, including:

-   specimen dissection
-   all tissue processing
-   staining
-   light microscopy, and
-   professional opinion or opinions (Item is subject to rule 13)

Note: The above information is an example only and may not accurately
reflect the current MBS.

Additional add-on procedures

Additional items are included to cover add-on procedures such as
immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy and frozen section. They are
claimable in addition to the basic tissue pathology items when ordered
by the requesting health professional.

Benefit is only payable for one basic tissue pathology items
(72813-72838) in a patient episode. Only the service with the highest
schedule fee is payable in a patient episode when:

-   more than 1 tissue pathology examination is performed on separate
    specimens of different complexity levels

Separately identified specimens

A separately identified specimen is:

-   an individual specimen collected
-   identified so that it is clearly distinguished from any other
    specimen
-   sent for testing by or on behalf of the treating health professional
    responsible for the specimen collection procedure.

This rule prevents inappropriate claims being made for multiple
unidentified specimens under new changed tissue pathology items.

Biopsy material

Biopsy material is:

-   all tissue (other than bone marrow biopsy) received by an APP from
    an operation, or group of operations at the same occasion, or
-   where the tissue was spontaneously expelled from the patient
    (spontaneous abortion)

This definition relates to biopsy items in Group P5. Biopsy material is
not limited to one organ or one body area as biopsy items in Group P5
are for ‘all tissue’. For example, cell blocks from an ovary, fallopian
tube and uterus cannot be considered as separate biopsy material.

The examination of the biopsy material attracts benefit once only under
the appropriate item regardless of whether:

-   one, or more than one service is performed
-   the services are rendered on the same day or on different days

Cytology – Group P6 items

Cytology is a microscopic examination of one or more stained
preparations of cells, through a microscope. It enables an opinion to be
formed about whether they are likely to be:

-   normal
-   abnormal but benign
-   abnormal and malignant

This definition relates to items in Group P6.

Note: the examination of a blood film and a bone marrow aspirate are
excluded from this definition.

Related Group P5 and P6 services

Pathology services contained in Group P6 include:

-   any services described in Group P5 which can be performed on the
    material submitted for cytology and,
-   no separate benefit is payable under Group P5.

Exemption to this rule

Both the accredited pathology laboratory (with archived tissue) and the
accredited pathology laboratory performing the testing can claim item
72860:

-   where a treating health professional requests genetic testing on
    archived tissue following an initial tissue, cytology or genetic
    pathology test

Note: when separate services are requested from both Groups P5 and P6,
separate benefits are payable.

See general explanatory note PN.0.21 Tissue Pathology and Cytology on
the Resources page.

Genetics - Group P7 items

Pre-implantation Genetic Testing (PGT) services

Pre-implantation Genetic Testing (PGT) can be used to test embryos for
either: a specific known single gene condition or chromosome variation.

Eligibility for PGT items are restricted to patients and (if relevant) a
reproductive partner. Eligible patients are those with a recognised risk
of having a child:

-   affected by a genetic disorder for which there is no curative
    treatment and
-   with a severe limitation of quality of life.

The MBS includes items for PGT services:

-   an item to test one or both of the reproductive couple for genetic
    mutations or abnormalities
-   an item for an embryonic biopsy to provide a test sample
-   items for genetic testing of the biopsied embryo sample/s

Genetic testing for hydatidiform moles

Genetic testing on a piece of tissue from a hydatidiform mole (also
known as a molar pregnancy) can help doctors provide women with targeted
treatment and advice.

Genetic Testing for Childhood Syndromes

Genetic analysis of a single gene variant for the purposes of detecting
childhood syndromes. Eligible patients are those with a biological
relative with a known monogenic condition, as follows:

-   the patient’s biological sibling
-   a first-degree relative of the patient has a monogenetic condition
-   the patient’s biological parent or biological relative has a
    monogenetic condition

Note: a first-degree relative is the patient’s biological parent, full
sibling or child.

Genetic testing for major fetal structure abnormalities

Major fetal structural abnormalities are typically caused by a genetic
condition. Pregnant individuals whose fetus have a known major
structural abnormality, determined by ultrasound, can have genetic
testing for the fetus. This is done via genome-wide microarray (GWMA)
testing items.

Genetic testing for people with multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia

Genome-wide microarray (GWMA) is used for analysis of chromosomes for
people with multiple myeloma.

Nutritional and Toxicity metal testing

These services are limited to the number of times a benefit is payable
for any combination of these items.

A benefit is not payable if:

-   other items in this range are claimed or referred from one APP to
    another APP in an unrelated APA

The Resources page has a table that lists the limitations for claiming
items for Nutritional and Toxicity metal items.

Related Links

Assessing Pathology claims

Account requirements for pathology services in Medicare

Approved Pathology Authority (APA)

Accredited Pathology Laboratory (APL)

Approved Collection Centres (ACC)

General assessing information for Medicare

Pathology processing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
