
Signature requirements for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-21032623

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to signature requirements on
Medicare Compensation Recovery forms. Medicare Compensation Recovery
forms can be hand signed, or signed digitally or electronically,
depending on the form. Digital and electronic signatures are not the
same.

Digital signatures

A digital signature:

-   is an encrypted copy of the person’s signature
-   is created using DocuSign software, or the inbuilt Adobe Digital ID
    function embedded in the (current) online forms
-   increases the authenticity of the signature

New versions of Medicare Compensation Recovery forms published from 1
December 2020 (Version 2010) have a built-in digital signature function.
Digital signatures created with ‘DocuSign’ are also accepted. Other
digital signature software options are not accepted. Where a digital
signature does not meet the agency’s digital signature requirements,
refer to the table on Resources to decide if the form can be assessed
for an electronic signature.

Customers are able to hand sign all forms.

Electronic signatures

An electronic signature:

-   is an identifying mark made by software that identifies the
    signatory
-   does not guarantee the authenticity of the signature

Electronic signatures can be created by:

-   word processor
-   digital draw pad, or
-   a scanned image

Not all Medicare Compensation Recovery forms accept electronic
signatures, some must have only hand written or digital signatures. See
the table on the Resources page for these requirements.

Valid signature

A signature is a marking or name that identifies the individual who
created it. A valid signature on a form or document signifies the
approval and acceptance of the information in the form. Without it, a
filled in form or document is like a blank piece of paper.

A valid signature on forms confirms that the authorised signatory:

-   checked that the information provided is true and correct, and
-   agrees to the Declaration and Privacy notices

The standards of the Electronic Transactions Act 1999 requires the
signatory to use a reliable method to identify themselves and their
intention. Services Australia (the agency) requires the full name of the
person, and the intention means they have shown their agreement of the
privacy note and declaration, and approval of the contents of the form.

The full name of the person signing the document must be provided.
Business names or initials are not acceptable because the identity of
the signatory cannot be determined regardless of the signature being
handwritten, digital or electronic.

The Resources page contains a table showing which signatures are
acceptable on each form.

Failure to provide a valid signature

If a customer fails to provide the required signature on a particular
form, the agency will send them a letter advising that more information
is needed, enclosing a signature fact sheet and a new forms flyer.

The signature fact sheet must be sent out with a new forms flyer with
these manual letters when a customer fails to correctly sign the form:

-   z2279 - More information is needed to register compensation case /
    Medicare history statement request
-   z2450 - More information is needed to process the third party
    authority form
-   z2463 - More information is needed to process the notice of judgment
    or settlement/ notice of reimbursement arrangement

The Resources page has a link to the forms.

The signature fact sheet educates customers on the signature
requirements.

The new forms flyer advises that new forms are available and that from 1
April 2021 only current forms will be accepted, or the previous version
only if signed and dated prior to 1 April 2021. It also advises that
they can use the inbuilt digital signature function if they download
Adobe Acrobat Reader from the Internet.

The Resources page contains copies of the signature factsheet, new forms
flyer, and a link to the manual letter templates. It also contains a
telephony script to help Service Officers answer questions surrounding
the signature requirements on forms.

Related links

Authority to release information and acting on a person’s behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Release of information for Medicare

Assess Medicare Compensation Recovery correspondence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
