
Bulk bill latter day adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare 011-43040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for regarding Latter Day Adjustment
(LDA) claims in Medicare. Note: as at 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island is
covered under Medicare provisions.

On this Page:

Temporary policy: Patient signatures for assignment of benefit during COVID-19 pandemic

The Department of Health have provided updated policy advice on how a
practitioner can obtain agreement from their patient for an assignment
of benefit for face-to-face services that are bulk billed during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Where an adjustment is required to a previously processed bulk bill
claim, reasonable steps must be taken to obtain a signature agreement.
For example:

-   Written signature
-   Email agreement, or
-   Signature of a responsible third party

However, if the patient refuses to sign the form, does not want to touch
the pen or paper, the practitioner can obtain agreement verbally. To do
this the health professional must:

-   Identify on the form that the patient is unable to assign the
    assignment of benefit and include the reason. For example, COVID-19,
    risk of exposure to COVID 19, Verbal agreement, Telehealth, Phone
    Consult
-   Notate the verbal agreement on the assignment of benefit in the
    patients clinical notes

Note: this policy is a temporary measure, currently effective until 30
June 2022.

Adjustment requests for previously processed bulk bill claims

To support this temporary policy, bulk bill adjustments received with a
date of lodgement from 13 March 2020, can be accepted, where the
following has been provided:

An application for bulk bill claim adjustment form (DB018) signed by the
health professional

An assignment of benefit form with:

-   Patient’s signature, or
-   The reason why the patient is unable to sign the assignment of
    benefit form. For example, COVID-19, risk of exposure to COVID 19,
    Verbal agreement, Telehealth, Phone Consult

Note: this would only apply where the patient refuses to sign (that is,
does not want to touch the paper). The above information does not
replace existing policy for all other ‘unable to sign/blank signature’
scenarios.

For information specific to COVID-19 services, see Temporary Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to Coronavirus (COVID-19).

Bulk bill LDA claims

A LDA is required when any details of a previously processed claim needs
amending with new or altered information.

A bulk bill LDA can only be actioned if the service details are present
on the patient's history.

Service Officers should always check PaNDA to see if a compliance
schedule has been submitted before actioning any adjustments.

The processes outlined in this document are for users experienced with
bulk bill processing concepts, methods and transactions.

All adjustment processing functions available in the DL** transaction
suite are also operational in the DH** transaction suite.

Types of adjustments

Five types of adjustments can be processed on the DHSC screen:

-   correcting service details for the patient
-   transfer service(s) from 1 patient to another, see Transfer and
    suppress a recalled claim for bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare for
    more information
-   delete service(s)
-   insert service(s)
-   suppress service(s), see Transfer and suppress a recalled claim for
    bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare for more information
-   Note: new vouchers cannot be inserted in an adjustment claim. The
    DUP key is not available

Lines with a different date of service than the existing lines should
not be inserted. For example, the date of service for each claim line
for a patient should be the same.

When the system displays an original claim for adjustment processing,
all claim lines (vouchers) for a Personal Identification Number (PIN) in
that claim are grouped together. If there are 2 or more vouchers (each
with a different date of service) for the same patient, this grouping
will result only in lines for a patient with the same dates of service.

When a line is inserted or a DOS field over keyed with a different date
of service, the system returns the warning message 8-CHCK DOS.

Adjustment requests

If a health professional contacts Services Australia asking for an
adjustment to a transmitted bulk bill claim:

-   earlier that day, they must contact the Medicare Provider line who
    can complete a same day deletion
-   on a previous day, a manual request for adjustment is required

See also, Delete electronic Medicare claims for eBusiness Service
Centre.

Adjustments to bulk bill claims under 2 years old from date of service

Health professionals can submit adjustments to previously lodged bulk
bill claims where there was incorrect information. For example, item 23
was claimed but it should have been item 5023 and the original claim's
date of service is less than 2 years old.

If the claim has already been processed and has a date of service under
2 years old and an item number needs to be changed, a manual request
must be submitted for adjustment and the health professional must
submit:

-   an Application for bulk bill claim adjustment form (DB018) signed by
    the health professional, and
-   a new Assignment of benefit form completed with the correct
    information and signed by the patient

For any changes to an item number on a previously paid claim, the
patient must sign the Assignment of benefit form. This is because the
original agreement entered into when accepting the patient's assigned
benefit(s) has been changed. An adjustment cannot be assessed unless the
patient or a third party (including a parent, guardian or power of
attorney) signs a new Assignment of benefit form.

The Resources page contains a link to the DB018 form.

For late lodgement adjustments (over 2 years from date of service) See,
Bulk bill late lodgement claims in Medicare.

Services Australia error

If an adjustment is required due to an agency error, the health
professional is not required to submit an application for an adjustment.
The bulk bill claim must be adjusted to reflect the original claim
submitted. If the Service Officer does not have the proficiency to
perform the adjustment, they are required to raise an enquiry with
subject – BB LATTER DAY ADJ and email to Medicare Provider Services
(MPS) Assessing to allow the adjustment to be put into the workflow for
actioning.

Processing Indicator (PI) 58

Wherever possible the LDA process must be performed.

Although there are some occasions when the LDA process is not possible.
For example, if a consultation and a surgical procedure are claimed
using different claiming channels, or if the service on history was
claimed as an out-patient and the surgical procedure is in-patient.

If the LDA process cannot be performed, Service Officers can use PI 58
to reduce the schedule fee of the highlighted item by the schedule fee
of the restricted item on history to adjust the benefit.

Omitted and adjusted bulk bill incentive and PEI items

Where bulk bill incentive or Patient Episode Initiation (PEI) items were
omitted or incorrect from the original bulk bill claim, and the date of
service is less than 2 years old, health professionals can resubmit the
bulk bill claim to include the omitted or adjusted bulk bill incentive
or PEI items.

Note: health professionals are not required to obtain a new signed
assignment of benefit form.

Health professionals that do not have access to electronic claiming, or
if their software does not allow them to transmit claims up to 2 years,
can manually submit these adjustments to the agency. A manual request
must be submitted for adjustment and the health professional must
submit:

an Application for bulk bill claim adjustment form (DB018), signed by
the health professional, and

a spreadsheet outlining

-   patient details, full name, Medicare card number and IRN
-   original date of service
-   correct incentive or PEI item number

Health professionals whose software is able to transmit claims up to 2
years should contact their software vendors for assistance.

The Resources page contains a link to the DB018 form.

See also, Bulk bill late lodgement claims in Medicare

LDA resulting in underpayments

The LDA bulk bill claims system pays benefits for amounts over $2.00 via
EFT to the payee provider.

Claims with a status of ADJ PAID are paid in the next overnight run. A
bulk bill benefit statement and EFT payment for the amount for the
underpayment is generated for the health professional.

LDA resulting in overpayment

When an adjustment results in an overpayment any outstanding amount
requires follow-up action as per Services Australia’s management of
debts policy.

For example, if an initial adjustment results in an overpayment of
$60.00 and a further adjustment results in an overpayment of $50.00,
recovery of monies must be sought for the total amount of $110.00.

Note: any outstanding amount requires follow-up action as per the
agency’s debt recovery policy.

Deletion of a previously paid claim

If the claim has been processed and has a date of service under 2 years
old and a health professional requests a deletion, a manual request must
be submitted for adjustment and the health professional must submit:

-   an application for Bulk Bill claim adjustment form (DB018), or
-   a signed letter using the practice letterhead

All claim information must be provided, for example, patient name,
Medicare number, date of service (DOS)

1-PREV CON message

Co-claiming message 1-PREV CON returns when certain consultation items
performed by the same health professional are on a patient’s history and
restrict against a Group T8 item, with:

-   a schedule fee equal to or greater than the threshold
-   the same date of service

Note: see the PREV CON co-claiming threshold for the consultation item
in QITI PF22.

The Resources page contains a matrix with the process for co-claiming
1-PREV CON message returns, templates and links to contact details.

The Resources page contains a list describing DHSC screen features and a
list of adjustment codes to assist with bulk bill LDA claims for
Medicare.

Contents

Action claim in pend for bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare

Adjusted lines for bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare

Online statement and features for bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare

Reverse a claim for bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare

Transfer and suppress a recalled claim for bulk bill LDA claims in
Medicare

Related links

Bulk bill late lodgement claims in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
