
Process a manually calculated patient refund for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 011-60020060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to make an Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT)
payment for a manually calculated PBS patient refund payment.

On this Page:

What is a manually calculated patient refund

In some situations, patient refunds have to be processed manually and
payment is made outside the processing system. For example:

-   refunds outside the current Safety Net year where a Safety Net card
    has not been issued
-   refunds for Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) visitors from
    New Zealand or the Republic of Ireland (Southern Ireland), where a
    Medicare card cannot be issued
-   claims containing PBS items dispensed in a participating public
    hospital

Note: RHCA visitors are not entitled to claim section 100 In-Vitro
Fertilisation (IVF) medicines, with a date of supply on or after 1
November 2017, unless the patient has made an ‘exceptional
circumstances’ application to the Department of Health and Aged Care

Prior to 1 July 2016, a manual cheque was raised and issued to the
claimant for these payments. With the introduction of EFT for patient
refund payments, specific staff within Medicare Providers Branch can now
make these payments via EFT.

Processes for calculating a refund are not contained within this
document however once an amount has been calculated, this function
allows for payment using EFT.

Processing an EFT payment for a manually calculated patient refund

Only Programme Support Officers who are authorised to enter claims using
this function should process the claim. A second Programme Support
Officer or Team Leader is also required to provide approval for these
payments within the system.

In exceptional circumstances, an application to consider an alternative
method of payment can be made to the PBS Help Desk. For example claimant
has identified as being vulnerable and is unable to be paid via EFT,
even to a third parties bank accounts.

This will require the PBS Help Desk to liaise with Finance to determine
if any alternative is available. Service Officers should suggest the
claimant open a bank account where they do not have one, or arrange to
use a third party's bank account. Third parties may include relatives,
carers, small businesses or other parties, as appropriate for the
claimant.

Claimants who still wish to make an application for exceptional
circumstances are required to submit a statutory declaration outlining
the reasons, including why they are unable to open a bank account.
Service Officers should advise consideration of the application will
take approximately 2 weeks.

Reasons that are not acceptable include:

-   unwilling to provide bank account details
-   unwilling to open a bank account
-   prefer a different payment method to EFT

This process should be used as a last resort and is not applicable to
claimants who would prefer a cheque.

Related links

Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT
payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
