
Assessing MBS item restrictions 011-42120030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19).

This document outlines the assessment of restrictive situations for
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items.

Education for health professionals

An education guide for health professionals relating to billing multiple
MBS items is available on the Services Australia’s website, see the
Resources page for a link.

The Training and Support page contains further information about
education resources.

Assessing item restrictions

There are a range of resources that Service Officers can use to assist
when assessing restrictions between MBS item numbers.

The Process page contains a table of resources and actions that should
take place when assessing restrictions between one or more MBS items and
where to go for more information.

Restrictive services under Medicare

Restrictive item is an administrative term used by Medicare and it
relates to the identification and processing methods used when items
should not to be paid together.

Certain items listed in the MBS are not payable:

-   when performed with other procedures or services
-   unless eligibility criteria are met, or
-   exceptional circumstances apply

The requirements for payment of Medicare benefits for these services are
usually included as part of the description of service.

Some types of restrictions applied to MBS items are:

-   patient’s age
-   time dependency
-   aftercare periods
-   item restrictions
-   item associations
-   patient eligibility
-   health professional eligibility

Assessing rules are added to MBS items in the Medicare mainframe. These
rules and return messages provide advice to help Service Officers assess
a claim. It may also explain why an item will pay without intervention.

When a return message presents in a claim Service Officers should:

-   read the message in full (PF8 to read additional pages)
-   read any text/notation in the claim and patient history
-   review the assessing rules for the restrictive items

The rules are not intended to cover every restrictive situation.

An item may display as restrictive with another but both may be eligible
Medicare benefits.

Complete medical service

A general principle in the MBS is that each professional service listed
is a complete medical service in itself.

There are items that describe comprehensive or combined services. This
means the item includes other individual services, which are essential
to that complete medical service.

If a health professional performs a comprehensive or combined item, they
shouldn’t bill the individual services that make up the complete medical
service.

If more than one item covers a service it is the health professional’s
responsibility to understand the item’s description and requirements
before billing.

The Resources page contains examples of combined and comprehensive
items.

Principles for assessing restrictive items

Restrictions or exclusions are most common within the Surgical
Operations Group (T8) of the MBS because of the complex nature of these
services.

Carefully assess every restrictive situation to decide the correct
benefit payable. The precise description of service contained within the
MBS must be taken into account.

There are times where a restriction can apply in one situation but not
in another. For example:

-   the services were performed at separate times during the same day,
    or
-   where the services were performed on separate parts of the body
-   the services can be co-claimed in specific circumstances

Additional information may be required to support the payment of
benefits where a restriction applies between 2 (or more) items. Health
professionals can provide additional information in the claim
transmission or notate on the account. The patient’s claiming history
may also be needed to support payment of a restricted item.

If additional information to support the assessment is not available,
reject the service/s.

Medicare claims are not to be automatically paid or rejected without
checking the account/claim and other assessing aids, for example:

-   QITI, or
-   the MBS

If a claim is received with clinical details (for example service text,
additional notations or an operation report), refer to Assessing complex
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) claims with clinical details.

Bilateral and unilateral items

Specific assessing rules apply to MBS items with the words bilateral and
unilateral in their descriptor.

Unilateral means occurring on, performed on, or affecting one side of
the body or one of its parts.

Bilateral refers to both sides of the body or affecting the right and
left sides of the body or the right and left organs of the body.

If a unilateral item has an equivalent bilateral item, the health
professional should use the appropriate item for the services provided.

MBS item description interpretations

Restrictive situations commonly take place where an item has a
description stating:

-   a particular limitation, for example the service can’t be performed
    with another item within the group, or
-   the inclusion of other services

Below are common terms found in item descriptions. These are legislative
limitations that may prevent the payment of Medicare benefits:

-   as an independent procedure
-   where no other procedure is performed
-   not being a service associated with
-   not being a service to which another

As an independent procedure

Medicare benefits are not payable when an item containing the term as an
independent procedure and another procedure:

-   are performed through the same incision
-   occur in the same body area; or
-   where one procedure is an essential part of the other

When assessing an independent procedure item restriction, check the
descriptions of both items and the assessing rules.

Acceptable text

If either restrictive item mentions a body area, the independent
procedure is not payable if performed on the same body area even if
performed through a separate incision. An independent procedure pays a
Medicare benefit where the account and/or text notes ‘separate body
area’ or similar.

Where there is no mention of a body area in either item, the independent
procedure will only pay a Medicare benefit if:

-   performed through a separate incision, and
-   the account/text notes ‘separate incision’, ‘separate sites’, lists
    the separate sites, or similar

The Resources page contains examples of situations where items with the
above term are payable/not payable.

Where no other procedure is performed

Medicare benefits are only payable for an item containing the term where
no other procedure is performed when the procedure is:

-   performed in isolation on the patient, and
-   no other procedure/s takes place at that time

Items with this term are generally limited to procedures aimed to
control post-operative bleeding and bladder catheterisation. The
claiming intention is for an independent (stand-alone) service and not
in association with a surgical procedure.

The Resources page contains examples of situations where items with the
above term are payable/not payable.

Not being a service associated with a service to which …

There are terms within some MBS item descriptions that prevent Medicare
benefits being paid when the service is performed in association with:

-   a specific MBS item number or item range
-   another MBS item within the same group
-   another MBS item within the same subgroup; or
-   a similar type of service/procedure

Other common terms found in MBS item descriptions with similar
definitions:

-   not being a service associated with a service to which item XXXXX
    applies
-   not in association with item XXXXX
-   other than a service associated with a service to which item XXXXX
    applies
-   not in conjunction with ...

For example, Medicare benefits are not payable for any other item within
the same group when it is performed on the same occasion as an item with
the term not being a service associated with a service to which another
item in this group applies.

The Resources page contains examples of situations where items with the
above terms are payable/not payable.

Not being a service to which another item in this group/subgroup applies

MBS items with one of the below terms in the item description can be
used where there is no other specific MBS item relating to the service/s
being performed:

-   not being a service to which another item in this group applies
-   not being a service to which another item in this subgroup applies
-   other than a service to which another item in the table applies
-   other than a service to which any other item applies

Often this rule applies to an item that describes a service in generic
terms.

Health professionals are to use these items where the service:

-   is clinically relevant, and
-   meets the item description, and
-   no other MBS item describes the service provided more precisely

Note: other MBS items in the same group/subgroup can still be claimed
for further services performed on the same occasion. That is, if they
are not directly related (for example, for a different site or limb) and
therefore are not associated.

The Resources page contains examples of situations where items with the
above terms are payable/not payable.

Procedures restrictive with an attendance or consultation service

Medicare benefits are not payable for an attendance/consultation in
addition to an item given on the same occasion, when the item
description states any of the following phrases:

-   each attendance
-   at an attendance
-   attendance at which
-   including all related attendances
-   including associated attendances or consultations

Medicare benefits are not payable for the attendance or consultation
item when provided at the same time as a procedure with this item
description.

Multiple attendances or consultations provided on the same day

Medicare benefits are payable for multiple attendances provided for:

-   the same patient
-   on the same day
-   by the same health professional

The subsequent attendance must not be a continuation of an earlier
attendance.

A reasonable lapse of time is required between attendances to be
regarded as separate attendances. Times noted on the account or within
text in the claim will allow the payment of benefits.

Note: when a claim is transmitted to the agency, a time will display in
the ‘service time’ field. This is not necessarily the time the service
was rendered. Do not use this to support payment.

There are situations where a subsequent attendance provided on the same
day is a continuation of an earlier attendance. For example, a patient
sees a GP and is given a prescription for a vaccine. The patient returns
to have the injection administered after dispensing by the pharmacy.
This is a continuation of the initial attendance and is only billed to
Medicare once.

The Process page has information about processing claims for multiple
attendance items.

See Resources page for:

-   examples of assessment outcomes of restrictive situations
-   information about acceptable text for claims

Acceptable text for multiple attendance items

To be paid for claims for multiple attendance/consultation items with
the same date of service (DOS), health professionals must provide text
to support their claiming.

Principles for deciding if text is acceptable

Health professionals are responsible for claiming appropriately in line
with:

-   legislation, and
-   what is accepted by their peers as clinically appropriate

Service officers are responsible for deciding if the health professional
has provided enough evidence to show they:

-   understand the rules of the items being claimed
-   believe the services are clinically relevant to the patient
-   have met the requirements to be paid for the items they are claiming

Generally, items with time-based restrictions (for example item 23) are
for:

-   separate occasions (times), and
-   separate conditions (reasons)

Generally, items for specific conditions or services can only be claimed
with other attendance items if they are for separate conditions
(reasons). Health professionals encourage patients presenting with
multiple clinical matters to book a separate consultation. In some cases
this may not be possible or in the patient’s best interest

Note: other categories in the MBS (for example pathology or diagnostic
imaging services) may have other requirements. See Diagnostic imaging
assessing rules in Medicare or Pathology assessing rules in Medicare for
more information.

The Resources page has examples of what may be acceptable text.

The Process page has information about assessing claims for multiple
attendance items.

Attendance items provided on the same day as a Chronic Disease Management (CDM) service

Health professionals are restricted from billing Chronic Disease
Management (CDM) items and an attendance item for the same patient, on
the same day.

If the same practitioner bills both an attendance item and a CDM item
for the same patient on the same day, benefits will be paid for the CDM
item only.

If the patient needs to see a different health professional on the same
day, Medicare benefits will be paid for that attendance.

This restriction prevents co-claiming GP attendance items:

-   3, 4, 23, 24, 36, 37, 44, 47, 52, 53, 54, 57, 58, 59, 60, 65, 179,
    181, 185, 187, 189, 191, 203, 206, 585, 588, 591, 594, 599, 600,
    733, 737, 741, 745, 761, 763, 766, 769, 5000, 5003, 5020, 5023,
    5040, 5043, 5060, 5063, 5200, 5203, 5207, 5208, 5220, 5223, 5227 and
    5228

With CDM items:

-   229, 230, 233, 721, 723, and 732

Subsequent consultations restricting with procedures > $312.15

Specialists and consultant physicians are restricted from billing
subsequent attendance items on the same day as any item in Group T8
(surgical operations) with a schedule fee equal to or greater than
$312.15, for the same patient.

A health professional cannot bill a patient for a subsequent attendance
item 105, 116, 119, 386, 2806, 2814, 3010, 3014, 6009, 6011, 6013, 6015,
6019, 6052, or 16404 if they are also billing surgical items
(30001-51171) with a schedule fee equal to or greater than $312.15 on
the same day.

If the procedure is urgent and not able to be predicted before the start
of the attendance, subsequent attendance items 111, 117 or item 120 can
be billed.

Subsequent attendance item 115 can be claimed if the nature of the
attendance is:

-   unrelated to the scheduled T8 surgical procedure, and
-   was not able to be predicted before the procedure

The specialist or consultant physician must be satisfied that it would
be a clinical risk to defer the consultation.

The treating health professional is responsible to ensure that any
service billed to Medicare meets the item description in the MBS and any
eligibility requirements in full.

See Resources page for more information on this co-claiming restriction
in MBS Note AN.0.70.

Time dependent restrictions

There are items that place limitations on the number of times a service
can be provided within a specified period of time in order to pay
Medicare benefits.

Where an item description limits the number of times an item can be
paid, additional services will not pay a Medicare benefit. If the
description outlines the situation, additional services are paid.

Time dependency rules can be applied where there is:

-   limitations on the number of services that can be performed in a day
    or specified time period
-   requirements for notating a time difference or separate occasion
    between the services
-   a specific number of related items which can be claimed in a certain
    time period

Note: there are instances where multiple time dependency rules apply to
the one item.

See Resources page for examples of assessments of items with time
dependency restrictions.

Rolling vs calendar year

Rolling and calendar years are 2 period types used to decide how the
total number of services are calculated when an item description limits
the number of services payable in a 12 month period.

A rolling year is defined as a 12 month period of time preceding the
date of service claimed. For example, 13104 planning and management of
home dialysis is calculated on a 12 month rolling year.

A calendar year is defined as the one year period of time that begins on
1 January and ends 31 December. For example, Better Access mental health
plans and treatment services are calculated per calendar year.

Special considerations:

-   Where a leap year occurs during the rolling year, the period becomes
    366 days. This may require a request for a restriction lift
-   Where a claim is submitted late or out of order, the time dependency
    calculation is on date of service and date of processing. This will
    impact claims which are capped yearly. For example, where a patient
    can only have 12 services in any rolling or calendar year. A late
    submitted claim may not be payable if the total services on the
    patient history reaches the maximum allowed.

For example:

Rolling year: if a Medicare benefit can only be paid for a service once
in a rolling year:

-   the service was performed on 1 July 2012, another Medicare benefit
    for that same service is payable on or after 1 July 2013

Calendar year: if a Medicare benefit can only be paid for a service once
in a calendar year:

-   the service was performed on 1 July 2012, another Medicare benefit
    for that same service is payable on or after 1 January 2013

Time dependencies based on months

Some time dependencies are for a specific number of months. For example,
item 732 can only be claimed every 3 months. However, as February was
only 28 days, the system will reject claims before 2 May 2021. This may
require a request for a restriction lift.

Item association restrictions

There are a number of items in the MBS where the description indicates
that the item is only payable:

-   when given in association with another service, or
-   a pre-requisite item has been performed previously

This means the item cannot be assessed as payable unless the required
associated (or pre-requisite) item/s are either:

-   already processed and paid on patient history, or
-   are included within the same claim

Item association rules may be applied:

-   when the associated item number is performed by the same health
    professional, or
-   where the associated item is performed by any health professional

Aftercare (post-operative treatment) restrictions

MBS items that apply to surgery include attendances necessary for the
purposes of post-operative treatment of the patient. Post-operative
treatment is generally referred to as aftercare.

Aftercare is deemed to include all post-operative treatment given by
medical practitioners. It includes:

-   all attendances until recovery from the operation
-   the final check or examination, regardless if the attendances are in
    hospital, private rooms, or the patient's home

Some items include or exclude aftercare in their item description. Where
'excluding aftercare' or similar is listed in an item’s description,
Medicare benefits are payable for relevant post-operative treatment
attendances.

Attendances that don’t form part of normal aftercare pay a Medicare
benefit. These services need to have the account endorsed with the
following before a benefit is paid:

-   not normal aftercare
-   NNAC or similar

Services which are not considered normal aftercare fall into 2
categories of services:

-   attendances for a condition not related to the operation; or
-   attendances for complications arising from the operation

For more information see Aftercare assessing rules in Medicare.

Aftercare for private and public patients – MBS explanatory note

For more information on aftercare rules for private and public patients,
see MBS explanatory note TN.8.4. The Resources page contains a link to
the MBS Online.

MBS items requiring referral

Medicare benefits are payable for specific services provided by:

-   specialists
-   consultant physicians
-   allied health professionals, and
-   dentists

Payment of these services is dependent on acceptable evidence that the
service was provided to the patient following referral from another
health professional.

Where an item requires that the service has been referred and
insufficient referral information has been provided, the item may not be
payable until further information is received.

For more information see Referrals for assessing in Medicare.

Health professional eligibility restrictions

There are some services listed in the MBS which are eligible for a
Medicare benefit if performed by health professionals with specific
qualifications.

As an example, the MBS description for item 13104 includes the term by a
consultant physician in the practice of their specialty of renal
medicine. Each health professional is classified with specialty codes
according to the services for which they are qualified to perform. Item
13104 in QITI displays a list of specialty codes which are qualified to
claim that specific item.

Additionally, there are location based restrictions placed on some MBS
items which limit the use of the item to:

-   regional
-   rural, or
-   remote areas

To be eligible for a benefit the service must be provided by a health
professional whose provider number location is within one of the
specified regions.

Patient eligibility restrictions

There are patient restrictions in place for some MBS items. These
restrictions can be based on a patient’s age or Medicare eligibility for
example, patients eligible for Medicare under a Reciprocal Health Care
Agreement.

If a patient age restriction is included in the MBS item description, it
must not be overridden as this is a legislative requirement.

Diagnostic imaging service restrictions

There are situations where claims for diagnostic imaging services
restrict. Examples include claims for diagnostic imaging items with:

-   other diagnostic imaging items
-   consultations or other services

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information.

Pathology item restriction exemption

There are circumstances where seriously or chronically ill patients with
specified conditions can be exempted from a restrictive situation.

Accounts for these patients will have the notation Rule 3 Exemption or
S4B3. Payment is made in strictly limited situations.

See Understanding Pathology assessing rules in Medicare.

MBS item restriction lifts

There are situations where restrictions can be lifted to allow for a
Medicare benefit to be paid. Restriction lift requests for
non-legislative restrictions are assessed by the Medicare Assessing
Helpdesk. If approved, the requesting officer is advised when the claim
can be processed.

When a restriction is lifted, it is for one day only. To avoid the
necessity of re-lifts and potential inappropriate payments the claim
must be processed on the day the restriction is lifted.

If a processing officer has planned leave or is unavailable on the day,
they should ensure they ask another officer to process the claim on
their behalf.

Note: for all restriction lift requests provide as much information as
possible. This will assist the helpdesk to decide if the restriction is
eligible for lifting.

The Resources page contains:

-   the restriction lift request templates
-   examples of restrictive MBS item situations
-   external websites
-   contact details

Related links

Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare

Latter day adjustments (LDA) and HELD payments for patient claims

Process Simplified Billing Latter Day Adjustment (LDA) claims in
Medicare

Bulk bill latter day adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare

General assessing information for Medicare

Aftercare assessing rules in Medicare

QITI assessing information system

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Understanding Pathology assessing rules in Medicare

Reciprocal Health Care Agreement

Referrals for assessing in Medicare

Composite items assessing in Medicare

Assessing complex Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) claims with clinical
details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
