
External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) 2 year claim again period 011-13040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the 2 year claim again period for the External
Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) and related processes.

On this Page:

Subsequent claim within 2 years

The EBPRP Program Management Team can apply discretion for a subsequent
reimbursement of an external breast prosthesis within the 2 year claim
again period, if there is a medical condition and/or cancer related
reasons for a replacement prosthesis.

Transfer enquiries about a reimbursement within 2 years to the EBPRP
Processing Team who will:

check eligibility

check if the intended purchase is within 2 years since the last date of
purchase

read the following statement:

-   'Services Australia can apply some discretion to the policy rule if
    there is a medical condition that has caused the need for a
    replacement prosthesis within 2 years of the date of last purchase.
    To seek reconsideration under the discretion policy, a letter from a
    health professional (i.e. general practitioner, oncologist,
    physiotherapist or breast care nurse) will be required. This letter
    needs to detail the medical condition, or cancer treatment reason,
    and how this gave rise to requiring an external breast prosthesis
    within 2 years and the health professional's stated opinion a
    further prosthesis is required', and

tell customers where to send the required information

Enquiries about rejected claim

Transfer enquiries about a rejected claim immediately to the EBPRP
Processing Team. The EBPRP Processing Team will discuss the discretion
policy and refer to EBPRP Program Management as appropriate.

Applications for reassessment by the EBPRP Processing team

Scan claim forms, receipts and supporting documents handed in to a
Service Centre into PaNDA.

The word 'RESUBMITTED' must be written on the claim form or included in
the email details.

Completed documents are emailed daily to the EBPRP Processing Team who
will provide their assessment within 10 working days. Refer requests of
a complex medical nature to the Department of Health and Aged Care for
assessment.

Reassessment issues/feedback

Confirm identity of the customer and warm transfer enquiries to the
EBPRP Processing Team to explain when discretion to the policy rule is
considered.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website,
contact details for the EBPRP Processing Team and a link to the Claim
for reimbursement External Breast Prostheses Program form (NH005)

Related links

External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

Eligibility for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
