
Security checks and release of Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) information 011-03010160

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about performing security checks and
releasing IHI information.

Access to IHI information

Individuals have a right to access their IHI information recorded with
the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

An individual can ask about:

-   their own IHI
-   IHI for their child under 14 years of age

Note: a child over 14 must ask for their own IHI.

Security checks

Individuals must pass a security check to prove their identity before
IHI information can be released. The Process page explains how to
perform a security check.

There are different security checks depending if individuals are
eligible or not for Medicare or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Note: a security check is not needed for general enquiries where
personal information is not accessed.

Release of IHI system log to a third party

Requests for an IHI system log by any person other than individuals
themselves must be sent to Tier 3 HI Service support (internal contact).

See also: Amend Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

Release of an IHI system log for an individual

Children under 14 years

A written request must be sent to Tier 3 HI Service support (internal
contact).

Note: if a power of attorney or other guardianship orders are in place,
this request must be treated as an own request and can be processed by a
Service Officer.

Persons aged 14 years and over

Where a person is aged 14 years and over, a parent or legal guardian
must have their consent to obtain an IHI system log.

A written request must be sent to Tier 3 support. The person must also
sign this request.

Contact the person to check they have provided consent if there are any
doubts about the request.

Note: no information is released to anyone without the consent of the
individual.

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details for My Health Record and Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
    Service
-   link to the Request or update an Individual Healthcare Identifier
    form (MS003) form

Related links

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Authenticating a Medicare customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
