
Deceased estates and Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15020010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes in Medicare Compensation Recovery
cases when the injured person is deceased.

Compensation claim for a deceased person

A compensation claim for a deceased person is notifiable to Services
Australia in the same manner as any other compensation claim.

An injured person may:

-   be deceased prior to the agency being notified of a compensation
    claim, or
-   become deceased during the progress of the compensation claim

Notification of death of an injured person

When Services Australia is notified of an injured person’s death by the
estate representative or claimant solicitor, a case note must be entered
in the Compensation Case Management System (CCMS).

Service Officers must update the claimant's name to 'Estate of' in the
CCMS, when official notification is received from:

-   a date of death being recorded on the Consumer Directory Maintenance
    System (CDMS), or
-   receipt of a copy of the official death certificate issued by the
    Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages

The Process page includes further information about the documentation
required when an injured person dies.

Release of information to the estate of the injured person

All Power of Attorney or third party authority documents received by
Services Australia prior to the death of the injured person become
invalid when the injured person dies.

If the executor, executrix or administrator of the estate requires
information to be released to a third party, they must complete a new
Medicare Compensation Recovery Third party authority (MO0210).

Note: documentation confirming the authority for a person to represent
the estate is also required.

See: Authority to release information and acting on a person’s behalf
for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Compensation Recovery
Third party authority (MO021).

Confirming the administrator, executor or executrix of the estate

Written documents confirming the executor, executrix or the
administrator of the injured person’s estate are required for Services
Australia to release information in relation to the compensation claim
of the deceased. Acceptable documentation to establish the authority for
a person to represent the deceased include:

-   the Last Will and Testament of the deceased
-   Letters of Administration from the courts appointing an
    administrator
-   Probate from the courts, or
-   Documents from the Public Trustee appointing an executor, executrix
    or administrator

Where the injured person dies intestate (without a Last Will and
Testament) the agency requires a Letter of Administration from the
courts or the Public Trustee confirming the appointment before any
information can be released.

If a Letter of Administration has not been received or granted, a
Commonwealth of Australia Statutory Declaration signed by the person
appointed as administrator by the Public Trustee is required and can
only be accepted in consultation with Programme Management.

Refunds for deceased persons

Where a refund is to be payable by Services Australia, the Medicare
Compensation Recovery Notice of Judgment or Settlement (MO022) or other
settlement documents nominate who is authorised to receive the refund.
The Resources page contains a link to Medicare Compensation Recovery
Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022).

Note: any refund to a deceased estate will be made by cheque payable to
the deceased injured person and is issued to the nominated executor,
executrix, Public Trustee, court or administrator that has been given
the authority to deal with the proceeds of the estate.

See: Payments, refunds and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, email templates
and forms.

Related links

Authority to release information and acting on a person's behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Payments, refunds and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
