
Professional attendances assessing rules in Medicare 011-42040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see

Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

This document outlines information about professional attendance
assessing rules in Medicare.

Professional attendances

Professional attendance items for use by general practitioners (GPs),
non-vocationally recognised medical practitioners (non-VR MPs), other
medical practitioners (OMPs), specialists, consultant physicians and
public health physicians are listed in the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) under Category 1 - Professional Attendances (MBS category 1).

Professional Attendances are structured according to provider category.
Practitioners should only use items which:

-   relate to their particular practitioner grouping, and
-   the service provider meets the item description

Other factors taken in to consideration in structuring attendance items
are location, for example, surgery, home or hospital.

Professional attendances by medical practitioners cover consultations
during which the practitioner:

-   evaluates the patient's health-related issue/s using certain health
    screening services if applicable
-   formulates a management plan in relation to one or more
    health-related issues for the patient
-   provides advice to the patient and/or relatives (if authorised by
    the patient)
-   provides appropriate preventive health care; and records the
    clinical detail of the service(s) provided to the patient

Non-vocationally recognised medical practitioners

From 1 July 2018 non-VR MPs practising in metropolitan areas (Modified
Monash Model 1) will:

-   continue to bill Group A2 items for standard GP services
-   continue to bill Group A19 items for attendances associated with
    Practice Incentive Payments, and
-   bill the relevant Group A7 items for all other eligible services

Non-VR GPs providing services in MMM 2–7 locations will be able to
access all of the new items under Group A7 they are eligible for.

The Modified Monash Model (MMM) designation of any location can be
identified using the DoctorConnect locator map, see the Resources page
for a link.

Personal performance

All professional attendance items only attract benefits if they have
been personally performed by a medical practitioner.

Professional attendance items (other than an attendance on a person in
the course of a group session) only attract benefits if the service has
been provided on no more than one patient on the one occasion. Two or
more patients cannot be attended simultaneously, although patients may
be seen consecutively.

The requirement of 'personal performance' is met whether or not
assistance is provided in the performance of the service according to
accepted medical standards.

Accepted medical standards will determine the nature and extent of the
assistance required, guiding the choice of individual best placed to
provide that assistance. This may vary with each service provided.

In considering whether assistance is being provided according to
accepted medical standards, the medical practitioner should take into
account whether the nature and extent of assistance would be considered
acceptable to the general body of medical practitioners.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Attendances at a place other than consulting rooms or a residential aged care facility

For the purpose of these items, one occasion is defined as either of the
following:

-   a continuous period of employment within a 24 hour period (a shift)
    where a medical practitioner (general practitioner or other medical
    practitioner) is employed or contracted to provide services to
    private patients in a private hospital
-   a period during which a medical practitioner (general practitioner
    or other medical practitioner) renders a professional attendance to
    each of one or more private patients at a hospital, and in order to
    provide that service or services the medical practitioner has
    travelled to the hospital from a distant location, such as a surgery
    or place of residence

Attendances at boarding schools and colleges

Attendances on persons at a boarding school or college attract a benefit
under the appropriate home visit item. These establishments are not
regarded as being an institution as defined in the Health Insurance
Regulations 2018.

Hospital attendances

Items relating to attendances at a place other than consulting rooms or
a residential aged care facility (such as a hospital) relate
specifically to privately 'admitted patients'.

Where doctors have arrangements with a local hospital to routinely use
out-patient facilities to see their private patients, the appropriate
surgery consultation item applies.

The benefits for these items are based on both the time spent with the
patient and the number of private patients visited on the one occasion.

Medical practitioners should use the item number appropriate to the time
spent with each patient and advise the number of private patients seen
on their invoice or Medicare claim.

Where a medical practitioner sees a mixture of private and public
patients on the one occasion, only the private patients are counted when
determining the benefit. If the medical provider sees 8 patients, of
which 3 are public patients, the benefit is calculated based on 5
patients.

Institution attendances

The Health Insurance Regulations 2018 provide that an 'institution'
means a place (other than a hospital, nursing home, aged persons'
accommodation attached to, or situated within and nursing home complex)
at which residential accommodation or day care, is made available to:

-   disadvantaged children
-   juvenile offenders
-   aged persons
-   chronically ill psychiatric patients
-   homeless persons
-   unemployed persons
-   persons suffering from alcoholism
-   persons addicted to drugs
-   physically or intellectually disabled persons

For information regarding attendance at a place other than consulting
rooms or a residential age care facility, see MBS online.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Consultant occupational physician attendances

Attendances by consultant occupational physicians only attract a
Medicare benefit where the attendance relates to one or more of the
reasons stated in the MBS explanatory note for these items.

Consultant psychiatrist consultations

Items relating to consultations by consultant psychiatrists apply only
where the patient has been referred by a medical practitioner and
benefits are structured on a time basis. The time intervals set out in
the items refer to the actual time spent with the patient.

Benefits are not payable for services which are one of the following:

-   part of a formal or informal training program
-   undertaken to improve a person's professional skills, for example,
    mental health medical and paramedical personnel who are required or
    encouraged by their employer to undergo a course of psychotherapy
-   attendance for treatment concurrent with, though not a part of, a
    training program

Interview of a person other than the patient

There are provisions in the MBS which enable investigative interviews of
a patient's relatives or close associates to determine whether the
particular problem with which the patient presented was focused in the
patient or in the interaction between the patient and the person being
interviewed. This does not necessarily involve a psychiatric assessment
of that person. These items do not cover counselling of family or
friends of the patient.

For additional information, see MBS online item descriptors and
explanatory note for Interview of Persons other than a Patient by
Consultant Psychiatrist.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Consultations and procedures rendered at the one attendance

As a general rule, benefits are payable for a consultation and a
procedure rendered during the course of the one attendance. However, the
following Medicare benefits are not payable for a consultation with a
procedure when:

those items in Group T4 of the Schedule which cover or include a
component for antenatal or postnatal care

those items in the Schedule which provide a separate benefit for special
services relating to the treatment of obstetrical complications

those items in the Schedule where the attendance is an integral part of
the service

all items in Group T5 (assistance in the administration of an
anaesthetic), T6 (anaesthetics) and T9 (assistance at operations) of the
Schedule

items with descriptions are qualified by the following words:

-   'Each Attendance', 'At an Attendance', 'Attendance at which',
    'including all/any related (or associated) attendances'
-   'including initial and subsequent attendances'
-   'including associated consultation', or

a subsequent referred attendance item with any item in Group T8
(surgical operations) with a Schedule fee equal to or greater than $300

Where the attendance item is time related, the time taken to perform the
procedure should be deducted before determining the appropriate
attendance item.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Contact lens consultations

Benefits for contact lens consultation items by an ophthalmologist are
only payable where the patient's condition falls into specified
categories, as detailed in the item descriptors.

Benefits are payable for an initial referred consultation rendered in
association with the fitting and prescribing of lenses. Subsequent
follow-up attendances attract benefits on a consultation basis.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Group attendances

Note: family in the context of these items means blood or de jure
family, or established de facto relationships.

Family group therapy

Family group therapy items (items 170 to 172 for GPs and 221 to 223 for
non-VR MPs) refer to group therapy services supervised by a medical
practitioner other than a consultant psychiatrist. Medicare benefits are
only payable if the group therapy is conducted by the medical
practitioner themselves.

Group psychotherapy

Group psychotherapy and family group psychotherapy items (items 342 to
346) apply when group psychotherapy is rendered by a consultant
psychiatrist.

Family related consultations

A joint attendance by both partners for family planning or sex
counselling attracts benefits once only under the appropriate
consultation item. Questioning or advice given to one partner
independently during the course of the consultation would not constitute
a separate attendance.

An interview with a partner or family member (who is not the patient),
for example, for the purpose of explaining the nature of sterilisation
and obtaining consent for the operation, or to give advice/discuss
treatment, does not attract benefit.

Marriage guidance counselling

Benefits are not payable for marriage guidance counselling. While Level
D consultations provide for counselling, it is only in the context of
implementing the patient's medical management plan.

For additional information, see MBS online. The Resources page contains
a link to the MBS Online page on the Services Australia website.

Prolonged attendances in treatment of a critical condition

To qualify for benefits under prolonged attendance items (160 - 164 and
214 - 220), the prolonged attendance must be on a patient in imminent
danger of death.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Psychiatric attendances - referred consultations in consulting rooms

There are 2 levels of Medicare benefit payable for psychiatry consulting
room attendance items:

-   a higher level of benefit where the number of attendances for the
    patient does not exceed 50 in a calendar year (items 300 to 308)
-   a lower level of benefit where the number of attendances paid at the
    higher level of benefit for the patient exceeds 50 in a calendar
    year (items 310 to 318)

Special provisions for specified conditions - Item 319

Item 319 was introduced to allow patients suffering from certain
psychiatric disorders to obtain Medicare benefits at the higher level
for an additional number of services (up to 160 in a calendar year).

It is the responsibility of the consultant psychiatrists to ensure a
patient meets the criteria for item 319. Account documentation does not
need to be annotated when item 319 is used. Post payment checking is
used to ensure Medicare benefits are paid in accordance with the
clinical requirements of the item.

Where a patient exceeds 160 services in a calendar year, further
clinically required services claimed using item 319 are payable under
the lower level benefit item (310 to 318). If the psychiatrist has not
advised the attendance time on the account documentation the claim must
be rejected as there is insufficient information to correctly identify
the correct item number to use.

Limitations on the number of referred psychiatric service

While there are a specific number of services available under the higher
level of benefit items and item 319 each calendar year, there is no
limit on the number of times a lower level benefit item can be used.

There is no calendar year limit to the number of psychiatric services
which can be claimed for referred psychiatric services taking place as
home visit, hospital or nursing home attendances.

For information regarding referred psychiatric attendance items see MBS
online.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Public health medicine

Attendances by public health physicians only attract a Medicare benefit
where the attendance relates to one or more of the situations advised in
the MBS.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Residential aged care facility attendance

Where a medical practitioner attends a patient in a self-contained unit,
within a residential aged care facility complex, the attendance attracts
benefits under the appropriate home visit item.

Where a patient living in a self-contained unit attends a medical
practitioner at consulting rooms situated within the precincts of either
the residential aged care facility, or at free standing consulting rooms
within the residential aged care facility complex, the appropriate
surgery consultation item applies

If a patient who is accommodated in the residential aged care facility
visits a medical practitioner at consulting rooms situated within the
residential aged care facility complex, whether free standing or
situated with the residential aged care facility precincts, benefits are
attracted under the appropriate residential aged care facility
attendance item.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Services payable on attendance basis

A number of procedural services not listed as MBS items are regarded as
forming part of a consultation are identified in the general explanatory
notes of the MBS. The requirement of 'physical performance' by the
medical practitioner must be met for benefits to be payable on an
attendance basis. If any doubt exists as to whether a service should
attract benefits on an attendance basis, please seek advice from the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) contacts.

Some services are precluded from attracting benefits, for example,
medical examination for life insurance purposes or removal of tattoos.
In these circumstances, the service does not attract benefit on an
attendance basis, see Services which do not attract Medicare benefits
for a detailed listing of excluded services.

Specialist and consultant physician consultations

Items relating to consultations by a specialist or consultant physician
only apply where the patient has been referred. Itemisation is based on
whether the consultation is an initial or subsequent attendance
(excepting a minor consultation by a consultant physician) and where the
consultation takes place, for example, consulting rooms, hospital,
nursing home or home visit.

Note: if the patient has not been referred, benefits are payable at the
non-referred medical practitioner consultation level unless the
practitioner is also a vocationally registered general practitioner.

Minor attendance by a consultant physician

The Health Insurance Regulations 2018 provide that a minor consultation
is regarded as being a consultation in which the assessment of the
patient does not require the physical examination of the patient and
does not involve a substantial alteration to the patient's treatment.

For information regarding specialist and consultant physician
attendances, see MBS online. The Resources page contains a link to the
MBS Online page on the Services Australia website.

The Resources page contains Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) contact
details, a link to the MBS Online page and a link to the Doctor Connect
website.

Contents

Treatment and management plans for eating disorders (including anorexia
nervosa)

Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

Referrals for assessing in Medicare

Services provided by practice nurses and registered Aboriginal health
workers for Medicare assessing

Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) health assessments for specific target
groups (including Indigenous Australians

Related links

General assessing information for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
