
Link Donor Only enh1ment to consumer record 011-11080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about linking Australian Organ Donor
Register (AODR) Donor Only entitlements to a consumer record in CDMS.

Linking Donor Only entitlements

AODR registrations should be linked to the registrants Medicare record
or existing Consumer ID, whenever possible. When a customer authorises
it, their AODR registration can be associated with their Medicare
record. Linking the donor only entitlement to the consumer record helps
the donor register maintain current details. This also allows the
customer to view and amend their registration via their MyGov and
Express Plus app accounts.

If a Donor Only entitlement exists for the customer, it can be 'linked'
to their consumer record which transfers the Donor Only entitlement to
their consumer ID record on CDMS. There are system requirements to
enable a Donor Only to link to a consumer records. Information and error
messages will appear where requirements are not met. See Action AODR
rework transaction for more information about error messages on the
Resources page.

Investigations must be actioned to confirm the details match before
linking can occur. Often the donor only record may have previous
information such as a previous name or address, as it was not previously
linked to Medicare. When Service Officers have followed initial checks
but are unsure if linking should take place, follow the escalation
process.

-   If duplicate records already exist, see Delete duplicate organ donor
    registration
-   If 2 Consumer IDs with AODR entitlement not linked to Medicare
    exist, see Duplicate Consumer ID with AODR Entitlement

Letter generation if a donor only entitlement is linked to create an intent registration

When linking a Donor Only Entitlement with Intent Status Type, a
confirmation letter and consent form will be sent if no correspondence
has previously been sent to the customer.

This is indicated by no text next to the Mail Sent field in the Donation
Decision Details tab.

If Medicare card numbers have been added to a Donor Only record by a
Service Officer but not linked, this is an error and a rework
transaction report will be sent for correction via Quality Management.

The Resources page contains information about system requirements to
enable linking Donor Only entitlements and AODR contacts.

Related links

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Search for and verify existing organ donor registration in Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details

Register a new organ donor in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Delete duplicate organ donor registration

Action Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) rework transaction

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
