
Medicare - Assessing - Your Health 011-42000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information about Medicare and assessing
requirements.

Government intent

Medicare provides access to medical, allied health and hospital services
for all Australian residents and certain categories of visitors to
Australia. Services Australia administers the payment of Medicare
benefits.

Under Medicare, benefits are paid for professional services listed in
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) that are provided to eligible
patients in and out of hospital.

Medicare benefits are payable only for 'clinically relevant' services
rendered by an appropriate health practitioner. A 'clinically relevant'
service is one which is generally accepted by the relevant profession as
necessary for the appropriate treatment of the patient.

When a service is not clinically relevant, the fee and payment
arrangements are a private matter between the practitioner and the
patient.

Medical practitioners are free to set own fees for their professional
service.

On this Page:

Medicare Benefits Schedule

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) is a listing of the professional
services that attract a Medicare benefit.

For each services, it includes a unique item number, a description, the
Schedule fee and Medicare benefit, together with a reference to an
explanatory note relating to the item (if applicable).

The MBS is not a legal document. It operates under the Health Insurance
Act 1973 (as amended) and, in cases of discrepancy, the legislation is
the source for payments of Medicare benefits.

Medicare Benefits

In general, the Medicare benefit is 85% of the fee listed in the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) for the service (known as the Schedule
fee).

For attendances provided by GPs (or on behalf of a GP) to out of
hospital patients, the Medicare benefit is 100% of the listed Schedule
fee.

For professional services provided to private hospital patients
(admitted to either a private or public hospital) the Medicare benefit
is 75% of the listed Schedule fee.

Public patients admitted to public hospitals, receive free medical and
hospital treatment funded under State/Territory arrangements, therefore
are not entitled to Medicare benefits.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Contents

General assessing information for Medicare

Assessing Bulletins for Medicare

Professional attendances assessing rules in Medicare

Diagnostic procedures assessing rules in Medicare

Therapeutic procedures assessing rules in Medicare

Oral and maxillofacial assessing rules in Medicare

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Pathology assessing rules in Medicare

Pathology processing for Medicare

Optometrical services assessing rules in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
