
IHI system logs for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 011-03010170

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about IHI system logs in the HI
Service.

On this Page:

IHI system log

The IHI system log:

-   records and stores all transactions and search attempts to IHIs
-   can be retrieved and viewed by Service Officers upon an individual's
    request

Individual requests to retrieve and view IHI system log

An individual may request their own IHI system log via:

-   Service Centres
-   information centres, or
-   mail

Service Officers:

-   can retrieve all or part of an IHI system log by specifying a date
    parameter
-   must ensure the individual making the request is for that
    individual's IHI by performing a security check

Note: if the request is for a third party and there is a Power of
Attorney or other legal directive in place, this must be treated as an
own request. See Security checks and release of Individual Healthcare
Identifier (IHI) information.

If an individual has already obtained their IHI system log, and is
asking for the details of an individual who performed a search on behalf
of an organisation, forward the request to Tier 3 - HI Service Support.

IHI system log

The IHI system log data contains the:

total line items

start date:

-   parameter selected
-   cannot be greater than 6 months before the system processing date

end date:

-   parameter selected
-   must be greater than the start date
-   is limited to 6 months from the start date

logged timestamp of when the action occurred

user ID and source office code

description of the process or event logged

certificate and transaction details of any Healthcare Provider accessing
a record

System logs are merged for records that have been previously resolved,
such as duplicates, or provisional records. The system log for the
primary record must be requested, and all resolved records display in
the history of the primary record.

Note: where a request for IHI system log information greater than 6
months in the past is received the release of IHI system log to a third
party process must be followed.

Information requirements to retrieve and view IHI system log

The Service Officer must perform a security check before giving
information to the individual.

If the request to retrieve and view IHI system log information is:

by a third party

for a child:

-   under 14 years
-   aged 14 and over

Service Officers must follow the Release of IHI system log to a third
party procedure.

Note: if an individual has obtained their IHI system log, and is asking
for the details of an individual who performed a search on behalf of an
organisation, forward the request to Tier 3 - HI Service Support.

The Resources page contains contact details for Healthcare Identifiers
service.

Related links

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Security checks and release of Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI)
information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
