-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about a Notice of Judgment or Settlement,
and factors influencing the Medicare recovery amount.

Notice of Judgment or Settlement

A Notice of Judgment or Settlement advises Services Australia (the
agency) that a decision has been reached about a compensation claim for
an amount greater than $5,000 (including legal expenses).

Under section 22 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act
1995 (HOSC Act) the notifiable person has an obligation to advise the
injured person of a potential debt liability.

This must occur in writing before settlement can occur. Question 2 on
the Notice of Judgment or Settlement form (MO022):

-   asks the notifiable person to confirm this has occurred, and
-   is not compulsory

Under section 23 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act
1995 (HOSC Act) a compensation payer or their representative must advise
the agency of settlement or judgment within 28 days of the date the
compensation was fixed. The agency needs the notification to be on a
MO022.

The agency is required to recover the eligible Medicare benefits and
residential care costs, once a judgment or settlement has been reached
about the compensable injury or illness.

See:

-   the Terminology used in Medicare Compensation Recovery tables for
    definitions of Judgment and Settlement
-   Notifiable and not notifiable claims – Medicare Compensation
    Recovery
-   Payments, refunds and debts – Medicare Compensation Recovery

The Resources page contains a link to the MO022 form.

Failure to give notice within 28 days

Under section 29(3) of the HOSC Act 1995, if valid notification of
judgment or settlement is not received by the agency within 28 days from
the date the compensation amount was set, the compensation payer is
liable to repay any debts identified in the notice of charge.

They will get a compensation payer has not complied with legislated
notice requirements letter (Z2809). Any payment made will be treated as
an ad-hoc payment and will be applied to the notice of charge.

The References page contains links to legislation.

Centrelink clearance

Under the Social Security Act 1991 (SS Act) an insurer or compensation
payer may need to wait for a Centrelink clearance before releasing a
compensation payment to the person. An advance payment can still be made
to the agency without committing an offence under the SS Act, or the
compensation payer may wait for a notice of charge. However a valid
Notice of Judgment or Settlement is required to be submitted to the
agency within 28 days (under section 23(2) of the HOSC Act).

The References page contains links to legislation.

Valid notification of judgment or settlement

A valid notification of judgment or settlement must include certain
information provided in:

a completed Medicare Compensation Recovery Notice of Judgment or
Settlement form (MO022), or

a partially complete MO022 form, plus official supporting documents such
as:

-   Consent judgment
-   Deed of release/discharge
-   Terms of settlement
-   Complying agreement for workers compensation
-   Court order or judgment

See Process correspondence for details about mandatory information
required in a valid notice of judgment or settlement.

Note: the MO022 form includes additional fields. For example, Question
35, ‘Is any amount payable to Centrelink’ is not a mandatory field in
MCRS, or on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to the MO022 form.

Amount to be recovered

The agency is required to recover:

The total amount of Medicare benefits, nursing home benefits,
residential care subsidies and home care subsidies (care costs) paid in
the course of treatment of, or as a result of the compensable injury or
illness

-   The agency only recovers those benefits and subsidies paid between
    the date of injury or illness and the date the amount of
    compensation was fixed
-   If the amount of compensation awarded has been reduced as a result
    of contributory negligence, the amount of recovery is reduced by the
    percentage of the contributory negligence. See Apportionment of
    liability for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Past expenses fixed by a judgment that specifies an amount for medical
care, nursing home care, residential care or home care already incurred,
subject to the specific terms of the judgment and the amount established
through the Notice to claimant process. See Judgment fixes the amount of
past expenses

An amount up to, but not exceeding the total amount of compensation
fixed under a judgment or settlement, less any amounts payable under
Part 3.14 of the Social Security Act 1991

-   For Medicare Compensation Recovery the amount payable under Part
    3.14 of the Social Security Act 1991 is referred to as the amount
    payable to Centrelink

The References page contains links to legislation.

Apportionment of liability for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Apportionment of liability as a result of contributory negligence is a
formal agreement or finding that reduces the amount of compensation that
would otherwise be payable. Where apportionment of liability applies,
the total amount payable to the agency is reduced by the proportion of
liability for the injury or illness attributed to the injured person as
indicated in the judgment or settlement documents if:

-   the judgment or settlement fixes the amount of compensation on the
    basis that liability for the injury has been apportioned between the
    injured person and compensation payer, and
-   as a result, the amount of compensation is less than it would have
    been if liability had not been apportioned

Evidence of liability

The agency must be satisfied that settlement has been fixed on the basis
that the original amount of compensation has been reduced as a result of
an apportionment of liability.

The Medicare Compensation Recovery Notice of Judgment or Settlement form
(MO022) form or settlement documents must include the percentage of
apportionment attributed to the injured person.

Acceptable documentation to support an apportionment, if not provided on
the MO022 is:

-   judgment or court order
-   consent order
-   terms of settlement
-   deed of release or discharge

Reducing the amount owed

-   When the amount of compensation is reduced because an apportionment
    of liability has been applied for contributory negligence, the
    amount owed to the agency is reduced by the proportion of liability
    attributed to the injured person
-   For example, if the amount owing is $1,000 but 20% liability has
    been apportioned to the injured person in the claim, the recoverable
    amount is reduced by 20% to $800
-   When the notice of charge is issued, the reduced amount owed to the
    agency is automatically calculated in MCRS. The notice of charge
    will show the reduction
-   A notice of charge may be amended if a request is made within the 2
    year reviewable period and supporting apportionment of liability
    settlement documents are provided

See Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for information about a
notice of charge.

Judgment fixes the amount of past expenses

When the 'amount of past medical expenses' and/or the 'amount of past
nursing home, residential care or home care expenses' are fixed by a
court at the time of judgment, this could mean either:

-   The total amount of medical and/or care costs has been established
    by the courts, and the Notice of Charge cannot exceed this amount,
    or
-   The Medicare and/or care costs recovery amount has been determined
    by the courts, and this is the amount the agency must recover

A judgment may deal differently with the medical and care costs. Each
cost may have a recoverable amount set or effectively capped by the
judgment independently of the other.

If one, or both, has not had the recoverable amount determined by the
courts, a notice to claimant (NTC) must be issued to establish the
related amount (of medical or care costs not set) which is recoverable.

To determine if the fixed costs are a maximum allowable, or the actual
Medicare recovery amount requires an interpretation of the judgment.
While not always applicable, wording in the judgement:

-   may be direct and specify the amount recoverable by Medicare, or it
    may refer to the Medicare expenses. These indicate this is the
    amount the agency must collect on the Notice of charge (NOC)
-   may be more general and refer to the Medical and or care expenses
    amount. This indicates it is the maximum available for collection.
    In these cases the amount listed on the NOC cannot exceed this
    amount. If the agency has not yet established the recoverable
    amount, an NTC must be issued to determine the NOC

If the judgment is unclear that it includes fixed amounts for Medical or
Medicare, escalate the matter to Program Management.

The Resources page contains a link to Medicare Compensation Recovery >
Programme Management.

See Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for details about a
NOC.

Total amount of compensation and amount payable to Centrelink

Like Medicare, Centrelink may recover benefits paid when a customer is
paid compensation, however Centrelink has priority in recovery.

The agency cannot recover more than the total fixed compensation amount.
Therefore, the maximum amount available for Medicare to recover is the
total amount of compensation less the amount payable to Centrelink.

The Notice of Judgment or Settlement (NOJS) form and capture screen in
MCRS contains a question/field to record the amount recoverable by
Centrelink. However this is a non-compulsory. It is recognised that this
information is not normally going to be available at settlement, so is
not required on the form.

Medicare Compensation Recovery has no role in recovering the amount
payable to Centrelink.

See Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for details about a
notice of charge.

Notice of past benefits becomes the notice of charge

When a judgment or settlement has been reached, a notice of past
benefits that was valid at the time, becomes the notice of charge.

To be valid at the time of judgment or settlement the Notice of past
benefits (NOPB) must be issued within the 6 months before the date of
judgment or settlement.

A valid NOPB at the time of judgment or settlement will not change
unless:

-   apportionment
-   fixed amounts under judgment, or
-   Centrelink recovery amounts affect the total Medicare recovery
    amount

See:

-   Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for information about a
    notice of charge
-   Payments, refunds and debts for information about advance payments
-   Statement by claimant and care costs

The References page contains links to legislation.

No valid notice of past benefits on the date of judgment or settlement

Where there is no valid Notice of past benefits (NOPB) on the date of
judgment or settlement, the agency has a maximum of 3 months from
notification of judgment or settlement to issue a Notice of charge (NOC)
to:

-   the injured person, if the compensation payer has made an advance
    payment to the agency, or
-   the compensation payer

Where a valid advance payment has been made, the 3 month time limit may
be extended by granting an extension of time to lodge the statement by
claimant (SBC) or by issuing a letter for an incomplete statement (23B,
Statement not substantially correct).

Where an ad-hoc payment (including failed advance payments) has been
made, the 3 month time limit cannot be extended.

When processing the Notice of Judgment or Settlement (NOJS), if there is
no valid NOPB, MCRS displays the notice to claimant (NTC) capture screen
so a new NTC can be issued to the claimant. If a SBC has been returned
before processing the NOJS, this can be reprocessed through the NOJS
review screen to produce the NOC.

See:

-   Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for details about a
    notice of charge, including situations where the 3 month time limit
    may be extended
-   Payments, refunds and debts for details about advance payments

Medicare Compensation Recovery Section 23A statement form (MO023)

A claimant or injured person may complete a MO023 if they:

-   have not had any medical or residential/home care costs related to
    the injury or illness, or
-   have not had more related services, since the last Notice of past
    benefits (NOPB)

The MO023 may be signed:

-   after the date of judgment or settlement (DOJS), or
-   up to 28 days before the DOJS

If an MO023 is accepted, the claim closes on the displayed NOPB. If
there is no NOPB, the claim closes on a $NIL charge.

A completed MO023:

-   is at the agency’s discretion to accept, and
-   does not automatically extend the NOPB, until the agency has
    formally accepted the statement

The acceptance or refusal of a MO023 does not impact the agency recovery
timeframes under S24(4) or 33D of the Health and Other Services
(Compensation) Act 1995.

The References page contains links to legislation.

The Resources page contains a link to the MO023 form.

No interest payable on section 33D/K cases

The agency does not pay interest if there has been a delay in processing
an advance payment (Section 33D of the Health and Other Services
Compensation Act 1995).

S33M of the HOSC Act 1995 does not require the agency to pay interest.
However, a claimant may submit a claim if they can provide another law
in writing that requires the agency to do so.

The References page contains links to legislation.

Total amount payable/refundable exceeds threshold

If the total amount payable/refundable exceeds the threshold ($50,000),
the Notice of charge (NOC) must be reviewed by an accredited quality
checker.

See Quality checking – Medicare Compensation Recovery for details about
the review process.

The Process page contains information about actioning corrections.

Re-processing Notice of Judgment or Settlement

Some claims must be reopened:

-   for error correction, or
-   more funds received after the claim closed
-   to process an amended statement by the claimant
-   to process amendments to the Notice of Judgment or Settlement

See:

-   Close, terminate, update or reopen a claim – Medicare Compensation
    Recovery
-   Extensions, not substantially correct, decisions and reviews for
    details about amendments
-   Escalations and case notes for details about referring a case to the
    appropriate delegate for approval before actioning the amendment

Related links

Escalations and case notes - Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notifiable and not notifiable claims - Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge - Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Process correspondence - Medicare Compensation Recovery

Payments, refunds and debts - Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant and care costs - Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
