
The My Health Record system - Your Health 011-04000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information and resources about My Health Record
system for individuals. A My Health Record is a secure electronic
summary of an individual's health information.

Government intent

The Government Intent for the My Health Record system is for individuals
to have a My Health Record. The individual controls what goes into it
and who is allowed to access their record. A My Health Record allows
doctors, hospitals and other healthcare providers to view and share an
individual's health information to provide the individual with the best
possible care.

On this Page:

Benefits

My Health Record lets individuals control their health information
securely, in one place. This means important health information is
available when and where it’s needed, including in an emergency.

As more people use the My Health Record system, Australia’s national
health system will become better connected. The result is safer, faster
and more efficient care for people receiving health care in Australia.

The My Health Record system will give patients:

-   24/7 access to a summary of their health information, from anywhere
    in Australia
-   the ability to keep track of their medications, immunisations and
    allergies
-   more understanding of their health status, and more involvement in
    the healthcare decisions affecting them
-   the ability to share their important health information with all
    healthcare providers involved in their care

An individual can appoint someone else to manage their record if they
can’t manage it themselves (authorised representative), or want someone
else to be able to access the record (nominated representative).

Cost

Having a My Health Record is free.

However, if preparing and uploading a document to the My Health Record
system during a consultation takes time, the healthcare provider may
charge the individual for a longer consultation.

Getting a My Health Record

From 16 July 2018, anyone enrolling in Medicare has the opportunity to
get themselves and dependents under 14 years of age a My Health Record.

Cancelling a record

Individuals who want to cancel a record can contact the My Health Record
System Operator to find out how.

Forms with My Health Record questions

Service Australia:

-   processes My Health Record questions on Services Australia forms
-   performs quality checking on Services Australia forms
-   resolves any registration errors or incorrect Medicare preferences
    found in quality checking

See also: Processing newborn child enrolments in Medicare.

My Health Record questions are included in the following forms:

-   Healthcare Identifiers Service Application to request a pseudonym
    Individual Healthcare Identifier record form (MS005)
-   Medicare enrolment form (MS004)
-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Medicare enrolment and
    amendment form (MS018)
-   Claim for persons granted a Refugee, Humanitarian or Protection Visa
    form (SS415)
-   Customer Declaration form Status Resolution Support Services payment
    (SU710)
-   Claim for Status Resolution Support Services Payment form (SU691)
-   Newborn Child Declaration form (FA081)

My Health Record questions are also included in the following online
options for enrolling newborn children:

-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
-   Centrelink online account
-   Medicare online account

If Service Officers get a My Health Record registration form, owned by
the My Health Record system operator, see the Handle My Health Record
forms table on the Process page.

Handling customer enquiries about the My Health Record

Services Australia handles enquiries that are about questions on forms.

The My Health Record system operator handles all other My Health Record
enquiries.

However, Service Officers can still help customers if they have
enquiries about incorrect demographic information (address or name
details), because the demographic information comes from Medicare
enrolment information.

Services Australia can also help customers at self-help terminals to
navigate to their My Health Record.

See the Triage a My Health Record enquiry table on the Process page.

The Resources page contains links to the My Health Record website and
contact details for the My Health System Operator.

Information in a My Health Record

A My Health Record can contain the following information:

-   Medicare information
-   clinical documents
-   an individual’s own notes

See also:

-   Document details in a My Health Record
-   Medicare information in a My Health Record

14-17 year olds

Parents/guardians cease to be able to act on behalf of their child/ren
when the child/ren turn 14.

This means parents/guardians cannot make a My Health Record opt-out
choice for child/ren, and they cannot access child/rens’ records.

14-17 year olds have the same capacity as an adult to make a My Health
Record opt-out choice. The following forms are in the process of being
updated to remove 14-17 year old-specific information, and the age an
additional person must sign will be 14 years of age and over.

-   Medicare enrolment form (MS004)
-   Healthcare Identifiers Service Application to request a pseudonym
    Individual Healthcare Identifier record (MS005)
-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Medicare enrolment and
    amendment form (MS018)
-   Claim for persons granted a Refugee, Humanitarian or Protection Visa
    (SS415)
-   Customer Declaration form Status Resolution Support Services payment
    (SU710)
-   Claim for Status Resolution Support Services Payment (SU691)

Before changes: 2018 forms have additional people opt-out questions. The
age a person is required to sign the corresponding signature block is 18
years or over. 14-17 year olds do not have an opportunity to choose
their preference, or sign the form.

After changes: 2019 on forms will still have additional people opt-out
questions, but the age a person is required to sign the corresponding
signature block will be 14 years of age or over.

See also:

-   Processing My Health Record preference – tips and error reporting
-   Processing newborn child enrolments in Medicare

14-17 year olds – interim processing information

Until forms are updated, there is an impact for Service Officers who are
processing Medicare enrolments. The changes only affect processing
opt-out preference for 14-17 year olds. Other age groups are not
affected.

Processing forms

-   2018 form versions: Service Officers must select Not stated this
    question has not been asked for additional people 14-17 years old
-   2019 form versions: Service Officers process the opt-out preferences
    as per the information on the forms

See also, Processing My Health Record preference – tips and error
reporting.

The Process page includes information on how to determine if the enquiry
is My Health Record related, what to advise individuals and how to
redirect enquiries to the My Health Record System Operator.

The Resources page contains links to the My Health Record website for
information only. The My Health Record System Operator handles enquiries
about the My Health Record. Links to My Health Record contact details
and forms that include the My Health Record opt-out questions are also
available.

Contents

Manage My Health Record incidents and urgent enquiries

Processing My Health Record options – tips and error reporting

Medicare information in a My Health Record

Consent to include Medicare information in a My Health Record

Service Officer training requirements for My Health Record system access

Document details in a My Health Record

Manage provider enquiries and issues relating to the My Health Record
system

Related links

My Health Record - Health Professionals

After hours provider line – handle My Health Record, NASH and HI Service
enquiries

Processing newborn child enrolments in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
