
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to register, amend or cancel registrations
for AIR ancillary providers in PDS.

AIR vaccination provider types

There are 17 vaccination provider types recognised by the AIR and these
are split into Medicare providers and ancillary providers.

Medicare providers are automatically recognised as vaccination
providers. They have access to the AIR via their Medicare provider
number:

-   Medical Practitioners (includes GPs and certain specialists)
-   Eligible Midwives (a Registered Midwife with a specific AHPRA
    endorsement)
-   Eligible Nurse Practitioners (a Registered Nurse Division 1 with a
    Nurse Practitioner endorsement)

The Resources page contains a link to details about Midwife and Nurse
Practitioner endorsement.

AIR ancillary providers (also known as ‘other’ vaccination providers)
can access the AIR using a provider number issued by AIR. This number is
created when the Application to register as a vaccination provider with
the Australian Immunisation Register (IM004) form is processed.

AIR ancillary providers include:

-   Medical Practices (where there is a principal vaccination provider
    with a Medicare provider number)
-   Aboriginal Health Services (also referred to as Aboriginal Medical
    Services or AMS)
-   Commercial vaccination providers
-   Community Health Centres (also known as Community Health Services)
-   Councils
-   Flying Doctor Services
-   Pharmacies
-   Private Hospitals
-   Public Hospitals
-   Public Health Units
-   Authorised Nurse Immunisers
-   Residential Care Facilities
-   State and Territory Health Departments (these can complete and
    endorse their own IM004, and forward directly to Services Australia
    for processing)
-   Primary Health Networks (PHN) (deal directly with AIR National
    Office for issuing new AIR provider numbers)

See the Resources page for more details about the AIR provider types.

Approval requirements for ancillary providers

Ancillary provider applicants must use the Application to register as a
vaccination provider with the Australian Immunisation Register (IM004)
form.

Before processing an ancillary provider registration, Service Officers
must check that an authorised person in the relevant state or territory
health department has approved the application. See the Resources page
for a list of authorised representatives.

For medical practices, Norfolk Island applicants or Defence Force
organisations:

-   Provider type ‘L - Medical practice’ applicants do not need state or
    territory health department approval. Advise applicants that the
    principal vaccination provider must complete and sign the form as
    the applicant and that AIR payments will not be identifiable for
    individual providers at the practice
-   Norfolk Island applications except ‘L - Medical practice’
    applications must be authorised by the New South Wales Department of
    Health and Aged Care before being registered on the AIR

For providers that identify as a Commercial provider type:

-   Provider type ‘COMM - Commercial’ organisations usually have a head
    office in one state/territory and may provide services across
    multiple locations across Australia
-   To make sure they meet the vaccination requirements in each
    state/territory, commercial providers must apply for an AIR provider
    number with each state/territory that they provide vaccinations in
-   If the applicant has a head office in one state/territory, the IM004
    form may list a business’s (physical) address that is in a different
    state/territory to the one they are applying in. These applications
    are processed differently to other IM004 forms and use specific
    addressing conventions in PDS. The Process page has instructions on
    how to process these applications

Forms can be accepted via email. The email must:

-   include the standard wording: ‘On behalf of <State or Territory>
    Department of Health and Aged Care, I have the authority to approve
    the attached application to register as a vaccination provider for
    the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)’
-   be sent from state or territory email address of an authorised
    approver
-   include the state or territory signature block

Digital signatures can be accepted if the form:

-   has been electronically signed using a known signing software such
    as Adobe Sign and DocuSign
-   shows no evidence that it was fraudulently completed

Note: Applications that have a digital signature with software that is
not Adobe Sign or DocuSign, should be escalated to an AIR Programme
Support Officer (PSO). AIR Service Officers must not contact the
authorised person for the state or territory health department under any
circumstances.

The following forms cannot be processed if signed with an electronic
signature. AIR does not own these forms:

-   Online Claiming Provider Agreement (HW027)
-   Provider registration for Electronic Funds Transfer payments (HW029)
-   Bank account details for Online Claiming (HW052)

The Resources page has a link to the Application to register as a
vaccination provider with the Australian Immunisation Register (IM004)
form.

COVID-19 Vaccine Hub (state/territory managed) provider numbers in PDS

COVID-19 vaccination hubs (also known as Pfizer Hubs, Astra Zeneca Hubs,
or hospital hubs) were set up by State and Territory health departments
as part of Phase 1a of the Australian Government’s COVID-19 vaccine
national roll-out strategy.

At the request of the Department of Health and Aged Care, hubs were
registered with Services Australia (in the Provider Directory System
(PDS)) using a standard naming convention, for example:

-   COVID 19 VACCINE HUB <State> <Number> for example, COVID 19 VACCINE
    HUB NSW 001
-   COVID 19 AZ HUB <State> <Number> for example, COVID 19 AZ HUB NSW
    001

The Process page describes how to Search for a COVID 19 Vaccine Hub and
other facilities in PDS. Note: these are no longer in use and are only
for historical reference.

Other COVID-19 Vaccine facility (not state/territory managed) provider numbers in PDS

The Department of Health and Aged Care has approved other locations to
administer COVID-19 vaccinations. These facilities are not managed by
state and territory governments. These can include selected:

-   GP respiratory clinics
-   Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services
-   GP practices
-   pharmacies
-   commercial providers servicing Disability and Residential Aged Care
    facilities
-   the Australian Defence Force

The naming conventions for these facilities may vary.

Vaccinations provided in a Disability Care Facility will fall under 1 of
the following provider details:

-   Healthcare Australia (Trading Name: Healthcare Australia,
    Organisation Name: Healthcare Australia Pty Ltd)
-   ASPEN (Trading Name: ASPEN COVID19 DF 0001)
-   Australian Defence Force (Trading Name: ADF National Disability
    Service)

The Process page describes how to Search for a COVID-19 Vaccine Hub and
other facilities in PDS.

Pharmacies registering

Pharmacies register with the AIR using the AIR provider registration
form (IM004). This gives the pharmacy an AIR ancillary provider number.
An individual pharmacist cannot register for their own AIR ancillary
provider number.

If an individual pharmacist (not pharmacy) makes an application to
register with the AIR, the application cannot be processed. Service
Officers must call the applicant to advise them of this.

If a pharmacist calls, it is important to tell them:

-   individual pharmacists cannot register for their own AIR ancillary
    provider number
-   they must use their pharmacy’s AIR provider number
-   they will need a PRODA account to access HPOS to record
    immunisations under their pharmacy’s AIR provider number
-   if they receive details or advice that it is not legal to upload
    immunisations under ‘the AIR Pharmacy Provider Number’ that is not
    correct

The Resources page has a link to the Connecting Pharmacies to the AIR
(AIRM02INFO2) infographic, to help pharmacies.

Authorised Nurse Immunisers registering

Authorised Nurse Immunisers register with the AIR using the AIR provider
registration form (IM004). This gives the Authorised Nurse Immuniser an
AIR ancillary provider number.

Note: for PRODA and access purposes, they are treated like an
organisation and need an ABN.

Provider bank account details

The AIR makes payments to eligible vaccination providers when they
notify the AIR of a vaccination that completes an early childhood
immunisation schedule. All payments are made to the provider's bank
account through Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT). Not all provider types
are eligible for payment.

Note: the AIR only makes payments when valid bank account details are
recorded for an eligible vaccination provider.

Vaccination providers can notify the AIR of their bank account details
using the following forms:

-   Application to register as a vaccination provider with the
    Australian Immunisation Register (IM004) (initial applications only)
-   Australian Immunisation Register - Bank account details for
    vaccination providers (IM005)

Use the IM005 form for amendments to bank account details.

The IM005 form does not let multiple vaccination providers sign the
form. In this case, vaccination providers can:

-   attach a separate sheet with all the provider signatures
-   include all the signatures on the back of the form, or
-   send the request and signatures on their practice letterhead

The IM005 form was added to the range of forms that can be uploaded via
the HPOS Messages Form Upload function. HPOS provides a secure, timely
and authenticated way for AIR to get this information, and should be
encouraged.

The Resources page has links to the IM004 and IM005 forms.

Release of bank account details

Do not release bank account details over the telephone. Details given by
the provider can be checked in the Provider Directory System (PDS) and
confirmed by AIR Service Officers.

A provider can request a copy of a previously completed bank account
details form be sent in the mail.

The Resources page has a link to the Australian Immunisation Register -
Bank account details for vaccination providers (IM005) form.

Processing or notification errors

Advice from vaccination providers over the telephone that their bank
account details are incorrect can only be accepted if an AIR Service
Officer keying error has occurred.

The authorised contact person must notify in writing for any other
changes to bank account details.

If bank account details were updated incorrectly and the processing
error identified on the same day, the error can be corrected and the
start date amended to the date the error was corrected (if necessary).

Cancellation of AIR ancillary providers

To cancel an ancillary provider registration, a request in writing from
the authorised contact person, including an end date, must be provided
on an official letterhead.

If the end date is not included, the receipt date can be used as the end
date.

Change of business ownership

An organisation’s AIR provider number is not transferable. Changes to
business ownership where the ABN has changed require a new AIR provider
number to be issued to the new owner/s.

If the site is using web services software to do business with us, a new
minor ID needs to be registered using the online claiming provider
agreement form. Depending on how the site’s software is configured,
there may be additional steps required. Organisations must seek advice
from their software developer.

Processing a Software ID/Location ID/Minor ID

The Software ID on an AIR registration represents the Location ID (also
known as a Minor ID). This is an identifier issued to AIR ancillary
providers that use practice management software to transmit data to the
AIR. The Software ID is critical to allow AIR ancillary providers to
submit claims through practice management software using web services
technology.

Services Australia is advised of the Location ID/Minor ID via the
following forms:

-   Online Claiming Provider Agreement (HW027)
-   Provider registration for Electronic Funds Transfer payments (HW029)
-   Bank account details for Online Claiming (HW052)

See Table 8 on the Process page for more about processing a Minor ID.
The Resources page has a link to the forms.

No provider type applied for

If the Application to register as a vaccination provider with the
Australian Immunisation Register (IM004) form does not have a provider
type selected, the form must be returned to the applicant using the We
need more information to process your form letter (Z2334) and selecting
‘the required checkboxes are not selected’ option.

Note: if State Health approves an application without specifying a
provider type, notify them via phone or email and ask to re-approve once
the category is determined.

Incorrect provider type applied for

If a Services Officer suspects an incorrect provider type has been
applied for, do not process the form and contact the provider to confirm
provider type.

Incorrect provider type recorded

If an incorrect provider type has been recorded by an AIR Service
Officer it must be escalated to an AIR PSO.

The AIR PSO will issue a request to AIR Program Support to rectify the
provider type via a file fix to Mainframe. Changing the provider type in
PDS does not update the AIR Site.

B type provider amendments and cancellations

Provider type ‘B – Information Requestor – Group’ is no longer an option
on the Application to register as a vaccination provider with the
Australian Immunisation Register (IM004) form. There are existing B type
provider registrations on the AIR.

If an existing B type provider is asking for an amendment to or
cancellation of their registration, contact an AIR PSO who will advise
the action to take.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to forms and contact details
-   provider types registered on the AIR
-   ancillary provider details that can be amended
-   troubleshooting messages AIR Service Officers may receive in the PDS
-   PDS processing buttons

Related links

Authentication and release of information for Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR)

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Provider registration in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Register or amend provider on Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
