
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Medicare eligibility for people who have lodged
an application for a permanent resident or protection visa. They lodge
these with the Department of Home Affairs (Home Affairs).

Application for permanent residency

A person can apply for a permanent residency or protection visas. They
can do this:

-   offshore (outside of Australia), or
-   onshore (in Australia)

There are different types of permanent residency visas including
protection visas. The legislation states that an applicant for a
permanent resident visa must hold a valid temporary visa. It does not
specify the type of visa.

Eligibility for Medicare

A person can enrol in Medicare if they meet all of the criteria. When
they enrol, they will get a blue 'interim' Medicare card.

A person is eligible to enrol if they:

-   apply for a permanent residency or protection visa
-   are onshore (VEVO displays if customer is onshore), and
-   have permission to work

This does not include a Parent visa.

The person must supply documents to enrol in Medicare.

If they do not have permission to work, they are only eligible for
Medicare if:

they have a relationship with a parent, de facto, spouse or child who
is:

-   an Australian citizen
-   New Zealand citizen, or
-   holds a permanent resident visa and lives in Australia

they were residing in a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) country
immediately before coming to Australia, and meet the criteria of that
country they can enrol under RHCA

See the Process page for more details.

Extending Medicare eligibility

If the customer’s visa details are shared via an electronic data link,
the system automatically extends eligibility, using the allowable card
extension periods. See the Resources page for more details.

If the customer’s Medicare Eligibility did not automatically extend,
manually extend using the allowable extension periods. The customer must
continue to meet the visa application criteria. A person is eligible to
extend their entitlement if:

-   their valid visa has not been refused, and
-   they have permission to work

If the person does not have permission to work, they are only eligible
to extend if they have a relationship with a parent, de facto, spouse or
child who is:

-   an Australian citizen
-   New Zealand citizen, or
-   holds a permanent resident visa, and resides in Australia

The customer must supply documents to extend their eligibility for
Medicare.

If the customer’s visa has been refused, see Appeals to visa refusal.

See Table 5 on the Process page for more details.

Appeals to visa refusal

A customer may have their visa application refused by the Department of
Home Affairs. When the application is refused, the Department of Home
Affairs will issue the customer with a notice telling them of the
decision. Their Medicare entitlement will cease and a system generated
letter is issued by Services Australia letting them know about the
change in Medicare entitlement.

The customer can appeal the Department of Home Affairs' decision to
refuse their visa application with the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT).

They are eligible for Medicare while appealing the decision. To re-enrol
they must provide the following:

-   a completed Medicare enrolment form (MS004)
-   evidence of an appeal (for example an AAT letter)
-   a valid visa with permission to work
-   an identification document

See Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility for customers who have
an adverse outcome with their Permanent Residence (Skilled Regionals)
subclass 191 visa. If they are appealing their refusal, see the Appeals
to a visa refusal Table on the Process page for more information.

Note: the evidence of appeal must be dated within 2 years of the date of
processing.

Child born in Australia to parent/s who have lodged an appeal

For a child born in Australia to parent/s who have lodged an appeal
against a visa refusal prior to the child’s birth, see Child born in
Australia enrolling in Medicare for more information.

New Zealand citizens

New Zealand citizens living in Australia are eligible for Medicare and
can apply for permanent residency.

Do not add an immigration data link to these enrolments. This can
incorrectly change or cease their Medicare eligibility.

A New Zealand citizen enrolled in Medicare as an applicant for permanent
residency may have their application refused. In these cases, update
their Medicare entitlement to reflect their New Zealand citizen
eligibility. Do not refuse a Medicare card in these cases.

For help, see Amending a New Zealand entitlement type.

From 1 July 2023, New Zealand citizens that have been living in
Australia for 4 years or more, are eligible to apply directly for
Australian citizenship:

-   they no longer need to first apply for, and be granted a permanent
    visa
-   these changes apply to New Zealand citizens holding a Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa (SCV) that arrived in Australia after
    26 February 2001

Permanent Residence (Skilled Regional) visa subclass 191

The Department of Home Affairs introduced 2 new pathways for eligible
residents for permanent residency. They are:

-   Permanent Residence (Hong Kong) (Regional) subclass 191, commenced 5
    March 2022
-   Permanent Residence (Skilled Regional) subclass 191, commenced 16
    November 2022

They are eligible for Medicare as a conditional migrant.

Asylum Seekers Assistance Scheme and the Red Cross Refugees

The Red Cross will help people who have come to Australia with limited
financial means.

The customer will:

-   be subject to constant review, and
-   must provide the immigration documents to enrol in Medicare

The Medicare eligibility of these persons is no different to other
people from overseas.

For refugees who do not have photo ID, see Table 2 on the Process page
for more details.

Electronic data from the Department of Home Affairs

The Department of Home Affairs (Home Affairs) shares some customer visa
application details with the agency. They share details via an
electronic data link, which tells the status or outcome of an
application with Home Affairs:

-   Lodged
-   Granted
-   Withdrawn, or
-   Refused

They share these details for customers who:

-   are migrants. This includes people who have a permanent resident
    status before or after they arrive in Australia
-   are conditional migrants. This includes people who have a temporary
    resident visa, and they have applied for permanent visa. For
    example, a spouse of an Australian citizen
-   live in Australia and have applied for a permanent resident visa
-   have some Ministerial orders once the visa has been granted

This can be accessed in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS). The link is used when enrolling a customer or amending their
record.

The link from Home Affairs may not be present on the system. This is
often because it has been a short time since the customer:

-   first arrived in Australia, or
-   has lodged their visa application

The details that they send may change a customer's Medicare entitlement.
This can also affect how they will get a Medicare card.

When Home Affairs refuses an application for permanent residency or a
protection visa, Medicare entitlement ceases. The system sends a letter
telling them about their Medicare entitlement.

For example:

A customer has a Conditional Migrant status with Medicare. The
Department of Home Affairs will share a data link. It will say they are
now a permanent resident. This will update the customers Medicare
record.

If a customer’s data link is not on the system, they can still enrol in
Medicare.

Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO)

Service Officers must access a VEVO when processing applications. This
includes:

-   extensions, and
-   initial applications

Document verification

-   Identification documents must be verified for all customers in the
    Document Verification Service (DVS) before processing an application
-   The DVS processing form must be completed for each document
    verification attempted, both successful and unsuccessful
    verification must be recorded on the form
-   If an application is received and processed in a service centre, DVS
    is only required if the Service Officer is not satisfied with the
    validity of the documents

See Identity verification for Medicare enrolments and re-enrolments in
the Document Verification Service (DVS) for more details.

Expired Identity document

Expired Foreign passport

An expired passport (up to a maximum of 2 years from the expired date)
can be accepted as an identity document for subsequent enrolments
providing the passport number:

-   was recorded in CDMS at the initial enrolment, and
-   can be verified in the Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO)

Note: Services Australia do not accept an expired passport as evidence
of identity for initial enrolments.

Expired Immicard

An expired Immicard can be accepted as an identity document for
subsequent enrolments.

If a customer provides an expired identity document, they must also
provide one of the below:

-   current Australian driver’s licence, or
-   current Proof of ID card

Note: Services Australia do not accept an expired Immicard as evidence
of identity for initial enrolments.

The Resources page contains:

-   allowable card extension periods
-   a letter link
-   result codes
-   data tables for Births, deaths and marriages
-   country codes for Australian visas
-   contact details, and
-   a link to the Medicare enrolment application form

Contents

Applicant for Partner visa (subclass 309/100 and 820/801)

Related links

Child born in Australia enrolling in Medicare

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Medicare cards

Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility

Medicare eligibility for customers with permanent resident status

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Medicare eligibility for enrolments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
