
Hospital Substitute Treatment (HST) claims for Medicare 011-43010080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Hospital Substitute Treatment
(HST) claims for Medicare. Note: as at 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island is
covered under Medicare provisions.

On this Page:

Hospital Substitute Treatment (HST) claims

The Department of Health advised that from 1 April 2007, private health
insurers are able to pay benefits for a wider range of services.

Items previously only claimable from both Medicare and private health
insurers when performed in-hospital, are claimable for patients being
‘hospitalised’ at home.

Hospitals and private health insurers receive the claims for HST first,
which will be noted on accounts. The Private Health Insurers forward the
claims to Medicare for processing.

All accounts must be clearly marked ‘Hospital Substitute Treatment’ or
‘HST’.

Section 10(2)(a)(ii) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 provides for a
benefit to be paid at 75% of the schedule fee for a Hospital-Substitute
Treatment.

Section 69-10 of the Private Health Insurance Act 2007 defines a
Hospital Substitute Treatment as general treatment that:

substitutes for an episode of *hospital treatment, and

is any of, or any combination of:

-   nursing
-   medical
-   surgical
-   podiatric surgical
-   diagnostic
-   therapeutic
-   prosthetic
-   pharmacological
-   pathology, or
-   other services or goods intended to manage a disease, injury or
    condition, and

is not specified in the Private Health Insurance (Complying Product)
Rules as a treatment that is excluded from this definition

Hospitals and private health funds receive claims for HST first, which
will be noted on accounts. The private health funds then pass these
claims on to Medicare for processing.

All accounts must be clearly marked 'Hospital Substitute Treatment' or
'HST'.

This policy applies to all claiming channels. The References page
contains links to the Health Insurance Act 1973 and the Private Health
Insurance Act 2007.

Manual patient claims

When an out-of-hospital claim is received with the wording 'Hospital
Substitute Treatment' or 'HST', Service Officer's must add a 'H' to the
item number and process at 75%.

All accounts must be either original documents or certified true copies
of the original.

The original account or the certified copy of the original account must
include:

-   'HST account lodged with [name of health fund]'

Note: processing associated with this policy is subject to quality
control.

Processing HST claims

The Process page describes how to process claims for HST presented
either:

-   over the counter, or
-   by mail

Bulk bill claims

Bulk bill claims for HST must be submitted on a hospital header.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
