
Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR). The AIR is a national register administered by Services
Australia that records vaccines given to all people in Australia.

Government intent

The AIR was established in 1996 as part of a national strategy to
increase age appropriate childhood immunisation in Australia. This was
in response to a decline in childhood immunisation levels and an
increase in preventable childhood diseases.

From September 2016, the Australian Childhood Immunisation Register
(ACIR) expanded to the AIR to record vaccines given to all people in
Australia.

The AIR aims to promote immunisation through the provision of
information and payments to recognised vaccination providers and to
increase national immunisation rates. It is administered under the
Australian Immunisation Register Act 2015.

Registration on the AIR

Individuals can be registered on the AIR when:

-   they enrol for Medicare
-   immunisation data is recorded by a recognised vaccination provider
-   they apply for an Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI)

Note: an IHI is a unique number used to identify an individual for
health care purposes.

Mandatory reporting

Changes to the Australian Immunisation Register Act 2015 require
mandatory reporting of the following vaccines by vaccination providers
to the AIR:

-   COVID-19 vaccines from 20 February 2021
-   influenza vaccines from 1 March 2021
-   National Immunisation Program (NIP) vaccines from 1 July 2021

See the References page for links to legislation.

Vaccines reporting

The AIR vaccination providers can report:

-   vaccines listed on the National Immunisation Program (NIP)
-   vaccines given while overseas (individuals can take evidence of
    vaccines received overseas to their vaccination provider in
    Australia to update the AIR. The evidence must be translated into
    English)
-   vaccines given through school programmes
-   COVID-19 vaccines (approved for use in Australia)
-   other vaccines including flu and travel vaccines (e.g. yellow fever)

Note: only vaccines administered on or after 1 January 1996 are recorded
on the AIR.

See Navigate Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) system for a list of
standard and non-standard vaccines.

The Resources page contains links to AIR information on the Services
Australia website and a table of AIR data transmission methods. It also
contains a link to the NIP Schedule and Australian Immunisation Handbook
on the Department of Health and Aged Care's website.

Purpose of AIR records

An AIR record:

-   enables recognised vaccination providers, individuals and
    parents/guardians (of children under 14 years of age) to check the
    immunisation status of an individual, regardless of where they have
    been immunised
-   forms the basis of an immunisation history statement for individuals
    and parents/guardians of children under 14 years of age
-   provides information about the immunisation status for the
    assessment of some family assistance payments
-   produces the COVID-19 digital certificate when an individual has
    received the required vaccinations

National due and overdue rules

National due and overdue rules are used to determine the immunisation
status for an individual.

Refer to the Australian Immunisation Handbook rules for information
about:

-   when vaccines are considered due or overdue
-   recommended intervals between doses
-   minimum age requirements

The Resources page contains links to AIR information on the Services
Australia website including national due and overdue rules for
immunisation and the Australian Immunisation Handbook on the Department
of Health and Aged Care website.

Family assistance and child care payment eligibility

The immunisation status of individuals up to 20 years of age links to
eligibility for some family assistance payments. The A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) Act 1999 ensure that all Family Tax Benefit Part A
families, regardless of income, are subject to the same immunisation
requirements.

Centrelink uses the immunisation status to determine if a child has
satisfied immunisation requirements. Note: this immunisation status is
provided to Centrelink, matching with the AIR using the child’s Medicare
card number and/or other details.

The Resources page contains:

-   AIR contact details
-   links to AIR information on the Services Australia website
-   links to the Australian Immunisation Handbook and National
    Immunisation Program Schedule on the Department of Health and Aged
    Care website
-   AIR data transmission methods
-   Adaptors to Web Services/PRODA FAQ

Contents

Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccines

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) site functions

Enquiries for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Overseas immunisations and processing history forms in the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

Family assistance and Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Individual registrations in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Provider registration in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian Immunisation Register
(AIR)

Proof of vaccination and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Payments and statements for AIR recognised vaccination providers

Process claims in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Process pended claims in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Change requests in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Returned mail for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Forms for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
