
Identify Medicare direct deposits on claimant's bank statements 011-43120030

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how financial institutions
identify Medicare direct deposits on claimant's bank statements. A
financial institution must identify that a payment has been made by
Medicare and the amount of the payment. How this appears on a claimant's
statement is the bank's decision.

On this Page:

Patient claims EFT deposits

Medicare creates a lodgement reference number for patient claims paid
via Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT). The lodgement reference number
consists of an 8 digit number and a 4 digit code for the appropriate
state processing area.

The Resources page contains a list of patient claim lodgement reference
numbers.

Information on claimant's bank statement

Information visible on a claimant's bank statement may differ to the
information provided by Medicare. Some financial institutions add
characters to the lodgement reference supplied by Medicare and other
financial institutions may not print the full reference provided.

The Resources page contains an example of what may display on a
claimant's EFT benefit bank statement when Medicare pays an EFT payment.

Provider payments

A lodgement reference was introduced to assist practice staff to
reconcile their Medicare statements with their financial institution
statements. The Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) lodgement reference
appears on both the Medicare benefit statement and the provider's bank
statement.

EFT statements consist of the following information:

-   a lodgement reference that also appears on their bank statement or
    financial institution statement
-   the Bank/State/Branch (BSB) number and name of their financial
    institution
-   the number and name of their financial institution account

Some financial institutions add characters to the lodgement reference
supplied by Medicare while other financial institutions may not print
the full reference.

Note: it is important that the complete reference number is used for
reconciliation.

The Resources page contains details of how provider lodgement references
are constructed.

90 day pay doctor EFT payments

Providers should use complete reference numbers listed on 90 Day Cheque
Cancellation Statements to locate and match the reference number on
their bank statements. The 90 Day Cheque Cancellation Statement provides
the information needed to reconcile payments, including the:

-   patient's name
-   date of service
-   charge
-   benefit

Using the 90 Day Cheque Cancellation Statement run date a person is able
to identify the date range of specific deposits on a bank statement.

If at any time a practice receives EFT deposits into their account and
does not receive the 90 Day Cheque Cancellation Statement with which to
reconcile it, they should call Services Australia and quote one of the
reference numbers within that week's date range. A duplicate statement
is then produced as soon as possible.

The Resources page contains details of how 90 day pay doctor EFT
lodgement reference numbers on bank statements are constructed.

Digital claiming

A provider's software set-up dictates the information given to financial
institutions when a Medicare benefit is paid.

When transmitting Medicare online claims, provider software has the
option of entering an account reference 'AccountReferenceId' (ACRF), a
reference used by the claim submitter to identify claims. This applies
to unpaid accounts only.

The ACRF is included in any reports relating to that claim, such as the
statement that accompanies the benefit cheque. Therefore, whatever is
entered in the ACRF element is also shown on the claimant's bank
statement.

Note: if the value is blank or not sent at all, then no reference will
accompany the payment.

The Resources page contains an example of an online claiming account
reference.

The Resources page contains information on how to identify Medicare
direct deposits on a claimant's bank statements.

Related links

Medicare benefit not received (EFT dispute)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
