
Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15030060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the statement by claimant in
relation to Medicare Compensation Recovery cases.

Statement by claimant

Statement by claimant is the second step to generate a notice of past
benefits or notice of change.

When a Medicare history statement has been requested, a notice to
claimant (Medicare history statement and declaration) is sent out. When
a notice to claimant is completed, it becomes a statement by claimant.

Completing a Medicare history statement and declaration (notice to claimant)

The declaration is for the claimant to declare information provided on
the Medicare history statement is correct. The claimant is also
declaring if care services were provided for the compensable injury.

The injured person must:

-   place a tick in the box on the Medicare history statement next to
    any services that relate to the treatment of the injury or illness
    relevant to the compensation claim. If there are no services that
    relate, leave the statement blank
-   place a tick in the box on the declaration next to the relevant
    statement indicating if nursing home, residential care or home care
    services were provided in relation to the injury
-   sign and date the declaration confirming the information provided is
    correct
-   return the completed documents to Services Australia (the agency) by
    the date given on the letter

The injured person may seek an extension of time if they are unable to
return the Medicare history statement before the return date noted on
the notice to claimant.

If the claimant believes the statement incorrectly lists previously
verified services, see Amended notices and reviews for Medicare
Compensation Recovery.

Requesting an extension of time to complete a Medicare history statement and declaration

An injured person can apply for an extension of time to return the
statement. Requests for an extension of time must be received before the
required return date noted on the notice to claimant. Requests received
after the return date should be rejected.

Applications for an extension of time must be made by the:

-   Injured person or claimant
-   Authorised legal representative appointed to act on the injured
    person’s behalf (such as a Court order, Power of Attorney or
    Executor), or
-   Authorised third party (including a solicitor or an individual who
    is being authorised to act on behalf of the injured person, claimant
    or legal representative)

Evidence must be on file to confirm the legal representative or third
party is authorised to act on the injured person or claimant’s behalf.

See also Authority to release information and acting on a person’s
behalf for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

A request can be made by:

-   Phone
-   Email, or
-   In writing

Note: all requests must be recorded in case notes.

Granting an extension of time to complete a Medicare history statement and declaration

The agency may grant an extension of time if information is missing,
such as:

-   not clearly completed
-   missing pages
-   missing valid signature and date on declaration
-   nursing home question is not ticked

An extension may be made for 28 days from the date the Medicare history
statement and declaration was due. Generally no more than 2 extensions
of time will be granted. This practice ensures that no more than 3
months of services after the date of injury may be 'missed' when a NOPB
is issued. Each case is assessed independently.

An extension may be granted when a case has:

Not settled

-   The agency may grant an additional 28 days to return the Medicare
    history statement if the request is received before the current due
    date

Settled, and the compensation payer has chosen to make an advance
payment

-   an extension can be granted where the request is made within 12
    months of the original due date
-   for a period of up to 12 months

The requestor should specify the extension period they require

Requests for second or subsequent extensions must be escalated to
Programme Management on the 'Escalation to Programme Management by TL5
or PSO4' template

Do not grant an extension if:

-   A case has settled but no advance payment money has been received by
    the agency
-   Supporting documents such as a Last Will and Testament are missing,
    or
-   The case has reached settlement and the Section 33D date has passed

Refer to Notice of past benefits and notice of change for Medicare
Compensation Recovery.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and email
templates.

Returning a statement by claimant

The injured person must return the completed statement by claimant to
the agency by the date on the letter unless an extension has been
applied for and granted.

Incomplete and missing information statement by claimant

Send a ‘z2452 - Provide more information to process the Medicare history
statement and declaration’ if:

-   returned statement by claimant or declaration is incomplete or
    missing mandatory information
-   both the Medicare history statement and declaration are returned
    blank
-   returned Medicare history statement is missing the final page (and
    there are further services on the final page identified as part of
    mail validation)
-   it is still within Section 33D due date

Note: the injured person is not required to return the final page if
there are no further services. Make a thorough case note that a check
for the final page of the Medicare history statement has been carried
out.

The z2452 letter does not grant additional time for the claimant to
provide the required information unless the case has already settled and
an advance payment has been made. Only for advance payment cases, the
letter will automatically calculate 28 days from issue.

If the missing information is not received in time to be processed,
issue a notice of past benefits/notice of charge - all services taken

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the letter
templates.

Assess a statement by claimant

Assess the statement by claimant to determine that all services provided
for treatment of the compensable injury or illness have been identified
(if applicable).

Where indicated services appear on a verified notice of charge for
another closed case for the claimant, do not include in new notice of
past benefits.

When the agency is satisfied the statement by claimant is correct,
either a notice of past benefits or a notice of charge will be issued.

Where there is an expired notice of past benefits and the claimant now
indicates previously verified services as not relating to the
compensable injury or illness, if approved by the delegate, Service
Officers should remove the services provided the statement is clear. See
the Resources page in Amended notices and reviews for Medicare
Compensation Recovery.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the letter and
email templates.

Related links

Amended notices and reviews for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Declarations for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare history statement request for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Authority to release information and acting on a person’s behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of change for Medicare Compensation
Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
