
Helping Children with Autism (HCWA) and Better Start for Children with Disability programs in Medicare 011-41020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

This document outlines information about the Helping Children with
Autism program (HCWA) and the Better Start for Children with Disability
Initiative (Better Start) in Medicare, known as Early Intervention
Services for Children with autism, pervasive developmental disorder
(PDD) or disability.

Transition to the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

The Department of Social Services (DSS) Helping Children with Autism
(HCWA) and Better Start for Children with Disability programs are
transitioning to the NDIS. Note: there are no changes to Medicare
programs for eligible patients, and customers can continue to access
Medicare benefits for clinically relevant services. The transition to
NDIS is only relevant to non-clinical services provided through DSS
(such as social support payments or grants).

Direct callers to the Department of Social Services (DSS) website for
more information on the NDIS transition. The Resources page contains a
link.

History of HCWA and Better Start

The Helping Children with Autism program was introduced on 1 July 2008
to allow for the early diagnosis and treatment of children with autism
or any other pervasive developmental disorder (PDD). Items were
introduced for paediatricians and psychiatrists to create treatment and
management plans. A group was added to the Allied Health Schedule which
included items for psychologists, speech pathologists and occupational
therapists to assist in diagnosis and provide treatment.

The Disability - Better Start for Children with Disability initiative
(Better Start) commenced on 1 July 2011, with additional items added to
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) for the early diagnosis and
creation of treatment plans for children with an eligible disability.
The MBS items for the program were grouped with the existing autism
items and additional allied health items were added for audiologist,
optometrist, orthoptist or physiotherapist to assist in diagnosis and
treatment.

The list of eligible conditions for Better Start was expanded on 1
January 2013, and again on 1 March 2014.

Patient eligibility

MBS items for assessment, diagnosis and the creation of a treatment and
management plan are available for a child under 13 years.

MBS items for allied health treatment are available for a child up to 15
years. The child must have had a treatment and management plan prepared
for them before their 13th birthday.

For HCWA the conditions classified as a pervasive development disorder
(PDD) should be informed by the American Psychiatric Association:
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

For Better Start eligible disabilities include:

Sight impairment in vision of less than or equal to 6/18 vision or
equivalent field loss, in the better eye with correction

Hearing impairment that results in:

-   Hearing loss of 40 decibels or greater in the better ear, across 4
    frequencies
-   Permanent conductive hearing loss and auditory neuropathy

Cerebral palsy

Down syndrome

Fragile X syndrome

Prader-Willi syndrome

Williams syndrome

Angelman syndrome

Kabuki syndrome

Smith-Magenis syndrome

CHARGE syndrome

Cornelia de Lange syndrome

Cri du Chat syndrome

Deafblindness, and

Microcephaly if a child has:

-   A head circumference less than the third percentile for age and sex,
    and
-   A functional level at or below 2 standard deviations below the mean
    for age on a standard developmental test, or an IQ score of less
    than 70 on a standardised test of intelligence

Rett’s disorder

Note: 'Standard development test' is explained in MBS note MN.10.1. The
Resources page contains a link.

General Practitioners (GP) services

GPs can provide the following services under Better Start:

-   Referral for allied health assessment
-   Assessment, diagnosis and development of a treatment and management
    plan
-   Review of treatment and management plan

Note: non-vocationally recognised medical practitioners (non-VR MPs) are
not eligible for Medicare benefits if they perform any service or refer
patients for allied health services under Better Start.

For a full list of item numbers, see Resources page for tables and the
Training and Support page for Health professional infographics.

Specialist and Consultant Physician services

Specialists and consultant physicians can provide the following services
under Better Start:

-   Referrals for allied health assessment items
-   Assessment and diagnosis and development of a treatment and
    management plan
-   Review of treatment and management plan

Paediatricians or psychiatrists can provide the following services under
the HCWA program:

-   Referrals for allied health assessment items
-   Assessment and diagnosis and development of a treatment and
    management plan
-   Review of treatment and management plan

For a full list of item numbers, see tables on the Resources page and
the Training and Support page for Health professional infographics.

Allied Health assessment and treatment services

Eligible allied health professionals can perform the following services
under either program:

-   Assessment services for assisting with diagnosis and contributing to
    the child’s treatment and management plan
-   treatment services

The following allied health professionals are eligible:

-   Psychologists
-   Speech pathologists
-   Occupational therapists
-   Audiologists, optometrists, orthoptists or physiotherapists

For a full list of item numbers, see tables on the Resources page and
the Training and Support page for Health professional infographics.

Restrictions, time dependencies and age limits

A child who has both autism or any other pervasive developmental
disorder and an eligible disability can access either HCWA or Better
Start but not both programs, as it is expected that the treatment and
management plan would address both conditions.

Better Start and HCWA services have age limits, time dependencies and
association rules.

See the Claiming limits and item association rules table on the
Resources page for more information.

Referral requirements

Specialists, consultant physicians and psychiatrists require patients to
have a valid specialist referral before providing early intervention
services.

There is no specific form to refer patients for allied health services
for the early intervention programs, and the referral can be a letter or
note signed and dated by the referring practitioner. A separate referral
should be provided for each allied health professional that the
referring practitioner allocates services to and also for each new
allied health course of treatment.

For the allied health treatment services a course of treatment consists
of the number of allied health services stated on the child's referral
(maximum of 10). This enables the referring practitioner to consider a
report from the allied health professional(s) about the services
provided to the child, and the need for further treatment.

Allied health professionals should retain the referral form for 2 years
from the last date of service (for auditing purposes). Records can be
kept in paper or electronic form. See the Resources page for information
about required record keeping.

Reporting requirements

When specialists, consultant physicians and psychiatrists develop a
treatment and management plan they are required to send a copy of the
plan to the initial referring medical practitioner.

Allied health professionals must provide a written report to the
referring medical practitioner after having provided the assessment and
diagnosis service(s) to the child or contributing to the treatment plan.

When providing treatment services the allied health professional must
provide a written report to the referring medical practitioner after
completing the treatment services specified in the referral (maximum of
10). The report should include information on:

-   treatment provided
-   recommendations on future management of the child's disorder or
    disability, and
-   any advice provided to third parties, for example parents, schools

Allied health multidisciplinary case conferences

Eligible allied health professionals can bill Medicare items for
participating in multidisciplinary case conferences with medical
practitioners.

The 3 time-tiered items apply to non-admitted patients under the age of
13 years for early diagnosis and treatment. They are for both Better
Start and HCWA.

Eligible allied health professionals:

-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practitioners
-   Aboriginal health workers
-   Audiologists
-   Mental health nurses
-   Mental health workers
-   Occupational therapists
-   Optometrists
-   Orthoptists
-   Physiotherapists
-   Psychologists
-   Speech pathologists

See Resources page for items and more information.

The Resources page contains tables matching items numbers with services
provided, links to Department of Health and Services Australia websites
for information on Better Start for Children with Disability initiative
and Helping Children with Autism program.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
