
Improved Monitoring of Enh1ments (IME) enquiry line 011-60010020

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about and telephone scripts for the
Improved Monitoring of Entitlements (IME) enquiry line.

Function of IME for pharmaceutical benefits enquiry line

The IME enquiry line can be used to get:

-   Confirmation of a patient’s entitlement to a pharmaceutical benefit
-   Medicare card details, and
-   concessional entitlement card details or a Department of Veterans'
    Affairs (DVA) file number for a patient who needs medicine
    subsidised by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

The IME enquiry line can be used by staff from:

-   Approved pharmacies
-   Public hospitals participating in the Australian Health Care
    Agreement pharmaceutical reforms

Note:

-   Services Australia is not able to confirm eligibility for Rapid
    Antigen Tests over the phone
-   Medicare card numbers can be provided over the phone for COVID-19
    vaccination purposes
-   Patients cannot request their own Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
    (PBS) Safety Net (SN) or other entitlement numbers via the IME
    enquiry line. If the patient has lost their SN card, they may
    request a replacement card by completing a PBS Safety Net
    replacement or supplementary card application (PB018) form and
    sending it to Services Australia, GPO Box 9826 in their capital
    city. See Resources for a link to the form

From 6 June 2021, pharmacies have access to the Find a Patient tile on
HPOS. Pharmacies can confirm Medicare card details, DVA and Centrelink
concessional entitlement eligibility through HPOS - Find a Patient.

Note: DVA and Centrelink concession card numbers will not be available
on HPOS – Find a Patient.

See Table 6 on the Resources page for the script to answer queries
regarding this change.

The IME enquiry line will still be available for approved pharmacies and
their staff members until 30 June 2022. From 1 July 2022, the IME
enquiry line will only be available for the following:

-   Hospital Accident and Emergency – for patients unable to provide
    Medicare details
-   A known outage within the HPOS system preventing pharmacies
    verifying customer details, including internet outages for
    pharmacies
-   DVA concession details
-   PBS Safety Net Concession and Entitlement card details

Limit to number of patient detail requests per call

Callers to the IME enquiry line can only request details of 2 individual
patients per call.

Exceptions

Pharmacies servicing nursing homes or residential care facilities, or
public hospitals participating in the Pharmaceutical Reform Agreements
can still make bulk requests.

However, callers will need to be called back using the phone number
recorded in the Pharmacy Approval System, to complete the request.

Note: do not release the recorded phone number. It is the responsibility
of the caller to ensure their contact information is up to date.

Service Officers are to make a single attempt to contact the
Pharmacy/Public Hospital using the phone number recorded in the Pharmacy
Approval System.

Information that cannot be released on IME enquiry line

Services Australia cannot, under any circumstances, release the date of
birth or address of a patient to a caller on the IME enquiry line. If
the date of birth is needed to verify the patient, request it from the
caller.

Do not provide information the caller has not requested. For example,
the caller asks for Medicare details and the Service Officer also
provides PBS Safety Net details.

Do not disclose/confirm the patient's date of birth or the address on
the IME enquiry line.

Information that can be released on IME enquiry line

Once a caller is successfully authenticated, the following information
can be released, if requested:

-   Medicare card number (ten digit number and the individual reference
    number) and expiry date
-   Centrelink concession card number and status (seemingly valid or
    ceased)
-   PBS Safety Net (SN) card number
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) file number and expiry date

A compromised consumer record Medicare card number can be released to a
pharmacy and a public hospital participating in the Pharmaceutical
Reform Agreements. Do not allow the caller several attempts to guess the
patient details. Remember: Ask don’t tell.

Patient consent

Consent is not valid unless the patient has been fully informed as to
why their personal details are being collected, and about other options
available for getting their details.

If a patient has given their permission to store and record their
details for the purpose of dispensing prescriptions, separate consent is
required to call the enquiry line. If pharmacy or hospital staff need to
call Services Australia to get the patient's details this would require
separate consent as it is for a different purpose.

In situations where an agent, such as a carer or family member, is
representing the patient and the pharmacy or hospital staff are
satisfied that the agent is acting on the patient's behalf, they can get
consent from that agent. For example, a wife collecting her husband's
prescription can provide consent for them to call the enquiry line and
get the patient’s Medicare number.

Only the staff who get the patient or agent’s consent can request the
patient’s details from Services Australia.

The enquiry line can only be used to get details that have been notified
as being incorrect in a Medicare/concessional entitlement report if they
have permission from the patient or agent to do so.

Suspected fraudulent calls

If a call is suspected to be fraudulent, get as much information as you
can to confirm the caller is genuine.

Do not provide any information until the authenticity of the caller has
been verified.

Remember, callers to the IME line may only be given entitlement
information (Medicare number, concession number, SN number, DVA number
or patient name).

In addition to the usual verification processes on the IME enquiry line,
a number of pharmacies must provide a unique code and password when they
contact the IME line. Those pharmacies must not be prompted to provide
the code and password. If a caller from an affected pharmacy does not
provide this information, tell the caller their identity cannot be
confirmed and end the call.

Service Officers managing the IME line can access details of the
affected pharmacies, their codes and passwords via the IME Team Leaders.

Do not disclose patient's personal information such as date of birth or
address.

To reduce the number of patient details inadvertently disclosed to
malicious callers during a call, callers can only request details of 2
individual patients each time they call the IME enquiry line. If the
caller has more than the 2 patient requests, tell the caller to call
back on the IME enquiry line. Do not place the caller back into the
queue. There are exceptions, for example a pharmacy servicing nursing
homes, or residential care facilities, or calls from a reformed public
hospital. These pharmacies need to tell the Service Officer they have a
bulk request. The Service Officer will call the pharmacy back using the
phone number recorded in the Pharmacy Approval System.

Fraudulent callers may use a number of different methods in an attempt
to access patient’s information from an operator on the IME line. For
example, the caller:

-   discloses incorrect patient information such as an incorrect date of
    birth. This is so the operator corrects the caller and discloses the
    actual date of birth
-   contacts to request a Medicare card number however, in the early
    stages of the call the caller actually provides the operator with
    the Medicare number. This is in an effort to have the operator
    disclose other personal information about the patient
-   indicates they are experiencing computer issues and asks the
    operator to repeat back patient information to them
-   indicates the patient has left the pharmacy and unable to verify
    details such as the date of birth with the patient
-   will enquire on more than one patient in an effort to confuse the
    operator into disclosing personal details of a patient
-   will often make multiple attempts in a short space of time on the
    same day
-   will often be aggressive and tell the operator they are going to
    complain about the poor service. This is again an attempt to confuse
    the operator into providing the details they are requesting, such as
    date of birth

The following mobile numbers have been associated with fraudulent
callers. The full numbers are blocked on the IME line.

-   0406 982 672
-   0406 982 xxx
-   0451 605 xxx
-   0414 161 173
-   0451 605 007
-   0401 849 458
-   0481 850 003
-   0431 216 436

Remember, where you suspect the call to be fraudulent, complete the
Report Suspected Fraud (RSF) form located on the intranet. Not all
fields on the RSF form need to be completed. Check with your leadership
group to confirm what needs to be completed.

See the Resources page for a link to the Report Suspected Fraud form.

The Resources page contains:

-   scripts for handling calls on the Improved Monitoring of
    Entitlements (IME) enquiry line
-   contact details for the PBS Helpdesk and PBS Programme Support
    Officers (PSO)
-   a link to contact telephone numbers on Services Australia website
-   FAQs
-   scripts for Find a Patient on HPOS enquiries
-   advice when a patient is listed on 2 Medicare cards
-   links to forms
-   'Ask don't tell' infographic

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
