
Process a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient refund 011-60020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for processing a patient refund for
the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

PBS patient refunds received at service centres

If a patient or claimant does not present a valid concession or Medicare
card at the time of dispensing, they can present their PBS Patient
refund claim at a Services Australia service centre. A patient refund
can be processed over the counter only if a Service Officer proficient
in processing patient refunds is present. Patient refund claims
processed at a service centre are archived as per service centre
guidelines and are not loaded to the Workload Management tool (WLM).

PBS patient refund claims which are not actioned at the service centre
are scanned into the WLM for processing.

In the event a patient or claimant contacts the PBS general enquiry line
to enquire on a claim completed in a service centre, Service Officers
should advise that the claim cannot be accessed on the system as it has
been archived at the service centre. Service Officers should escalate
this enquiry to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) who can arrange for
the claim to be recalled from archives.

Important information about processing refunds for exceeding the 2022 PBS Safety Net thresholds

In March 2022, a federal budget measure was announced to lower the PBS
Safety Net thresholds effective from 1 July 2022. As thresholds have
never been updated part way through a calendar year, this means that 2
thresholds are in effect during 2022. As the lowered threshold is only
effective from 1 July, it cannot be reached before this, and patient
refunds are not payable for the difference between the higher and lower
thresholds.

For PBS Safety Net and PBS Patient Refunds, this means:

Patients only need to meet the threshold once in a calendar year

Patients who reach the old threshold before 1 July have already
qualified for the PBS Safety Net and will continue to receive the
scripts at the Safety Net price

-   As the new threshold was not active when the prescriptions were
    dispensed, patient refunds do not apply and are not payable
-   Patients are still able to apply for a refund for items that have
    exceeded the old thresholds

For patients who reach the new threshold before 1 July but not the old
threshold, it is the first script they have dispensed from 1 July that
is considered the date they reached the threshold. This script is also
the first one that can be supplied at the Safety Net price and therefore
the first script that can be refunded in an over the threshold refund

As the lower thresholds are only effective from 1 July 2022, they cannot
be retrospectively applied. Refunds will not be payable for any items
that exceeded the lower thresholds before 1 July 2022.

Reject refund claims where the patient reached the old threshold before
1 July and is requesting a refund down to the lower threshold. For this
type of claim, only items that exceed the old threshold can be refunded.

A patient may not be entitled to a PBS patient refund when information is not available

A patient can present a concession or Medicare card that appears valid
but the patient's entitlement may not be current at date of supply. In
this case, the pharmacist can charge the patient the general rate or
full private price for their medicine.

Once Services Australia verifies the patient's concession entitlement
period, a patient refund can be made.

Note: Services Australia can only process a patient refund if the
patient has a valid Medicare card. If the patient only has a DVA card,
return the claim to the patient or claimant with a Z1680 Your PBS item
refund is not payable letter.

PBS patient refund for CTG co-payment

Information concerning refunds for prescriptions dispensed prior to 1
July 2021

From 1 July 2010, eligible patients can claim a patient refund for
closing the gap (CTG) co-payment relief. For information on eligibility
and who can annotate a PBS prescription, see Closing the Gap (CTG)
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Co-payment Measure.

To write the CTG annotation, the prescriber must be registered to
prescribe under the measure as part of either the Indigenous Heath
Incentive (IHI) or a Practice Incentives Program (PIP) practice.

A prescription endorsed with CTG enables a pharmacist to dispense the
medication at a lower rate, for example, general patients with a CTG
prescription are charged the concession rate and concessional patients
with a CTG prescription receive the medication for free.

A patient is entitled to receive a patient refund for CTG co-payment
relief when, at the time of supply by a pharmacist, the patient:

-   was unable to establish their level of entitlement, or
-   had exceeded the threshold limit before a safety net entitlement or
    concession card was issued

To claim a patient refund for CTG co-payment relief from Services
Australia, the patient must present proof of entitlement with a Patient
claim for refund Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) form (PB132) and
attach:

-   a valid pharmacy receipt with a CTG annotation such as a 6 digit
    code commencing with the letters CTG; or
-   a letter from the prescriber (on the practice letterhead) confirming
    the patient is eligible for CTG and the prescription details
    including, medicine name, quantity and date, supplied to the patient
    under the CTG co-payment measure. Pharmacists or patients cannot
    provide endorsement on the prescriber’s behalf

Note: for manually annotated prescriptions, the manual code CTG00B must
be keyed into the CTG field.

PSOs will escalate CTG claims to National Office, when supporting
documents are not provided and will check the patient’s eligibility
before requesting for more information is made. If the person was
registered at the time of the script being dispensed complete the Z1682
More information is needed for your PBS item refund letter. If the
person is confirmed not to be registered complete the Z1680 Your PBS
item refund is not payable letter.

Information for Refunds post 1 July 2021

From 1 July 2021 a patient’s registration for the CTG PBS Co-payment
program will be stored on their Medicare record in the Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS). From 1 July 2021, there is no
longer a legal requirement to write or electronically print ‘CTG’ on
eligible PBS prescriptions for registered Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people. However, annotation of a PBS prescription is encouraged
to help community pharmacists, when dispensing medicines, to know that
the patient is registered for the program. A script will not need to be
annotated to receive a patient refund. Any eligible script that was not
dispensed as CTG for a CTG registered patient can receive a refund.

Note: a patient must be registered for CTG in HPOS to receive the CTG
benefit.

Services Australia staff have access to view a patient’s CTG status and
registration history in CDMS.

A patient is entitled to receive a patient refund for CTG co-payment
relief when, at the time of supply by a pharmacist, the patient:

-   was actively registered for CTG PBS Co-payment measure in CDMS;
-   had exceeded the threshold limit before a safety net entitlement or
    concession card was issued

To claim a patient refund for CTG co-payment relief from Services
Australia, the patient must supply:

-   a Patient claim for refund Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) form
    (PB132) and
-   a valid dated, pharmacy receipt

The PBS Safety Net and thresholds

The PBS Safety Net reduces the cost of prescription medicines for
individuals and families once the PBS Safety Net threshold is reached in
a calendar year.

PBS Safety Net rates

There are 2 PBS Safety Net thresholds - General and Concession. The
thresholds are updated each year on 1 January. See PBS Safety Net
processing and enquiries for the Current Patient Contributions and PBS
Safety Net Thresholds table containing annual rates.

For more information on the PBS safety net see Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and enquiries

PBS patient refund for over the safety net threshold

Responsibility for claiming entitlements rests with the patient. When
items accumulated on a Prescription Record Form (PRF) exceeds the PBS
Safety Net threshold, Services Australia may refund the excess amount.

When a patient cannot satisfy a pharmacist they qualify for the PBS
safety net, they may be charged at the pre-Safety Net rate. The patient
can apply to Services Australia for a refund covering the cost
difference.

The agency can only pay refunds for PBS items supplied through approved
suppliers. Refunds for non-PBS hospital-supplied items should be
referred to the relevant State or Territory hospital or health
department.

Note: for refunds outside the current Safety Net year, where a Safety
Net card is not issued, contact a Programme Support Officer to source a
valid SN/CN number to issue.

Closing the Gap (CTG) PBS Co-payment Measure and PBS Safety Net

The measure does not change the operation of the PBS Safety Net for
participating patients or their families. The amount that can be added
towards a family's Safety Net tally for each CTG prescription is the
same amount that would have been added in the absence of the measure.

For example, a CTG eligible patient has a prescription dispensed under
the concessional benefit. Without CTG it would cost them $6.80, the CTG
means they pay $0.00. Their PRF will show as if they had paid $6.80
towards the PBS Safety Net.

See Closing the Gap (CTG) Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
Co-payment Measure for participating patient scenarios, and a link to
the CTG PBS Co-payment Measure Pharmacy Staff Resource booklet.

Required documents for over the PBS Safety Net threshold patient refunds

A claim for an over the threshold patient refund must include the
following documents:

-   A Patient claim for refund Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) form
    (PB132). This must be signed and dated by the claimant
-   A prescription record form (PRF) or other documentation supplying
    all relevant details. For example, pharmacy invoices or receipts
    such as an s87A receipt. Tax statements or patient history
    documentation must be certified by the pharmacy as paid in full.
-   Evidence the safety net threshold was met, if the patient did not
    previously apply

Note: till receipts or carbon copy receipts cannot be accepted, and must
be rejected.

If a Safety Net card is processed and the supporting documentation
indicates the claim is for items dispensed after the threshold was
reached, the refund can be processed. Services Australia does not need
additional proof that the patient has met the threshold. If these
documents were not included with the refund application, send a Z1682
'We need more information to refund your PBS claim' letter to the
claimant. If the claim includes items dispensed prior to the threshold,
the claimant is responsible for providing evidence the items were not
included in the calculation to meet the threshold.

PBS Safety net data not recorded and over the threshold refund received

If the over the threshold refund is for items supplied in the current
Safety Net year and the Safety Net entitlement details have not been
received from the pharmacy, or the Safety Net number is not recorded on
the claim form, Service Officers should pend the claim in the Workload
Management tool (WLM) for 14 days from the date originally allocated by
the WLM (not the date the claim was received). Claims should be pended
in the WLM with a future release date of 14 days with a note added to
the file to explain the reason for pending the claim.

When the Safety Net data is:

-   received and keyed within the following 14 days, the refund is
    processed
-   not received within the 14 days, the refund is returned to the
    claimant with a Z1682 'We need more information to refund your PBS
    claim' letter
-   received and not keyed within the following 14 days, the refund
    should be pended for another 14 days

If the over the threshold refund is for items supplied in a previous
Safety Net year and no Safety Net entitlement details have been recorded
the refund claim should not be pended for this reason. Contact a
Programme Support Officer to have a spare Safety Net number provided to
enabling processing of the refund claim.

Establish entitlement eligibility and identify patient

To process a claim, the Service Officer must verify that the Medicare
number provided is for the patient who was supplied the item, and that
the number was current on the date of supply.

Patients eligible for the Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) should
provide evidence of their eligibility for example, a Medicare number if
enrolled or a copy of passport. Escalate to a Programme Support Officer
for further assistance.

The Service Officer must also verify the entitlement ID quoted on the
patient refund claim. Where no details are held in PBS eligibility
records, and the documentation states the entitlement was current on the
date of supply (for example, a letter from Centrelink), escalate the
details to the PBS Helpdesk. The PBS Helpdesk confirms validity of
entitlement and arranges for the PBS eligibility records to be updated
if appropriate.

Where the patient's entitlement is not valid, do not key the claim.
Refer the claimant to the agency that issued the card. Use the Z1682 We
need more information to refund your PBS claim letter.

Safety Net Checker and refunds

The Safety Net checker is used to perform eligibility and threshold
assessments of all PBS Safety Net applications. The checker can also
generate a ‘script list’ displaying all prescriptions showing in a
patient’s dispensing history. While the primary function of the checker
is for assessment Safety Net claims, this ‘script list’ can also be used
to check the details of an item in a refund claim.

The checker displays the details of the prescriptions supplied and this
is extracted from PBS Online claims. Information included in the checker
include the payment category. Medicare and concession numbers, item
code, quantity and more.

The checker can be used to confirm the details if there is any doubt
about the details on the pharmacy receipt. For example, there can be
items that were supplied as concession that include a brand premium
which is not refundable. The receipt shows the total amount the patient
paid including the premium. As the amount will be over the concessional
co-payment amount it may appear to be a general amount.

See PBS Safety Net Claims System (SNCS).

Quality of patient data

The details of concession entitlements held in the PBS system in
relation to patients, are not always complete. Services Australia may be
waiting to receive information, confirming entitlement to receive PBS
medication at a reduced rate.

Where no details are held in the PBS eligibility records, and the
documentation states the entitlement was current on the date of supply,
the Service Officer should escalate the details to the PBS Helpdesk. The
PBS Helpdesk confirms validity of entitlement and arranges for the PBS
eligibility records to be updated when appropriate.

Error with Medicare number or entitlement ID after date of supply keyed

If an error occurs with the keyed Medicare number or entitlement ID for
the patient, the Service Officer must investigate the problem and
resolve the error.

There can be a problem with the Medicare number or entitlement ID in the
following situations:

-   card reported stolen on the date of supply
-   card reported lost on the date of supply
-   card issue number expired, and not valid on the date of supply
-   patient transferred from card prior to date of supply
-   patient entitlement ceased, and not valid on date of supply

The Service Officer should use the Entitlement Search facility on the
RPQN screen to determine the correct Medicare or Concession number on
the date the item was supplied.

If unable to resolve, escalate to a Programme Support Officer.

The Process page contains more information.

Reject a claim

Before starting a claim in the system, Service Officers should ensure
the following information is provided:

-   A fully completed Patient claim for refund Pharmaceutical Benefits
    Scheme (PBS) form (PB132)
-   Supporting documentation such as a prescription record forms,
    receipts or invoices
-   Correct bank account details stored on the Medicare system

Claims missing any of the above information are not keyed and returned
to the claimant with a Z1682 More information PBS refund rejection
letter.

If a claim is registered in Mainframe prior to detecting missing
information, it should be deleted.

If a claim is to be rejected, due to any reason, for example, private
items or already paid, a processing note needs to be entered in the WLM
advising why the rejection is necessary and a copy of the letter saved
against the file. Do not key rejected items in Mainframe.

The Process page contains a table describing how to delete a claim.

Claims with paid and unpaid items

Where a claim contains multiple items and not all items can be paid:

-   The items that can be paid are actioned
-   A processing note is added to the WLM to indicate which items were
    rejected and why
-   The paperwork for the rejected items is not returned to the patient
    unless requested
-   A letter is not sent to the patient unless every item is rejected

If a claimant calls requesting the return of their documentation, print
a copy from the WLM file and post them to the claimant’s mailing
address. Include a ‘with compliments’ slip as a letter is not required.

PBS Joint Safety Net arrangements for Reform and Non Reform States

The PBS Safety Net threshold may be reached using prescriptions filled
at both community pharmacies and out-patient pharmacies at public
hospitals. This arrangement is called the Joint Safety Net arrangement.

The amount charged under the Joint Safety Net arrangements by public
hospitals is determined by the relevant State and Territory. Although
these medicines may not be dispensed as a PBS item, they can still count
towards a customer’s total spending for the PBS Safety Net.

Non-reformed States, ACT and NSW, have a hospital formulary which
contains non-PBS/Private items. For the purpose of PBS Safety Net,
non-PBS/Private items can also count towards the PBS Safety Net
threshold, as long as the drug is approved by the hospital therapeutic
committee and the relevant State/Territory Health departments.

Note: these items are not eligible to be refunded if the patient has
gone over the threshold. The reason a patient refund does not apply in
this situation is that the Commonwealth did not provide a subsidy to the
Non-PBS/Private item. The item was paid for by the patient or funded by
the State/Territory entirely.

The Resources page has additional information on rules to apply when
processing a patient refund for reform and non-reform states.

For more information, see Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety
Net processing and enquiries.

Error messages

The Resources page contains information relating to error message
resolution.

The Resources page contains letters and common scenarios, tables with
explanations of form fields, error message resolutions, and information
on Processing PBS patient refunds for Reform and Non Reform States.

Related links

Making an enquiry on a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient
refund claim

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and enquiries

PBS Safety Net Claims system (SNCS)

Repatriation Benefits card (RPBC) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme

Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer (PSO)

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised
Representative for Medicare

Medicare claims for deceased persons

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
