
Verify an Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 011-03010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to verify an IHI in the HI Service.

On this Page:

IHI verification process - features and restrictions

A search must be performed for an unverified IHI based on demographic
data or the IHI provided by the individual.

Where the previous record was a provisional IHI, the search must be
conducted on the IHI only.

If an exact match is:

-   found, the verification process may continue
-   not found, the search criteria must be refined

The verification process:

-   can occur on an unverified or provisional IHI
-   must be performed by a Service Officer

For an individual who is unable to attend a Service Centre, certified
copies of supporting documentation may be sent via mail.

Where an unverified IHI has a retired or expired status, and it is
determined that this has been applied in error, the reinstate process
must occur prior to any other action being undertaken.

Evidence of identity

An evidence of identity (EOI) check is conducted to ensure the
individual's IHI can be verified.

See also: Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Remove verification

When an IHI has been verified in error the HI Service provides the
ability to restore the IHI to an unverified status.

In order to remove verification, the documents used to verify the IHI
must be removed.

Removing the documents automatically restores the IHI to its previous
status prior to the incorrect record verification occurring.

Verify an IHI

The verify IHI process needs the individual to present 1 primary
document or 2 secondary documents as specified in the Evidence of
identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service documentation.

This may occur for an individual who:

-   is not enrolled in Medicare, has had an unverified IHI created at a
    healthcare event and subsequently requests for their IHI to be
    verified
-   has an unverified IHI and is enrolling in Medicare

Note: individuals who are unable to attend a Service Centre can have
their IHI verified when certified supporting documentation is received
via mail or fax.

Related links

Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Reinstate Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
