
Medicare Safety Net thresholds 011-43080100

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Resources

This document outlines details of the Medicare Safety Net thresholds and
how they apply when met or not met by families or individuals.

Thresholds for Medicare Safety Net

A Safety Net threshold is a dollar amount that an individual or a
registered family must reach in eligible out-of-pocket medical costs
before they become entitled to receive Safety Net benefits.

These thresholds vary if the:

-   person is an individual (single) or part of a family not receiving a
    commonwealth concession or Family Tax Benefit part A, or
-   individual or family receives a Commonwealth concession or Family
    Tax Benefit Part A entitlement

See also: Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net.

There are 4 components of the Medicare Safety Net and threshold amounts
are indexed annually from 1 January:

-   Original (Gap) for all Medicare card holders, is the difference
    between the benefit paid and the schedule fee. This amount
    accumulates towards the threshold. When the threshold is reached
    Medicare benefits are payable at 100% of the schedule fee for
    out-of-hospital services
-   Extended Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for families eligible for FTB Part
    A is the difference between the charge and the benefit paid
    (out-of-pocket expenses (OOP)) for out-of-hospital services. This
    amount accumulates towards the threshold. When the threshold is
    reached Medicare benefits are payable at 80% of the OOP expenses or
    the benefit cap, whichever is the lesser amount. See also: Family
    Tax Benefit Part A in Medicare Safety Net
-   Extended Concessional for Commonwealth concession card holders is
    the difference between the charge and the benefit paid (OOP) for
    out-of-hospital services. This amount accumulates towards the
    threshold. When the threshold is reached Medicare benefits are
    payable at 80% of the OOP expenses or the benefit cap, whichever is
    the lesser amount. See also: Concessional Safety Net (CSN) threshold
    for Medicare
-   Extended General for all Medicare card holders is the difference
    between the charge and the benefit paid (OOP) for out-of-hospital
    services. This amount accumulates towards the threshold. When the
    threshold is reached Medicare benefits are payable at 80% of the OOP
    expenses or the benefit cap, whichever is the lesser amount
-   Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) Benefit Cap - EMSN benefit
    capping means that for some Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items,
    there is a maximum amount of EMSN benefits payable, regardless of
    the fee charged by the doctor. See also: Extended Medicare Safety
    Net (EMSN)

The Resources page contains a table that lists the Medicare Safety Net
threshold amounts.

Safety Net threshold

When the eligible out-of-hospital services reach the Safety Net
threshold for that year (family or individual), and for families their
composition has been confirmed, the Medicare benefits are increased.
This may vary for reaching the Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
concessional threshold, refer to Family Tax Benefit Part A in Medicare
Safety Net for more information on FTB A concessional threshold.

This applies to individuals or families who are registered in a family
Safety Net and the total gap amounts and the total out-of-pocket (OOP)
expenses paid during a calendar year for eligible out-of-hospital
services reach the Safety Net threshold for that year (family or
individual). When the eligible threshold is met Medicare benefits are
increased depending on which threshold has been reached.

For the original Safety Net, benefits will increase to 100% of the
schedule fee and for the Concessional Safety Net (CSN), Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) Part A and Extended General Medicare Safety Net (EMSN)
benefits will increase to include 80% of the OOP expenses or the EMSN
benefit cap.

All claims lodged after the date of a family registration will
contribute towards the threshold, however a family composition must be
confirmed before higher benefits will be paid. Once the threshold has
been reached and the family is confirmed, higher benefits will be paid
for all members of the registered family for the rest of the calendar
year (this may vary for FTB A concessional, refer to Family Tax Benefit
Part A in Medicare Safety Net).

If the family is not confirmed, all members are treated as individuals
for Safety Net purposes.

When a registered family’s OOP expenses are equal to or greater than 70%
of the threshold, the family contact (FC) gets a letter (Letter F) that
tells them to confirm the family composition. This occurs each calendar
year.

If the FC has electronic messaging, a message is sent to their myGov
inbox. See: Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety
Net > Medicare Safety Net confirmation.

All out-of-hospital services with a date of service before and after the
date of registration will be counted towards the threshold amount,
however no additional benefits are paid for services performed prior to
the family registration date. Individuals do not have to register for
the Medicare Safety Net and out of pocket expenses for out-of-hospital
services processed will automatically contribute to the relevant
threshold.

View Medicare Safety Net balance online

[] Customers registered as an individual, or as the family contact (FC)
or spouse/partner (SP) of a Medicare Safety Net family can view their
Medicare Safety Net balance using their Medicare online account.

See: Using Medicare self service.

Changes before threshold has been reached

A person who leaves a registered family and has a Safety Net amount in
their own right will take this amount with them to their individual
safety net.

If a person transfers from one registered family to another registered
family prior to family confirmation, they take their individual Safety
Net amount with them. This amount is then deducted from the first
registered family Safety Net amount and added to the new registered
family Safety Net amount.

If a family Safety Net composition has been confirmed a person cannot
leave the family safety net until the next calendar year. A person can
only leave a family Safety Net providing the family Safety Net
composition has not been confirmed.

For example, a person who leaves a registered family with an individual
Safety Net amount of $100 will take a Safety Net amount of $100 with
them and this $100 will be deducted from the accumulation of the family
being left.

Reaching Safety Net threshold

Where a claim is processed that will take an individual or family over
any of the eligible Safety Net thresholds, the system will automatically
calculate and pay the additional benefit under the Safety Net for
individual or a confirmed family.

Reaching Concessional or FTB A Safety Net thresholds

Where a claim is processed that will take an individual or family over,
or near the current threshold, the system checks for the entitlement
status to determine whether the individual or family is eligible for the
Concessional Safety Net (CSN) or Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A Safety
Net. Medicare receives entitlement information from Centrelink.

Entitlement status confirmed

If the system has registered a concessional or FTB Part A entitlement
status and the family is confirmed and the claim has been assessed, the
system will automatically calculate and pay the additional benefit under
the Concessional or FTB Part A Safety Net.

Entitlement status not confirmed

If the system does not have registered a concessional or FTB Part A
entitlement status, the system will continue to accumulate the OOP
expenses to the Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) threshold amount.

Reaching the Gap Safety Net threshold

Where an individual or registered family reaches the current threshold
for out-of-hospital services, except GP services, the standard Medicare
benefit will increase from 85% to 100% of the schedule fee for the
remainder of the calendar year.

The system sends a confirmation letter to families when their gap amount
is equal to 70% of the threshold.

Reaching the EMSN threshold

When out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses reach the current threshold amount for
an individual or family who is not entitled to the Concessional Safety
Net (CSN) or Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A Safety Net, the individual
or family will be entitled to additional benefits under the Extended
Medicare Safety Net (EMSN).

The Resources page has:

-   details of amounts payable for out-of-pocket expenses
-   Medicare Safety Net letters for individuals and families
-   links to Medicare Safety Net information on the Services Australia
    website, and
-   the Medicare Safety Net user guide to Inquire on Medicare Card
    Number

Related links

Medicare Safety Net

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Verify services for Medicare Safety Net

Family Tax Benefit Part A in Medicare Safety Net

Concessional Safety Net (CSN) threshold for Medicare

Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN)

Medicare Safety Net letters

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
