
Treatment and management plans for eating disorders (including anorexia nervosa) 011-19101507

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

This document outlines the treatment plans and services available for
patients with eating disorders.

Information for health professionals

The Services Australia Website has an education guide for health
professionals about treatment and management plans for eating disorders.

Health professionals can access the page by searching for ‘eating
disorders’ on the Services Australia Website or navigating to the Health
Professional Education Guides section.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website.

Overview of eating disorder treatment and management plans

From 1 November 2019, Medicare items for the treatment and management of
anorexia nervosa and other severe eating disorders are available to
increase support for patients requiring more intensive assistance.

Eating disorder treatment and management plan items allow patients to:

-   have a treatment and management plan created by their usual medical
    practitioner (more information about health professional eligibility
    is below)
-   access up to 40 eating disorder psychological treatment services
    (subject to reviews being undertaken)
-   access up to 20 eating disorder dietetic services

Access to Medicare benefits for these items depend on patient
eligibility and health professional registration with Medicare.

Determining patient eligibility

Health professionals can check patient eligibility for Medicare benefits
through the MBS Items Online Checker in HPOS.

See Process page for more information.

Eligible conditions

Patients are considered clinically eligible for an eating disorder
treatment and management plan when they have been diagnosed with:

-   anorexia nervosa
-   bulimia nervosa and meet the other eligibility criteria
-   binge-eating disorder and meet the other eligibility criteria, or
-   other feeding or eating disorder and meet other eligibility criteria

Health professionals do not need to provide information about a
patient’s diagnosis when submitting claims to Medicare.

More information about clinical eligibility criteria can be found in the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items and explanatory notes. The
Resources page contains a link to the MBS.

Eating disorder plans with other treatment and management plans (CDM, Better Access)

Most patients will only have 1 care plan in place. A patient can have an
eating disorder plan as well as a:

-   chronic disease management plan
-   mental health treatment plan

There are no restrictions between plan items, but health professionals
may be subject to post-payment audits to ensure they are claiming
Medicare benefits appropriately.

Treatment services under other care plans count towards the total
services the patient can have under their eating disorder treatment and
management plan (EDP) including:

Chronic Disease Management plan

-   Dietetic treatment services (item 10954)

GP Mental health treatment plan

-   all services under the Better Access Initiative

The link to the infographic Eligibility for treatment services can be
found on the Resources page. This contains a list of the item numbers.

Note: the COVID-19 pandemic support additional psychological treatment
services announced in the 9 October 2020 budget measure do not count
towards eating disorder psychological treatment service limits.

See Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare and Mental health
treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access Initiative) for
more information.

Who can prepare treatment and management plans

The following health professionals can prepare treatment and management
plans for eating disorders:

-   Medical practitioners working in general practice
-   Consultant Psychiatrists
-   Consultant Paediatricians

Prepare treatment and management plans

Health professionals should be directed to MBS Online if they have
questions about what needs to be included in a treatment and management
plan.

Health professionals do not need to provide a copy of a treatment and
management plan when claiming Medicare benefits.

Health professionals can access the full item descriptions and
explanatory notes in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS). The Resources
page has a link to MBS Online.

Allied health services under a treatment and management plan

Health professionals eligible to provide services under an eating
disorder treatment and management plan are:

-   Medical practitioners (including GPs) registered with Medicare to
    provide focussed psychological strategy (FPS) services
-   Eligible clinical psychologists
-   Eligible registered psychologists
-   Eligible occupational therapists
-   Eligible social workers
-   Eligible dietitians

Claiming treatment and management plan items for eating disorders

The eating disorder treatment and management plan education guide on the
Services Australia website has a list of health professionals and which
items they can claim.

Service Officers can also check QITI to see which health professionals
can claim these items.

See QITI assessing information system for more information on item
restrictions. Note: assessing information in QITI cannot be released
externally.

The Resources page contains a link to the Education guide - Eating
disorder treatment and management plans.

Restrictions

Some items for eating disorder treatment plans and psychological
treatment services restrict with some other MBS attendance items.
Service Officers can use QITI and the MBS items and explanatory notes to
check restrictions for particular eating disorder treatment or planning
items.

See QITI assessing information system for more information on item
restrictions.

Referral requirements

Patients must have a valid referral to access Medicare benefits for
allied health services as part of an eating disorder treatment and
management plan.

Referrals can be issued by general practitioners, medical practitioners,
consultant psychiatrists and consultant paediatricians for psychological
treatment and allied health dietetic services.

A referral can be made for:

-   up to 10 psychological treatment services
-   up to 20 dietetic allied health services

Additional referrals can be made for patients who require further
treatment after reviews of the treatment and management plan. The
Resources page has an infographic about the review process and number of
treatment services.

The following information is for internal use only and cannot be
released externally:

Patients do not need to have a review item on their Medicare claims
history to claim more than 10 psychological treatment services.

Note: patients are only eligible for up to 40 psychological treatment
services and 20 allied health dietetic services under their plan,
regardless of how many are stated on the referral.

Treatment services provided under a Mental Health Treatment or Chronic
Disease Management plan may have different referral requirements. See
Resources page for Infographic - eligibility for treatment services.

For more information about referrals for Medicare see Referrals for
assessing in Medicare.

Claiming limits

A patient may be eligible for up to 40 psychological treatment and 20
dietetic services under their eating disorder plan.

The following information is for internal use only:

Item association rule:

A paid Eating Disorder Plan (EDP) item must be on the patient’s history
in the last 12 months to claim treatment services. Once the plan
expires, a patient will need a new plan to continue accessing treatment.

Time dependency rule:

There is no time dependency rule for eating disorder treatment services.
Health professionals may be subject to post-payment audits by the
Department of Health and should ensure they are claiming Medicare
benefits appropriately.

Time dependency rules may apply to Chronic Disease Management or Better
Access treatment services.

The Resources page contains MBS planning, review and treatment items, a
common enquiries quick reference table, external links, and infographics
for the treatment and management plan review and renewal process and
eligibility for treatment services.

Related links

Referrals for assessing in Medicare

QITI assessing information system

Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative)

Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
