
General information for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers about the date
of injury or illness and recording case notes for Medicare Compensation
Recovery cases.

Date and nature of injury or illness for Medicare Compensation Recovery cases

Services Australia recovers eligible Medicare and nursing home benefits,
residential care subsidies and home care costs in relation to a
compensable injury or illness from the date of injury or illness to:

-   the date of judgment or settlement where the total amount of
    compensation fixed (including legal costs) is more than $5,000, or
-   the date a reimbursement arrangement is made, if the arrangement was
    made more than 6 months after the date the claim for compensation
    was lodged by the injured person

Notification of the date and nature of injury or illness is provided by
the:

-   compensation payer or the solicitor acting on their behalf
-   injured person (or claimant) or the solicitor acting on their behalf
-   Public Trustee or person holding Power of Attorney acting on behalf
    of the injured person

The date of and nature of injury or illness must be provided in writing
at the first notification for the agency to register a case on the
Compensation Case Management System. Notification can be provided to the
agency by completing and lodging a:

-   Medicare Compensation Recovery Medicare history statement request
    form (MO026)
-   Medicare Compensation Recovery Notice of reimbursement arrangement
    form (MO027)
-   Medicare Compensation Recovery Notice of judgment or settlement form
    (MO022), or
-   request in writing in any other document provided the required
    information is supplied

The nature of the injury or illness can be basic description if it
adequately informs of the injury sustained. For example:

-   whiplash
-   upper or lower extremity (left or right not required)
-   psychiatric
-   psychological

Note: an accident description is not acceptable, as it does not indicate
the injury (hit by car, slip and fall, fell off ladder).

See Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims.

The Resources page contains a link to the forms.

Change to the date of injury or illness

The relevant date of injury or illness may change over the life of a
compensation case for various reasons:

-   The injury is taken to have been caused by an incident earlier than
    originally thought
-   The parties agree that the injury is due to the nature and
    conditions of the injured person’s employment and decide on an
    earlier date to encompass the whole period
-   Various injuries or incidents are added or removed from the scope of
    the claim (either by agreement or by determination of a tribunal or
    similar body), or
-   The initial date notified to Services Australia was incorrect and
    the error has been identified

Often the first notification Services Australia receives regarding a
change to the date of injury or illness will be on the Medicare
Compensation Recovery Notice of judgment or settlement (MO022) form, but
advice may also be received before then.

Any change to a date of injury or illness for a registered compensation
case must be submitted in writing.

Generally a new case must be registered as the date of injury or illness
cannot be changed on the Compensation Case Management System (CCMS) for
an existing case, however consider the circumstances of the case. As
Medicare did not commence until 1 February 1984, changes to the date of
injury where both dates are prior to 1 February 1984 will have no effect
on the services generated on the Medicare history statement.

Register a new case unless all apply:

the notice of judgment or settlement advises of a new date of injury or
illness

there is enough indication that, apart from the different date of
injury, the notice is for the same claim

there is a current notice of past benefits at the date of judgment or
settlement

the compensation payer has paid the notice of past benefits amount (or
indicated it intends to do so), and

the new date of injury or illness

-   is later than the date currently registered on CCMS, or
-   both the old and new dates of injury are prior to 1 February 1984

Where a decision is made to retain the existing registered case, the
documents can be matched to the case. If the notice of past benefits
includes services before the new date of injury a post settlement
amendment may be required.

Cases outside the above situations should be discussed with a Programme
Support Officer or Team Leader for a decision.

A decision should be made based on the circumstances of each case
including:

-   the nature of the injury or illness
-   potential timeframes and
-   level of risk of unidentified services

If unsure, escalate the case to Programme Management.

See:

-   Amended notices and reviews for Medicare Compensation Recovery.
-   Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims.

The Resources page contains a link to the forms.

Advice for compensation payers in determining the date of injury or illness

The date of the injury or illness depends on the type of compensation
claim being made by the injured person and the nature of the injury,
illness, disease or condition reported. Compensation claims lodged
against compensation payers can include claims for:

-   workers compensation
-   motor vehicle accidents
-   public liability
-   product liability
-   common law
-   medical negligence
-   school accidents
-   sporting injuries
-   wrongful deaths (including malpractice)

If a compensation payer contacts Services Australia to clarify the
agency's position in relation to a notifiable date of injury or illness,
see the Resources page which contains information to assist with
providing advice about the notifiable date of injury or illness.

If a Service Officer requires further support to assist the compensation
payer, refer the case to a Programme Support Officer.

Date of injury or illness prior to 1 February 1984

Medicare was introduced to eligible Australian residents on 1 February
1984. When the date of injury or illness is prior to 1 February 1984, a
compensation case must be registered with the actual date of injury or
illness for example, 10 February 1970.

However, the Notice to claimant (Medicare history statement and
declaration form) will only list services for which a Medicare benefit
has been paid since 1 February 1984.

Date of injury and historic cases

While a specific date of injury or illness should be provided to the
agency, for historic abuse cases this may not be possible due to the
length of time involved (for example, historic abuse or psychological
cases). The date of injury or illness provided will often be provided as
only a year or a month and year, an approximate date or a date range.

If a form or notice is received by the agency to register a case for a
historic claim without a specific date of injury or illness, refer to
the Resources page as to how to register the date.

Case notes for Medicare Compensation Recovery cases

Purpose of case notes

Case notes are a public record of information created, sent and received
in the course of carrying out business on behalf of Services Australia.
Case notes are relied on by departmental staff working in:

-   Medicare Compensation Recovery
-   Compensation Finance
-   Debt Management Branch
-   Treasury
-   Accounting, and
-   Programme Management

They are used to make informed decisions on the next course of action
for a case. This is particularly important where the Programme Advice &
Privacy Branch (Legal Services Division), the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal, the Ombudsman or Minister are involved in a case.

Case notes are a free form text field in the:

-   Compensation Case Management System (CCMS)
-   Medicare mainframe screens and Systems
-   Applications & Products Financial Accounting (SAPFI)

When a case note is required

Record Case notes:

-   every time a case is viewed, accessed or processed even if no action
    is taken (the Compensation Case Management System audit trail shows
    when a case has been viewed/accessed)
-   following contact with an injured person, claimant or their
    solicitor or a compensation payer or their solicitor about a case
-   when advice is provided to another staff member about a case
-   when making a decision in relation to a case

Examples of when a case note must be recorded include:

-   Service Officer records a case note after talking to an injured
    person, claimant or their solicitor or a compensation payer or their
    solicitor about a case
-   Team Leader records a case note after viewing a case to provide
    feedback to a staff member
-   Service Officer and Team Leader each record a case note when a
    response is sent to or received from a Programme Support Officer or
    Programme Management for an escalation
-   Programme Management staff member records a case note explaining a
    decision about a case
-   Accounting Operations staff member records a case note in relation
    to a payment received and allocated or when debt recovery action is
    commenced

Structure of case notes

Case notes inform the reader of the status of a case and may be required
as evidence in court, to provide a true and accurate account of
decisions made.

Case notes must include:

-   a full and accurate record of work-related decisions and activities
-   details allowing others to easily understand when, how, where and
    why actions occurred and the decisions made
-   why the case was viewed, accessed or processed. Staff are only
    authorised to access personal information on customer records where
    they have a business need to do so. For more information see the
    References page for a link to the Australian Privacy Principle 11 of
    the Privacy Act 1988. The Resources page includes a link to the
    Privacy and Secrecy intranet page
-   actions and decisions made
-   reason/s why the action/decision was made, for example why a change
    of address was recorded or who authorised an action
-   requests for actions to be performed
-   instructions for future actions or decisions that are required
-   when, what and why information was requested or provided and by who
    and to whom
-   full name and details of the person spoken to during a telephone
    conversation, for example, solicitor’s name and solicitor’s firm
    name, family member’s name and relationship, compensation payer

Case notes should not include:

-   personal comments and opinions or information not related to a case
    as case notes may be requested for viewing by members of the public
    under certain provisions in the Freedom of Information Act 1982
-   acronyms and abbreviations unless they are approved

The Resources page contains links to the Standard Case Notes template,
General processing abbreviations and acronyms and the Privacy and
Secrecy intranet page.

The References page contains a link to the Privacy Act 1988 and Freedom
of Information Act 1982.

Recording case notes during system failure

If a system failure prevents the entry of case notes in the Compensation
Case Management System (CCMS), and

-   Medicare mainframe is available, record case notes in mainframe on
    the National Compensation Judgment Case Enquiry (NCJC) screen
-   there is a complete system failure, record case notes on a document
    which can be scanned to the case as backlog or matched to a manual
    file at a later date

See: Process Medicare Compensation Recovery cases.

The Resources page contains a link to the 'Case notes' - email template
and General processing abbreviations and acronyms.

The Resources page contains information to assist in determining the
notifiable date of injury or illness, links to contact details, forms
and the privacy and secrecy intranet page. It also contains general
processing abbreviations and acronyms and case notes template.

Contents

Medicare Compensation Recovery quality checking processing

Related Links

Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims

Process Medicare Compensation Recovery cases

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
