
Cosmetic and plastic surgery assessing rules in Medicare 011-42060070

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to cosmetic plastic surgery,
proposed plastic surgery and plastic and reconstructive surgery
assessing rules in Medicare. Plastic and reconstructive surgery item
numbers are found in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Group T8,
Surgical Operations Subgroup 13, Plastic and reconstructive surgery.

On this Page:

Cosmetic plastic surgery

Services performed for cosmetic reasons, such as face lifts, eye-lid
reductions, breast implants, tummy tucks, liposuction, nose jobs, or
hair transplants, do not attract Medicare benefits. However, benefits
are payable for certain procedures when performed for specific medical
reasons.

Where a claim for surgery performed for cosmetic reasons does not
attract a benefit, the benefit is not payable for the following:

-   assistance rendered at the operation
-   administration of the anaesthetic (including pre-operative
    examination)
-   initial or subsequent consultations relating entirely to assessment
    or discussion of cosmetic services

Services rendered prior to surgery, for example, consultation services,
only attract a Medicare benefit if that service meets the requirement of
being a clinically relevant service as defined in the Health Insurance
Act 1973.

It is the responsibility of the health professional to determine if a
service can be billed to Medicare, having regard to the clinical needs
of their patient and any provisions of relevant Commonwealth, State and
Territory laws.

The health professional must ensure that each service they bill Medicare
meets the MBS item descriptor and any eligibility requirements in full.

Plastic surgery services performed before 1 November 2018

Health professionals must apply to the Medicare Claims Review Panel
(MCRP) for approval of payment of Medicare benefits for designated
plastic surgery items where the date of service is before 1 November
2018. These services can be identified by the statement ‘where it can be
demonstrated’ in the item descriptor, see Medicare Claims Review Panel
(MCRP).

MBS items for plastic and reconstructive surgery

Services for plastic and reconstructive surgery that are clinically
relevant or for therapeutic purposes are found in the MBS Category 3,
Therapeutic Procedures, Group T8, Surgical Operations, Subgroup 13,
Plastic and reconstructive surgery. Item numbers in this subgroup
include, but are not limited to:

-   General plastic and reconstructive surgery
-   Skin flaps surgery
-   Free grafts
-   Other grafts and miscellaneous procedures
-   Oral and maxillofacial surgery

Skin grafts and local skin flaps

A skin graft is an operation in which a strip of skin is excised from
another area of the patient's body, or in some cases from another
person, for grafting to a wound or defect.

The excision of the skin from another area of the patient's body or from
the donor is covered by the benefit for the actual graft and does not
attract an additional benefit.

Elective dissection, in relation to grafts, refers to the preparation of
the skin at the site to which the graft is to be applied. For example,
debridement (removal of dead, infected or damaged tissue) and toilet
(cleaning) of the wound. It does not refer to the prior excision of a
lesion. Where there is prior removal of a tumour, cyst, etc., benefit is
also payable under the appropriate item for the tumour or cyst removal.

Items 45200 to 45207 cover skin flap repairs. Skin flap repairs are
commonly used to cover a deep or large open wound, or to repair damaged
skin.

More information about skin flaps can be found in Skin Services in the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Reduction of eyelids (45617 and 45620)

Items 45617 and 45620 are in Category 3, Therapeutic Procedures, Group
T8, and Surgical Operations, Subgroup 13, Plastic and Reconstructive,
Part 10 Operations of the MBS.

These items are for reduction of skin from the eyelids.

General assessing rules are:

-   if the procedure is performed on one eye for medical reasons,
    Medicare benefits will be payable for a service performed on the
    other eye to return balance to both sides
-   these items are payable twice on the same day if text is provided
    with the claim indicating left and right eye were both treated

The Resources page contains a link to MBS explanatory note TN.8.103 for
more information about items 45617 and 45620, as well as Frequently
Asked Questions (FAQ).

Reconstructive surgery for cleft lip and cleft palate

Items 45677 to 45713 are for plastic and reconstructive surgery for
cleft lip and cleft palate. Item numbers in this range can be billed
even if the patient is not a prescribed dental patient under the Cleft
Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme, but the health professional must ensure the
service meets the item descriptor and is a clinically relevant service.

More information about dental item numbers under the Cleft Lip and Cleft
Palate Scheme can be found in Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme in
Medicare.

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online and Frequently Asked
Questions (FAQ) about cosmetic surgery.

Related links

Therapeutic procedures assessing rules in Medicare

Skin services in the Medicare Benefits Schedule

Medicare Claims Review Panel (MCRP)

Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
