
Prescription Shopping Programme (PSP) 011-60030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Prescription Shopping Programme (PSP). The
aim of the PSP is to identify and limit the number of patients obtaining
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) subsidised medicines in excess of
medical need.

Information provided by the PSP

Services Australia administers the Prescription Shopping Programme (PSP)
on behalf of the Department of Health and Aged Care in accordance with
Section 24 of the Human Services (Medicare) Regulation 2017.

The PSP provides information to assist prescribers to:

-   make informed prescribing decisions
-   better manage the health outcomes of their patient

Services Australia may contact a prescriber when their patient is
suspected of obtaining PBS medicine in excess of medical need.

PSP criteria

The patient will be identified under the programme's criteria within the
most recent 3 month period, where that person has been supplied:

-   PBS items prescribed by 6 or more different prescribers (including
    nurse practitioners and midwives but excluding specialists and
    consultant physicians)
-   a total of 25 or more target PBS medicines, and/or
-   a total of 50 or more PBS items

Patient does not meet criteria

If the patient does not meet the above PSP criteria for the current
period then no further information can be provided. Patients can be
identified in 1 period and not in another period, so it is in the
interest of the prescriber to continue to phone the Prescription
Shopping Information Service (PSIS) about any patient of concern.

If the prescriber is concerned that their patient may be drug seeking
they should contact their state/territory health department for further
information on any legislative requirements and programmes available in
their state.

PSIS and prescribers

The Prescription Shopping information Service (PSIS) offers access to
information that can assist prescribers in managing patient's medicines
more effectively. The service is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week.

Prescribers must register to access the PSIS.

If the prescriber is PSIS registered, they can phone the PSIS to:

-   find out if their patient has been identified under the programme's
    criteria, and
-   request a patient summary report if the patient has met that
    criteria

Note: specific medicine information on the patient summary report must
not be read to a prescriber over the phone. The operator must only
advise if a patient is identified and follow the script in Table 1, Step
5 of the process. Information in a patient summary report must be
considered in its entirety by the prescriber to ensure they have all PBS
medicine information to make an informed decision.

If the prescriber is not PSIS registered, they can phone the PSIS and
the Service Officer can register them while they are on the phone. The
Resources page contains a link to contact details.

Note:

-   From 1 August 2022, Prescription Shopping Information Service
    registration form (PB131) is no longer accepted for processing. If
    forms are received via fax or mail, destroy them via a secure bin
-   Mark any work items within PaNDA as ‘Completed – Request Rejected’
    and add a processing note that states ‘From 1 August 2022, this form
    is no longer accepted’.

Prescriber Eligibility

PSIS Prescriber Registration eligibility is based on the Prescriber
number of which there are 4 types, Medical, Medical/Dental, Dental and
PBS.

If the prescriber has a Medical or Medical/Dental Prescriber number then
the prescriber is eligible to be registered to access the Prescription
Shopping Information Service.

If the Prescriber Number is Dental or PBS the provider is not eligible
to be registered. These calls are transferred to the PSO line (see the
Process page for more information).

Patient summary report

Where a patient has been identified as meeting the criteria, a
prescriber can request a patient summary report. The patient summary
report confirms if the patient, within any 3 month period, has had
supplied to them:

-   any PBS items prescribed by 6 or more different prescribers
-   a total of 25 or more PBS target items, and/or
-   a total of 50 or more items. This includes target and non-target
    items supplied to the patient

A prescriber can get a patient summary report either:

-   by calling the PSIS requesting the patient summary report be sent to
    them through Health Professional Online Services (HPOS). The patient
    summary report will be available to prescribers (or a delegate
    acting on behalf of the prescriber) for 14 days
-   by calling the PSIS requesting the patient summary report be faxed
    to them, or
-   by calling the PSIS requesting the patient summary report be sent by
    mail in exceptional circumstances

Note: the fax number must be confirmed with the prescriber prior to
sending the report via fax.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
more information on HPOS and PSIS contact details.

Prescription shopping alert service

The Prescription Shopping Alert Service (PSAS) assesses patients who
meet the PSP criteria once a month. Services Australia may write to
prescribers if the patient could be getting more PBS medicines than they
medically need.

The letter contains a summary of the PBS medicines supplied to the
patient that have been identified as target medicines under the PSP.

The Resources page contains a list of target medicines to assess
high-risk patients.

The agency recognises that prescribers are best placed to make decisions
about PBS medicines for their patient. The letter is for consideration
only and is provided to assist the prescriber with patient management.

Prescribers will only receive 1 letter for their patient every 6 months,
even if the patient continues to meet the PSP criteria monthly.

The Resources page contains an escalation protocol and scripting for
enquiries received about the PSAS.

Disclosure of patient information and privacy

Through the PSP, Services Australia is authorised to disclose to
prescribers without consent, specific and limited PBS information about
their patients who may be obtaining PBS medicine in excess of medical
need.

Strict privacy conditions apply and when prescribers contact the
Prescription Shopping Information Service (PSIS) they will be asked a
series of questions to validate who they are.

The PBS information collected under the programme is subject to the
secrecy provisions of the National Health Act 1953 and the Australian
Privacy Principles (APP) contained in the Privacy Act 1988. Any
disclosure of the information must therefore accord with the provisions
in those Acts.

The Chief Executive of Medicare may disclose patient information for the
following purposes:

-   administering and enforcing functions under the National Health Act
    1953 conferred upon the Chief Executive of Medicare
-   protecting public revenue
-   discouraging inefficient and improper use of pharmaceutical benefits

Privacy issues

If a prescriber or the patient of a prescriber has concerns about a
privacy issue under the PSP, they can provide feedback to Services
Australia. See the Resources page for a link to the Services Australia
Intranet or Services Australia website for managing complaints and
feedback.

Customer enquiries for the PSP

Customers who want to find out about the PSP can:

-   visit the Services Australia website
-   call the Prescription Shopping Information Service (PSIS) for
    general information on the PSP. See Resources for FAQ's for
    customers calling the PSIS

Note: customers wishing to receive a copy of information collected by
Services Australia about their use of the PBS can request personal
details held by the agency under our administrative access scheme.

The Resources page contains a link to the Release of information contact
page, and Information and Prescription Shopping Information Service
(PSIS) contact details as well as FAQs and information on handling
callers talking about suicide or self-harm or in need of social worker
assistance.

Reporting fraud

If a prescriber or member of the public calls the PSP line with concerns
about a person committing fraud, such as forging prescriptions see
Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the intranet and Services Australia website
-   contact details
-   PSP escalation template and guidelines
-   FAQ's and scenarios for callers talking about suicide or self-harm,
    and
-   prescription shopping alert service target medicines

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982

Level 1 - Managing customer complaints and feedback

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
