-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about eligibility under Reciprocal Health
Care Agreements (RHCA) for Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS).

What RHCA provides

RHCA provides information on entitlement for visitors to Australia from
each RHCA country. Information for Australians visiting RHCA countries
can be found on the Services Australia website. The Resources page
contains a link.

RHCAs for visitors to Australia

The Australian Government has signed RHCAs with the following 11
countries:

-   Belgium
-   Finland
-   Ireland (Republic of Ireland)
-   Italy
-   Malta
-   The Netherlands
-   New Zealand
-   Norway
-   Sweden
-   Slovenia
-   United Kingdom (including Northern Ireland)

Enrolment in Medicare

To enrol in Medicare under an RHCA, the person must complete a Medicare
enrolment application (MS004) form and provide supporting documents
required from the RHCA country.

The Process page contains further general eligibility information, and
specific information for each RHCA country including document
requirements and processing details.

RHCA documents required letter

Service Officers must:

-   issue a RHCA documents required letter when a customer has lodged an
    application and has not provided the required supporting documents
-   remove any sections not relevant to the required documents for the
    customer or the relevant RHCA country
-   follow the process in Quality assurance and quality checking for
    external mail in Medicare for all letters sent

Note: 2 Residency documents for Finland and Sweden are only required if
there is evidence that suggests the applicant may not have resided in
the applicable country for more than 6 months before entering Australia.

Document Verification Service (DVS)

All identity documents must be verified in DVS. See Register a customer
for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the
process.

Services covered

Eligible visitors are generally entitled to the following under an RHCA:

-   Medicare benefits for medically necessary out-of-hospital treatment
    except for visitors from New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland
-   medically necessary care as a public patient in a public hospital
-   some medicines available on prescription which are subsidised under
    the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), at the general rate

Eligible visitors from New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland have
access to the following services for the length of their stay in
Australia:

-   services as a public patient in a public hospital (including
    outpatient services) for medically necessary treatment
-   some medicines available on prescription which are subsidised under
    the PBS, at the general rate

New Zealand and Republic of Ireland visitors are not entitled to
out-of-hospital treatment, they are not enrolled in Medicare.

The RHCAs do not cover medical treatment for a person who has entered a
country for the sole purpose of accessing medical treatment or for care
planned before arriving in Australia.

Note: a New Zealand citizen is not considered a visitor if residing in
Australia for 6 months or more. For more information, see Medicare
eligibility for New Zealand citizens.

Services not covered

RHCAs do not cover

-   private hospital care
-   public hospital care as a private patient
-   ambulance travel
-   care from a physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech
    therapist, eye therapist, chiropractor, podiatrist or psychologist
    unless it is in the Chronic Disease Management scheme
-   acupuncture unless from a doctor
-   glasses and contact lenses
-   hearing aids and other devices
-   prostheses
-   costs someone else is responsible for, for example an insurer,
    employer or government agency
-   care that is not clinically essential
-   cosmetic surgery
-   checks for life insurance or superannuation or to join a friendly
    society
-   home nursing
-   Medicare benefits are not payable for Assisted Reproductive
    Technology (ART ) services (Items 13200-13292)
-   PBS subsidised In Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) medicines under the
    Section 100 IVF program. For further information the Resources page
    contains a link to Guaranteeing Medicare – aligning reciprocal
    health care - Budget 2017

Defence force personnel and medical visa holders

There are specific RHCA eligibility rules for defence force personnel
and medical visa holders (subclass 602).

The Process page contains more information on RHCA eligibility for these
cohorts.

Australian citizens travelling to RHCA countries

Australian citizens travelling to RHCA countries may get some publicly
funded medically necessary care depending on the individual agreement.
The Resources page contains links to information about Australians
travelling to RHCA countries on the Services Australia website.

Australian citizens living in a RHCA country who are visiting Australia

Australian citizens visiting Australia (meaning they have not returned
to reside) but are living in a RHCA country, may be eligible under a
RHCA, if they:

-   have been residing outside of Australia for more than 5 years and
    have not returned to Australia to reside, and
-   meet the eligibility criteria as outlined under their relevant
    country’s RHCA

The Process page contains further general eligibility information, and
specific information for each RHCA country including document
requirements and processing details.

Pathway to Permanent Residence for Retirees

The Pathway provides eligible Retirement (405/410) visa holders with the
ability to obtain permanent residence in Australia.

Customers can access the Pathway by applying for a Parent (subclass 103)
or Contributory Parent (subclass 143) visa in Australia. If a retiree
has lodged an application for a Parent visa subclass 103 or Contributory
visa subclass 143 they are eligible to enrol in Medicare if they were
residing in a RHCA country before arriving in Australia.

The customer’s visa subclass 405/410 may still be current or they may
have a bridging visa. This will display on VEVO.

Resources contains more information.

Temporary extension of RHCA entitlement for eligible citizens of Italy and Malta

Due to coronavirus (COVID-19), previously or currently enrolled citizens
of Italy and Malta, living in Australia, had their entitlement
automatically extended until 17 March 2022.

Eligible Citizens visiting Australia had an extension of RHCA
entitlement from 18 March 2020 until 17 March 2022. Eligibility for
Medicare returned to the regular eligibility requirements set out under
the RHCA from 17 March 2022.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   forms
-   contact details
-   RHCA effective dates
-   eligibility and entitlements
-   the Services Australia website
-   external websites
-   user guide
-   letters

Related links

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility

Medicare eligibility for customers with permanent resident status

Quality assurance and quality checking for external mail in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
