
Medicare Two-way and claims processing 011-43100010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Medicare Two-way program and how to process
Medicare Two-way claims.

Medicare Two-way program

The Medicare Two-way program is an Australian Government initiative
designed to make lodging claims easier for people with private health
insurance. Under Medicare Two-way, a person can lodge in-hospital and
ancillary claims either with their participating private health insurer
or with Medicare.

Claims sent electronically or manually

Medicare Two-way claims are sent to participating private health
insurers electronically where possible. There are some circumstances
where claims cannot be sent electronically and must be sent by external
post.

Appropriate reasons to send claims by post include:

-   assistant items which are payable to the principal or leading
    provider
-   the member number is missing or incorrect
-   the account is for ancillary services
-   a Medicare cheque has been cancelled and reissued
-   the claim has been adjusted
-   the claim is over 2 years from the date of service
-   miscellaneous claims
-   service charge over $9999.99
-   other: notification of a members change of address for participating
    health insurer

For these types of claims, complete the Unable to transmit Medicare
Two-way claim form (HW038).

See Resources for a link to the form.

The Process page contains information about how to send ancillary, or
Two-way claims that cannot be transmitted electronically, to
participating private health insurers.

Accounts over $9,999.99

Medicare Two-way accounts over $9,999.99 cannot be transmitted
electronically via the PHEB screen. The gap statement must be sent
manually to the participating health fund. For Medicare claims
processing see Provider charges $10,000 or more (greater than $9,999.99)
for Medicare patient claims.

Ancillary services

Ancillary services are services such as dental, optical and
physiotherapy. Ancillary claims do not attract a Medicare benefit and
are covered by the customer’s private health insurance. If the customer
requests Medicare to send an Ancillary, Medicare Gap Statement or change
of address details to their private health insurer, the fund must be a
participant in the Medicare Two-way programme.

Same day adjustments and deletions

Medicare Two-way data is sent to the private health insurer after the
close of business each day. This allows for same day adjustments or
deletions to be made through Mainframe. When a same day adjustment or
deletion of a Medicare claim is completed, Mainframe automatically
deletes the Medicare Two-way component.

If an adjustment or deletion to a claim is required, it must be done
through Mainframe before close of business that day. Medicare Two-way
claims cannot be deleted directly from the PHEB screen.

The same day adjustment (NAOI) system automatically adjusts the payee
code of the Medicare component of a Medicare Two-way claim. The message
ASSOCIATED TWO-WAY CLAIM ADJUSTED displays. See Resources for PHEB
return messages. Latter day adjustments

There is no provision for latter day adjustments of Medicare Two-way gap
claims. For more information about incorrect processing of in-hospital
services and gap statements see Account and receipt documents for
Medicare claims processing.

Transmitting a duplicate claim

A duplicate service can be transmitted where:

-   the same service lines exist in the Medicare Two-way database and
    the same service lines are with a different Fund ID, or
-   the original service lines were rejected or the transmission status
    failed

Where duplicate service lines already exist in the Medicare Two-way
database for the same Fund ID, these cannot be transmitted. The display
lines will be protected blue. See the Process page for more information
on transmitting a duplicate service.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to forms and Medicare public claim letters
-   a list of private health insurers
-   PHEB screen messages
-   Medicare Two-way patient claims field and message definitions

Related links

Claims processing in Medicare

Process digital self service claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
