
Overseas immunisations and processing history forms in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about notification of overseas
vaccinations to the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Notifying Services Australia

Recognised vaccination providers can notify the AIR of immunisations
given by other vaccination providers by recording an immunisation
history. Providers can do this by using:

-   the AIR site
-   Practice Management Software (PMS), or
-   by completing an Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) –
    Immunisation history form (IM013)

Note: providers do not receive payments for recording an immunisation
history given by another vaccination provider.

Overseas vaccines

The vaccination schedules of other countries do not always correspond to
Australian schedules. This means that an Australian provider may not be
able to identify the vaccine brand name given to a person overseas. This
may result in conflicting history between the vaccinations given
overseas and in Australia.

History form description

The immunisation history form contains details of:

-   a person’s name, address, gender and date of birth
-   a person’s Medicare card and reference number (if available) or
    Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI),
-   a person’s vaccination history, which includes tick-boxes that
    indicates if they received the vaccinations overseas
-   immunisation service dates
-   whether a person is on a catch-up schedule
-   a provider's name and Medicare provider/AIR registration number

The provider also signs and dates a declaration on the form.

Note: the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) - immunisation history
form (IM013) is available on the Services Australia website. An
immunisation history form cannot be backdated.

History form claim header

Immunisation history claims require a Service Officer to create a header
before processing a claim. The details to create the header are included
on the history form. Electronic claim types automatically create
headers.

Providers do not receive an information payment for providing history
form for processing on the AIR. The immunising provider number field on
the header is always pre-populated with the generic Australian AIR
provider number A56801A.

Note: if Services Australia receives a history form that only notifies
the AIR of a catch-up schedule, there is no need to key a header. See
the Record catch-up schedule on a person's registration table on the
Process page for more information.

History form not complete

Services Australia only uses a history form if immunisations aren't
recorded on the AIR. See the Resources page for information on actioning
incomplete forms.

Catch-up schedule

Vaccination providers can notify the AIR of a catch-up schedule by:

-   recording it on the AIR site
-   transmitting it using their Practice Management Software (PMS)
-   submitting an Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) – Immunisation
    history form (IM013) form, or
-   submitting an Australian Immunisation Register Immunisation
    encounter (IM018) form. This allows vaccination providers to tick a
    box indicating the person is on a catch-up schedule for overdue
    vaccines

Note: as of 30 September 2016, only 1 catch-up schedule can ever be
recorded for a child or individual.

By recording a catch-up schedule on the AIR, a child's or individual's
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) statuses:

-   may be considered up-to-date, and
-   may meet immunisation requirements for some family assistance
    payments for the catch-up period

However, their AIR immunisation status remains not up-to-date until
Services Australia records all required vaccinations. The YIIS - Status
and Due Overdue Details screen in AIR Mainframe shows the CCS and FTB
status.

Take care when entering the date for catch-up schedules. If the date is
incorrect, it can trigger reminder letters and impact family assistance
payments.

Note: if the provider has not supplied the signature date, use the date
Services Australia received the form. A catch up schedule cannot be
backdated.

See: Change requests in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

The Resources page contains a link to forms and a table of actions for
incomplete immunisation history information.

Related links

Enquiries for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Change requests in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Process claims in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Manage work items in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
