-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia (the agency) releases
information for Medicare Compensation Recovery claims. Includes how
information can be released to third party authorities, claimants and
notifiable persons, legal representatives, minors, and deceased estates.

Authorising a third party

Authorising a third party means:

-   the injured person/claimant is bound by the third party’s actions
-   gives the agency permission to release information about the
    compensation claim to the third party, and
-   the third party can sign documents and update personal information
    on their behalf

When authorising a solicitor as a third party, it implies that all
solicitors employed by that firm have the same authority.

Written authority must be on the current Third party authority form
(MO021). When the MO021 form is assessed as invalid a Z2802 We are
unable to process the third party authority letter is issued.

A phone call is required to the party who submitted the MO021 to advise
that a letter has been sent to the injured person or claimant. This is
to advise that no correspondence or information about the compensation
claim will be provided until a valid MO021 is received.

An authority remains valid, even after the claim is closed, unless:

-   revoked verbally or in writing
-   replaced by a new third party authority, or
-   the injured person or claimant dies

The MO021 form is not to be used in place of verbal consent. Do not
advise the injured person or claimant to complete the MO021 form as this
form is for authorised third parties, not individuals, and verbal
consent is required for each phone call received. For more information
see Verbal consent for telephone conversations.

If a MO021 form is received and an individual is listed as the third
party a phone call is required to confirm that the injured person has
fully understood that:

-   submitting a MO021 will revoke any existing authorisation for a
    solicitor,
-   information will be released to the third party, and
-   the injured person is bound by the third parties actions

Note: only details of an authorised third party are recorded in MCRS,
where authority has not been provided details are not to be recorded.

See:

-   Process correspondence for more information on assessing a MO021
    form
-   Table 4 for steps for validating written authority to release
    information

Verbal consent for an authorised third party

If an MO021 form has been submitted but is missing a valid signature,
verbal consent can be accepted when:

-   the injured person/claimant has been authenticated
-   the injured person/claimant provides verbal consent authorising the
    third party to act on their behalf, and
-   the MO021 form is current and otherwise complete

An injured person or claimant does not need to give their signature
after providing a verbal consent.

An authorised third party cannot give their verbal consent. Their valid
signature must be included on the form.

Getting verbal consent

-   Make an outbound call and complete authentication checks
-   Ask the injured person ‘do you authorise (insert name from TPA form)
    to act on your behalf regarding the Medicare compensation recovery
    claim that includes your personal information?’
-   Include a case note such as: ‘Verbal consent has been provided by
    [Injured person/claimant] for [authorised third party name] to act
    on their behalf as per the MO021 form at folder [X]’

Note: record verbal consent in case notes.

See:

-   Process correspondence for more information on assessing a MO021
    form
-   Process for steps for verbal consent
-   References for a link to the Privacy Act 1988
-   Resources for a link to the MO021 form

Legal representative

A legal representative is a person appointed by law to act on the
injured person’s behalf.

Appointment of a legal representative can be advised by:

-   Power of Attorney
-   Last Will & Testament, confirming the executor or executrix of the
    estate
-   Letters of Administration or Probate where the injured person dies
    intestate (without a Last Will & Testament in place)
-   Public Trustee documentation, or
-   Court order

When evidence:

-   is provided to confirm legal authority the details are recorded in
    MCRS
-   has not been provided to confirm legal authority, a letter is
    required to request supporting documents

Date of injury or illness and third party authority

The date of injury or illness is not a mandatory requirement for the
MO021 form under the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.
However, the agency must be satisfied that the authority received on the
MO021 form is for the correct compensation claim.

The MO021 form is invalid if:

-   The date is missing and there is no other correspondence attached
    confirming the correct date of injury or illness, or
-   The date is prior to or after the date of injury or illness recorded
    on an existing compensation claim

The authority remains invalid until the injured person or claimant
confirms the correct date of injury or illness, verbally or in writing.

Record verbal confirmation from the injured person or claimant in case
notes.

If verbal confirmation cannot be obtained, issue the We are unable to
process (z2802) letter. The date of injury or illness is required to
avoid wrongful disclosure of information by the agency that relates to
another claim.

See:

-   Process for the steps for validating a written authority to release
    information
-   Resources for links to the MO021 form and letter templates

Changes to authorised law firm details

A new third party authority is required when the firm representing the
injured person or claimant has:

-   Split into more than 1 business, or
-   Closed, and a new firm has taken on the claim

Where 2 or more law firms have merged and the new firm retains the name
stated on the initial authority, an existing authority will remain in
effect.

Release of information to an injured person or claimant

Customers may request copies of documents relevant to their claim.

Documents supplied to the agency by the:

injured person, claimant or authorised party can be released, such as
the completed Medicare history statement and declaration

notifiable person or another party cannot be released for privacy
reasons, such as the Notice of judgment or settlement. In these
situations, advise the requestor to:

-   contact the compensation payer directly to request a copy; or
-   request a copy from the agency via a Freedom of Information (FOI)
    request. Advise them to search for ‘Freedom of information’ on the
    agency’s website

The FOI team will redact third party names, signatures and email
addresses from documents before release. This will protect parties from
having grievances aired through social media channels.

A third party may choose to attach a note to a form stating that if the
form is released under FOI, that their name is not to be released. This
will ensure a greater likelihood of their name not being released in
error.

Release of information if the injured person is deceased

Written documents confirming the executor, executrix or the
administrator of the injured person’s estate are required for the agency
to release information about the compensation claim of the deceased.

Acceptable documentation to establish the authority for a person to
represent the deceased include:

-   the Last Will and Testament of the deceased
-   Letters of Administration from the courts appointing an
    administrator
-   Probate from the courts, or
-   documents from the Public Trustee appointing an executor, executrix
    or administrator

Where the injured person dies intestate (without a Last Will and
Testament), the agency requires a Letter of Administration from the
courts or the Public Trustee confirming the appointment before any
information can be released.

Note: if a Letter of Administration has not been received or granted, a
Commonwealth of Australia Statutory Declaration signed by the person
appointed as administrator by the Public Trustee is required, and can
only be accepted in consultation with Programme Management.

Notification of the injured person’s death is provided by the estate
representative or claimant's solicitor. That is, via a copy of the
official death certificate issued by the Registry of Births, Deaths and
Marriages or a date of death being recorded by Medicare, this can be
found in MCRS using the Medicare hyperlink.

If the date of death has been recorded on the Medicare record, it will
be identified by MCRS when a new claim is registered. However, MCRS does
not automatically update the date of death on an existing claim.
Updating the date of death in MCRS results in outgoing correspondence
being addressed to ‘The Executor or Administrator for the Estate of the
late’ before the deceased person’s name.

A Power of Attorney or third party authority documents received by the
agency before the death of the injured person become invalid when the
injured person dies. If the executor, executrix or administrator of the
estate requires information to be released to a third party, they must
complete a new Third party authority (MO021) and provide documentation
confirming the authority for a person to represent the estate.

See Process for further information about the documentation required
when an injured person dies.

Release information for a minor

For Medicare Compensation Recovery, a person under 14 years of age is
considered a minor. For all other legal matters, a minor is a person
under 18 years of age.

A claim is normally made on behalf of a minor by a claimant or a legal
representative, including:

-   A claimant (normally a parent or guardian)
-   A person appointed as Litigation Guardian (normally by the courts)
-   An Executor or Administrator of a deceased minor’s estate (normally
    appointed by the courts), or
-   The Public Trustee (although they are usually the refund recipient
    rather than the claimant)

Injured person under 14 years of age

When the injured person is under 14 years of age and:

-   Is enrolled on the parent or guardian's Medicare card, the parent or
    guardian can sign the authority to authorise the release of the
    child's information
-   Is not enrolled on the parent or guardian's Medicare Card, legal
    documentation must be provided to verify the third party has a legal
    authority to act on the child's behalf

Note: when the agency is notified that a state or territory Public
Trustee is acting on the child’s behalf, contact the state or territory
Public Trustee for verification and to get legal documents confirming
this arrangement.

See Resources for a table for assessing documentation requirements for a
third party acting on behalf of a minor.

Injured person over 14 years of age (but under 18)

When an injured person turns 14 years of age, they need to provide
written authority for a third party to act on their behalf, unless they
have been medically diagnosed as mentally or physically incapable of
handling their own affairs.

If the parent or guardian has not obtained a Guardianship order or Power
of Attorney, a Commonwealth of Australia Statutory Declaration is
required from the parent or guardian, declaring:

-   The injured person has been medically diagnosed as mentally
    incapable of handling their own affairs, and
-   They have legal authority to make decisions and sign documents on
    the injured person's behalf

Note: a Commonwealth of Australia Statutory Declaration can only be
accepted if approved by Programme Management.

If the agency has existing authority signed by the parent, guardian or
legal representative (legally appointed to act on the injured person’s
behalf) prior to the injured person turning 14 years of age, the
authority remains valid due to implied consent until the injured person
turns 18 years of age, provided:

-   The injured person is still enrolled on the parent or guardian’s
    Medicare card, or
-   The legal representative is still legally appointed by law to act on
    the injured person’s behalf

Although implied consent may be accepted as above, best practice for
privacy is to get a new MO021 form signed by the injured person over 14
years of age. If the agency receives a new authority signed by the
injured person, or receives a request to revoke authority, the implied
consent ceases.

Release of information to the notifiable person

After an advance payment has been made by the compensation payer,
details of the claim can only be discussed with the injured person,
claimant or their authorised third party.

Medicare Compensation Recovery cannot release a copy of the Medicare
history statement to the compensation payer, but the compensation payer
may apply to the Information Release team for this information. The
Information Release Team must have a signed authority from the injured
person or claimant to release the information.

Where an advance payment has not been received at judgment or
settlement, and there is no valid notice of past benefits, a notice to
claimant (Medicare history statement and declaration) is sent to the
injured person or claimant, and when returned, a notice of charge will
be issued to the compensation payer.

Updating or revoking authority

When documents are received confirming an authorised parties details
have changed or is no longer authorised the details must be updated in
MCRS.

When recording details in the claimant fields in MCRS a unique
relationship must be selected. The authorisation end date must be added
before a new authorisation can be added.

Authorised third party

The injured person or claimant must advise the agency if they no longer
authorise the release of their information to the third party. This can
be done verbally or in writing. Even after the claim is closed, the
authority continues until revoked.

An authorised third party can also notify the agency that they no longer
represent the injured person or claimant, verbally or in writing.

Where the injured person or claimant reports a change in solicitor, a
new MO021 form will be required to authorise release of information to
the new solicitor.

Where the agency becomes aware of the possible involvement of a new
solicitor representing the injured person or claimant, request a new
MO021 form from the new solicitor.

If this is not possible, contact the injured person or claimant or
existing authorised solicitor to determine if the solicitor has changed.
If the solicitor has changed, ask for a verbal cancellation of the
existing authority.

Clearly record revoked authority in the MCRS case notes. No further
information must be released to that third party.

Claimant

A person appointed to act on behalf of the injured person may not remain
as the claimant for the duration of the claim. For example this may
occur when:

-   Power of Attorney is no longer valid as the injured person has
    passed away
-   The review date of a court order has passed and a new court order is
    not provided
-   A minor turns 18

If notified in writing that the authorisation is no longer valid the
existing claimant must be revoked and new claimant added, if applicable.

See:

-   Table 4 on the Process page for process steps on updating or
    revoking an authority
-   Release of information for a minor for claims when the injured
    person is a minor
-   Release of information if the injured person is deceased for claims
    when the injured person is deceased
-   Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim for
    process steps to update the claim

Release of information to Child Support Program

A request must include the correct section of the Child Support
(Registration and Collection) Act 1988 under which it is being made, and
must be signed by a person holding the delegation to request such
information. Otherwise, service officers should decline the request.

Section 120 of the Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988,
allows the Child Support Program to request the below details in respect
of an injured person from the agency:

-   name
-   address
-   amount of advance payment refunded
-   the date the refund was issued
-   whether the refund has been presented for payment, and
-   the name of the compensation payer and the total amount of
    settlement

The References page contains links to relevant legislation.

Subpoenas

A subpoena requires the agency to produce relevant documents or appear
in court. Direct all subpoenas to the Subpoena Team for assessment. The
Subpoena Team will send a follow up request to Programme Management for
further action. See Handling subpoenas and Commonwealth Information
Location Orders served on the department.

Release of information legislation

Privacy Act

The Privacy Act 1988 governs the privacy and quality of personal
information, including how it is:

-   Collected
-   Stored
-   Accessed
-   Disclosed

Personal information cannot be released by the agency to a third party
unless it is:

-   Authorised in writing on a Medicare Compensation Recovery Third
    party authority form (MO021)
-   Required under law. For example, under the provisions of the Health
    and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995

A third party may be:

-   an organisation (such as a solicitor) or
-   an individual (such as a friend or relative)

Authority can be given by:

-   injured person or
-   claimant (such as a legal representative)

Freedom of Information Act

Under the Freedom of Information Act 1982, a person has a right, with
limited exceptions, to access documents we hold. The Freedom of
Information Act 1982 (FOI Act) gives any person the right to do all of
the following:

-   access copies of documents the agency holds, except exempt documents
-   ask the agency to change or annotate customer information if it is
    incomplete, out of date, incorrect or misleading
-   seek a review of the agency's decision to deny a customer access to
    a document or not to amend a personal record

A person can ask to see any document that the agency's holds. The agency
can refuse access to some documents, or parts of documents that are
exempt. Exempt documents may include:

-   those relating to national security
-   documents containing material obtained in confidence
-   Cabinet documents
-   other matters set out in the FOI Act

See Freedom of Information.

Verbal consent for telephone conversations

During a telephone conversation with the injured person or claimant,
they may request to include another person for the duration of the call,
such as a relative or friend. Verbal consent is for the duration of the
phone call only.

Do not advise the injured person or claimant to complete the MO021 form
in place of providing verbal consent for telephone conversations. The
MO021 form is for authorised third parties, not individuals, and verbal
consent is required for each phone call received.

See Enquiries and authenticating a customer for information about verbal
consent during phone calls and process steps.

The Resources page contains:

links to contact details and the MO021 form

information for Service Officers on:

-   accepted documents to authenticate a third party acting on behalf of
    a minor
-   actions on a compensation claim

Related links

Case management – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge – Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Notice of past benefits request and notice to claimant – Medicare
Compensation Recovery

Payments, refunds and debts – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Release of information for Medicare

Handling subpoenas and Commonwealth Information Location orders served
on Services Australia

Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim –
Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
