
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality assurance and quality checking
procedures that staff must comply with when preparing external mail.

Incoming correspondence

In all instances where a letter contains any type of complaint,
compliment or suggestion it must be recorded in the Customer Feedback
Tool. The Resources page contains a link to the Customer Feedback Tool.

Preparing outgoing correspondence

The following quality assurance steps must be undertaken by all staff
when preparing correspondence to:

-   members of the public, or
-   health care providers

Requirements for letters

Make sure the correct nationally endorsed Standard Letter Template is
used. See Using Standard Letter Templates (SLT) for more details.

All correspondence prepared by staff must include:

-   Date on the letter
-   Recipient's name and address as per relevant database, for example,
    Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) or Provider Directory
    System (PDS)
-   Our Reference:
    PaNDA work ID or Source Code and Logon ID where work type is not
    completed in PaNDA
-   Appropriate documentation that is associated with the claim or
    application, as required. For example, ensure another customer’s
    documentation has not been attached in error
-   Signature of the staff member responsible for preparing the
    correspondence may be required as directed by business line
    processes. The Resources page contains a link to the Mandatory
    standards - agency signature blocks
-   No personal information unless it is relevant to the transaction.
    For example, a date of birth should not be displayed on an itemised
    claim statement sent to a customer
-   The letter should be attached to the originating PaNDA activity
    where appropriate

Update Customer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) - CDMS users only

The staff member preparing the correspondence must enter a comment in
CDMS with a brief description of the reason for the letter.

Comments are entered under the Comments tab of the Personal section for
the customer.

Addresses

If a windowless envelope is used and address details are available on
outgoing correspondence, ensure the address on the envelope matches that
of the correspondence. Before enveloping, refer the letter to the
appropriate quality checking delegate.

Some databases are set to produce all capital addresses (including
names). This is an accepted style from Australia Post. Addresses that do
not meet Australia Post standards require intervention to be sent and
increase mailing costs.

The Writing Guide and the Mandatory Standards contain information on
addressing envelopes. See the Resources page for links.

Note: staff must use Secure print when printing letters and supporting
documentation.

Peer to peer letter information - Health Service Delivery Division (HSDD)

HSDD staff follow peer to peer letter checking for all letters. The
Process page contains the details.

Note: do not use the peer to peer process for Lifetime Health Cover
(LHC), Statement of Benefit (SOB), or Estimate letters. Upload these
letters to PaNDA for quality checking.

The Process page contain details about:

-   how staff are to upload letters in PaNDA for quality checking, and
-   the process for quality checkers

Peer to peer letter information for face-to-face staff only

All letters must be quality checked by a quality checker/delegate. That
is, before the letter is given to the customer, or when completing a
work item in PaNDA. Letters include:

-   Lifetime Health Cover (LHC)
-   Statement of Benefit (SOB), and
-   Estimate

Note: do not email letters to Quality Operations & Technical Support
Team for quality checking.

The Resources page contains intranet links and contact details.

Related links

Operational Blueprint letters and electronic messaging

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Using Standard Letter Templates (SLT)

Work Optimiser for staff

Management of the Staff Feedback Tool

Recording feedback in the Staff Feedback Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
