[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about documents and identification
required for Medicare eligibility and enrolment.

Residency documents

Two residency documents are required for:

Australian citizens who have:

-   never enrolled in Medicare
-   been absent from Australia for more than 5 years

Permanent residents (migrants) who have:

-   not enrolled in Medicare within the first year from their visa grant
    date
-   been absent from Australia for more than one year, or
-   returned to Australia on a return resident visa

New Zealand citizens enrolling in Medicare

-   never enrolled in Medicare
-   been absent from Australia for more than one year

Note:

-   when a family arrives in Australia to reside, 2 residency documents
    are required to be provided for the family unit enrolment
-   the residency documents can be made up of 2 documents from Australia
    or one document from Australia and one from where customer last
    resided
-   it is acceptable for an applicant to complete a statutory
    declaration in support of their application to enrol in Medicare
    where the necessary residency document cannot be provided. See
    Acceptable use of a statutory declaration when enrolling or
    re-enrolling in Medicare

The Resources page contains a list of documents.

Standards for Medicare enrolment forms

A person can complete Medicare enrolment forms on their computer using
Adobe Acrobat Reader on some browsers, or they can print it. They must
consent:

-   electronically, or
-   manually

When filling in the form, each person must:

-   declare the information is true and correct
-   key or write their full name (middle name/s not mandatory)
-   tick they have read, understood and agree
-   key or write the date (not mandatory)

Services Officers must accept Medicare enrolment forms where people
have:

-   previously signed in all required fields
-   electronically signed in all required fields
-   declared in all required fields

If the person has not completed correctly in all required fields, return
the form with the appropriate letter.

See Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility for more details.

Visitors to Australia enrolling under a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement

To be eligible for enrolment under a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement
(RHCA), applicants from some countries will need to provide proof of
their residency in the RHCA country to establish their eligibility for
Medicare.

The Resources page contains a list of documents.

See also: Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) for Medicare.

Acceptable use of a statutory declaration when enrolling or re-enrolling in Medicare

In some circumstances, it will be acceptable for an applicant to
complete a statutory declaration in support of an application to enrol
or re-enrol in Medicare where the necessary residency documents cannot
be provided.

The decision to accept a statutory declaration to enrol or re-enrol an
Australian citizen must be supported by Medicare Public Eligibility.
Service Officers must follow the appropriate escalation process. See
Escalation process of Medicare Eligibility.

Migrants and eligible New Zealand citizens cannot use a statutory
declaration in lieu of 2 residency documents within the first 6 months
of their arrival.

Note: visitors to Australia requesting enrolment under a Reciprocal
Health Care Agreement (RHCA) (except Italian citizens) cannot use a
statutory declaration in lieu of the specific documentation required.

Australian citizens who return to Australia to reside after an absence
of 5 years or more

Where an Australian citizen has been residing overseas for 5 years or
more and has returned to Australia to reside, 2 documents confirming
residency must be provided. When the documents cannot be provided they
can:

-   provide them once the 2 residency documents have been obtained, or
-   complete a statutory declaration (their arrival date can be
    confirmed by their entry stamp in their passport or by getting
    confirmation from their International Movements Record (IMR)

Note: Medicare Consumers Program Support - Medicare Consumers Section -
Medicare Branch can access the applicants IMR to confirm their arrival
date. Service Officers should follow the appropriate escalation process.
See Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility.

Service Officers, if advised by Medicare Public Eligibility, can make
the statutory declaration available to an applicant on their initial
enquiry (or within less than 6 months from arrival) when the applicant
cannot provide 2 acceptable residency documents to confirm residency.
For example, the applicant may be residing in Australia with relatives
or friends and is currently unemployed or is not included on a rental
agreement contract and utility accounts.

The statutory declaration must comprehensively detail why the applicant
cannot provide 2 acceptable residency documents from the list in the
Resources page. The statutory declaration must also include:

-   the applicants previous country of residence
-   what steps they took to cease residing in the overseas country
-   confirmation that the applicant has returned to reside in Australia
    (as opposed to returning to visit),and
-   any other steps taken to establish their residence back in Australia

Australian citizens who return to Australia to reside after an absence
of less than 5 years

Under a Ministerial Order, Australian citizens remain eligible for
Medicare on return visits to Australia for 5 years from the date they
left Australia to reside overseas.

Holders of a permanent resident visa

Where the holder of a permanent resident visa (migrant) has been absent
from Australia for 12 months or more, and have returned to Australia to
reside, must provide documentary proof of their residency. If they do
not have sufficient documentation to prove residency:

-   they can return anytime within 6 months of arriving in Australia to
    reside, with their accumulated 2 residency documents, or
-   complete a detailed statutory declaration (if they still cannot
    provide 2 residency documents) once they have been residing in
    Australia for 6 months or more

Note: if after a period of 6 months they are able to provide sufficient
residency documents, they are not required to complete a statutory
declaration.

The requirement to prove residency in Australia applies to migrants who
are either:

-   already enrolled in Medicare as a migrant, but have been residing
    overseas for 12 months or more, or
-   have not been enrolled in Medicare, but became the holder of a
    permanent resident visa 12 months or more ago

New Zealand citizens who have entered Australia to reside

Where an applicant cannot provide 2 residency documents after being in
Australia for 6 months or more, they can complete a Commonwealth
statutory declaration together with any documents they have. The
Commonwealth statutory declaration must be comprehensive and state why
sufficient residency documents could not be provided. For example,
living with friends or relatives and have no employment, or they are on
a fly-in-fly-out (FIFO) contract with an Australian employer, in which
case they must provide the name of their Australian employer. The
statutory declaration must be completed stating the reasons why
residency documents cannot be provided.

New Zealand citizens may be eligible under the Reciprocal Health Care
Agreement with New Zealand until they are able to provide the 2
residency documents.

Important information when completing a statutory declaration

A person completing a statutory declaration must understand the
statements must be true and that it is a chargeable offence to
intentionally make a false statement. The penalty for making a false
statement is a maximum of 4 years imprisonment.

The agency will accept a Commonwealth statutory declaration form and
will accept a statutory declaration on a state or territory form.

The Resources page contains links to the Commonwealth Statutory
Declaration and the statutory declarations page on the
Attorney-General’s Department website.

Translating documents

Where documents provided are not in English the applicant can be asked
to provide an English translation, which can be obtained by contacting
either:

-   a regional office of the Department of Home Affairs
-   a private translation service

A National Association of Accredited Translators and Interpreters
(NAATI) accredited translator can do the translation. NAATI is an
Australian organisation.

The Resources page contains a link to NAATI and Department of Home
Affairs.

Application lodged in service centre

Service centres can scan application and original documents into PaNDA
by selecting Medicare Eligibility and Enrolment work type Enrolment.

Information that cannot be requested

A tax file number (TFN) must not be requested for identification
purposes. If a TFN is provided by a person as identification, or as part
of documentation to establish resident status, it must not be retained
on any documents kept by Medicare and the number must be erased or made
illegible.

Applicant refuses to provide identification

A person cannot be enrolled until a Medicare Enrolment form with
appropriate documentation is produced to verify the applicant's Medicare
eligibility and identity. This requirement must be made clear to the
applicant.

Services Australia staff should avoid entering into a discussion about
the rights and wrongs of enrolment or eligibility policy. If necessary,
the Site Manager or Team Leader can explain, the reasons for requesting
identification and eligibility documentation from intending applicants.

Applicant details do not match documents

If the name on the Medicare enrolment form is different from the name on
the documents, you must sight proof of a name change. Before enrolling,
a name search must be conducted as the person may have been enrolled
under a previous name due to a name change.

See also: Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS)

Medicare eligibility start date using ePassports

An ePassport:

-   is a combined paper and electronic passport
-   is also known as a biometric passport
-   contains an embedded microchip in the centre page which stores the
    exact personal information that appears on the printed
    identification page

Arrival and departure stamps are stored electronically in ePassports and
therefore cannot be used to confirm a person's date of arrival in
Australia for Medicare purposes.

Confirm Medicare eligibility start date

Where a person enters Australia on an ePassport and the Medicare
eligibility start date is the date they entered, and the date cannot be
confirmed via the immigration data link (where applicable), the
following can be provided to confirm the arrival date:

-   boarding pass
-   flight itinerary

Where it is not possible for the person to provide the above documents
Service Officers can contact Local Peer Support (LPS) to check an
International Movements Record to confirm the person’s arrival in
Australia.

Alternatively, Medicare eligibility can commence from:

-   Medicare registration date (processing date), or
-   the date of a claim for a Medicare benefit which has an earlier date
    than the date of registration (eligibility start date can be back
    dated to the date of the claim)

Note: for both situations above, add a comment in CDMS - 'ePassport -
arrival date not evident in passport, eligibility date - application
processing date or claim date'.

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in the Document
Verification System (DVS) before processing the application. See
Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   information on the types of documents required for Medicare
    eligibility and enrolment, and what to record in the CDMS
-   external websites
-   contact details
-   result codes
-   data tables
-   country codes

Related links

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) for Medicare

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility

Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
