
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

If you have concerns about a child’s safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the types of enrolment errors and issues that may
arise where the newborn is already enrolled, enrolled on an incorrect
Medicare card, enrolled on their parent's Medicare card and how to
remove return mail indicator to process newborn child enrolment.

Family and domestic violence

Services Australia (the agency) plays a critical role in providing
support to people with family and domestic violence concerns. The agency
gives access to the services and support they may need. Family and
domestic violence can pose a serious risk to the safety and wellbeing of
our customers. It is important to discuss all options with the customer.

Newborn enrolled in error

Privacy implications require Service Officers to take action to rectify
the error if they identify that a newborn has been added to an incorrect
Medicare card, including:

-   initial (new) enrolment
-   copy or transfer
-   newborn has been enrolled twice on the same Medicare card

Note: the newborn may also be incorrectly registered on the wrong
Medicare Safety Net family registration.

The Process page contains more information.

Applicant (parent) still on original family card

Before enrolling a newborn, Service Officers must check the applicant's
(parent) Medicare card in the CDMS to confirm if the parent is still
enrolled on their original family card (with their parents).

If it is identified that the parent is still enrolled on their original
family card, the Service Officer must not enrol the newborn on this card
unless there are exceptional circumstances.

Every effort must be made to contact the parent to seek their consent to
be transferred from their original family card to another Medicare card
(for example, their own or their partner's). If contact can be made with
the parent and consent is given, the parent can be transferred to
another Medicare card and the newborn can be enrolled onto this card
with the parent.

If contact is unsuccessful with the parent, the newborn is required to
be enrolled on their own Medicare card with the birth mother as the
group contact and a comment placed in Group in CDMS.

The Process page contains more information.

Unless exceptional circumstances apply, it is not usually acceptable to
have a grandparent, parent and child on the same Medicare card together.
Situations when it may be considered are:

-   birth mother under 15 years of age (the Process page contains more
    information)
-   grandparent has guardianship for both the mother and grandchild

If exceptional circumstances apply, Service Officers must escalate to a
Medicare and Aged Care - Local Peer Support (LPS).

Checking partner details

The group members on a Medicare card must be checked prior to enrolling
a newborn.

If a customer presents a Medicare card number that includes their
ex-partner, the customer must be contacted and transferred to a new
Medicare card before enrolling the newborn child.

The Process page contains the process to follow when the applicant is
required to transfer to a new Medicare card.

Ways to identify if ex-partner is still on the Medicare card

Check the question on the lodged FA081 or a MS004 that asks if the
customer has a partner.

If the yes answer is selected, Service Officers must check the partner’s
details match the existing Medicare records.

If the no answer is selected, and there is another adult on the same
Medicare card, it might mean their ex-partner is still listed on that
card.

Service Officers must be aware of any sensitive indicators that may have
been applied.

If a Service Officer is unsure if a person listed on the Medicare card
is the ex-partner, they must seek advice from LPS before contacting the
customer or enrolling the newborn.

The Resources page contains links to

-   Medicare and Aged Care - Local Peer Support (LPS) contact details
-   Medicare Consumers Program Support - Medicare Consumers Section -
    Medicare Branch contact details
-   Card extraction request form
-   Application to copy or transfer from one Medicare card to another
    form (MS011) form

Related links

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Complex eligibility and entitlement type of newborn child enrolments in
Medicare

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card

Customer enquiries about newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Duplicate Medicare enrolment and Consumer IDs in Medicare

Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Lodgement of newborn child enrolments in Medicare at service centre

Medicare cards

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

Newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Processing newborn child enrolments in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
