
National telephony protocols for Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 011-40120000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures relating to the national telephony
protocols for Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Site faults and emergencies

In a black out or other emergency causing the closure of a site or Smart
Centre, normal emergency plans apply. This information is located with
the Fire Wardens in each respective site.

Serious interruptions to business will occur if there is:

-   an extended loss of a Smart Centre, for example, loss of building
-   a prolonged loss of Smart Centre staff, for example, an epidemic in
    a Smart Centre

Any of these situations will render Services Australia unable to handle
large numbers of inbound telephone calls and enquiries and unable to
achieve business requirements.

In an emergency where the business continuity plan is activated, Service
Officers should advise customers that we are experiencing technical
difficulties, apologise for the delay and thank them for their patience.

Media enquiries

Services Australia has a dedicated media team staffed by public affairs
professionals who are responsible for monitoring and responding to
issues in the media.

All media contact must be handled through the media team.

Note: only the media team's spokespeople may speak to the media on
behalf of Services Australia. No other staff are to speak to the media
at any time, unless with consent from the media team. For more
information, refer to the Services Australia Media Protocols.

The Resources page contains a link to the Media intranet page, which
contains contact information.

Complaints and feedback line

All external feedback received via the Complaints and Feedback Line must
be recorded on the Feedback Register on the date of receipt.

The Resources page contains a link to the Customer Feedback form.

The Feedback Register is accessed via:

-   Medicare Portal (Applications > My Service Delivery Systems)
-   Services Australia Intranet - Feedback

Note: Service Officers' names or P numbers are not to be entered on the
Feedback Register. If the complaint is about a particular Service
Officer, only the alleged behaviour is recorded in a separate email to
the Feedback and Service Improvement Coordinator (FSI Coordinator) in
the Service Officer's state for appropriate action.

The Resources page contains intranet links to the Customer Feedback
form, Media, mySupport for ICT Service Desk referrals, and the forms,
letters, guides, publications and templates page. It also provides the
intranet link for Telephony, Real-Time and Incident Management.

Contents

Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare and PBS telephony

Call transfers for Medicare and PBS telephony

Call tracing for Medicare and PBS telephony

National Programme Support Officers (PSO) line for Medicare and PBS

Related links

Recording interactions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
