
Access VEVO (Visa Enh1ment Verification Online) program 011-44010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page contains contact details for the Department of Home Affairs
and information on error messages returned when entering visa
entitlement information in VEVO (Visa Entitlement Verification Online)
program.

Contact details

Department of Home Affairs

Error messages when checking VEVO

VEVO may return the following error messages when the information
entered does not match the information recorded by the Department of
Home Affairs:

-   The Department has not been able to identify the person. Please
    check that the details you entered are correct. Otherwise complete
    the Online referral form to obtain the work or visa entitlements
-   Your query cannot be processed as VEVO has encountered an error. The
    error has been automatically reported to the appropriate area of the
    Department. If you are performing a single person entry, please
    select 'Clear' button to perform a new enquiry. If you are
    performing a multiple enquiry, please update the visa holder’s
    information if required, or otherwise continue through your enquiry
    list

In the first instance, Service Officers need to check that they have
correctly entered the information. Where entered correctly, Service
Officers need to scan the identity page of the customer's passport, take
a screen shot of the error message and refer the enquiry to the VEVO
helpdesk on the Department of Home Affairs Website for further
investigation.

Where the below error message appears, Service Officers are to advise
the customer to contact the Community Resolution Service (as outlined in
the error message). These issues must not be referred to the VEVO
helpdesk:

-   VEVO has not identified a visa for this person. If your client is in
    Australia, please ask them to contact the department's Community
    Status Resolution Service as soon as possible to discuss available
    visa or departure options 1300 853 773

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
