
Patient eligibility for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 011-17010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility requirements for
Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) issues health cards to
veterans, their war widow(er)s and dependants to ensure they have access
to health and other care services.

Gold cards - 'DVA Health card - For all conditions'

A Gold Card (Personal Treatment Entitlement Card (PTEC)) entitles the
holder to DVA funding for services for all clinically necessary health
care needs, and all health conditions, whether they are related to war
service or not.

The card holder may be a veteran or the widow(er) or dependant of a
veteran. Only the person named on the card is covered.

Prior approval for some services may be required.

White cards – ‘DVA Health Card – For specific conditions’

A White Card (Specific Treatment Eligibility Card (STEC)) entitles the
holder to care and treatment for:

-   accepted injuries or conditions that are war caused or service
    related
-   malignant cancer, pulmonary tuberculosis, any mental health
    condition whether war caused or not
-   the symptoms of unidentifiable conditions that arise within 15 years
    of service (other than peacetime service)

Services covered by a DVA White Card are the same as those for a Gold
Card but must be for one of the above conditions. The veteran will have
received a letter from DVA specifying their accepted disability.

A White Card (Specific Treatment Entitlement Card (STEC)) can also be
issued to eligible personnel for the treatment of malignant neoplasm
(cancer) and pulmonary tuberculosis and any mental health condition
under the Non-Liability Health Care arrangements (NLHC). A formal
diagnosis is required for cancer and pulmonary tuberculosis
applications.

The card also entitles the holder to transport related to treatment of
their accepted condition and access to the Repatriation Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme.

Generally, those medical services listed on the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) are available to White Card holders, as long as they are
required to treat the veteran’s accepted disability. Any limits that
apply are consistent with limits imposed under the MBS. Medical services
not listed in the MBS may be considered in exceptional circumstances.
Prior financial authorisation must be obtained from DVA. Where a veteran
needs treatment for a health condition that is not an accepted
disability, the health provider should not bill DVA.

PAMT Initiative

Provisional Access to Medical Treatment (PAMT) determination was
introduced by DVA Policy in July 2018. A number of White card holders
will be included in the initiative which allows for a group of white
card conditions to be covered under the single heading of PAMT.

If a DVA client eligibility is listed as PAMT, payment for claims should
only be given where the condition being treated relates to 1 or more of
the 20 specific conditions approved for PAMT. To view the 20 specific
conditions, see the Process page.

No other treatment should be approved under PAMT eligibility unless a
PARS approval is provided.

See the Resources page for a link to the DVA website which has more
information on PAMT for veterans.

Note: Optical and Dental services should not be paid under PAMT.

Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) conditions

Spinal Cord injury white card holders have accepted conditions for
certain spinal cord injuries.

From 23 November 2020, any SCI conditions from the SCI conditions list
are covered for treatment according to the manifestations list. To view
the SCI conditions and manifestations list, see the Process page.

ADF Firefighters Cancer Screening

The ADF Firefighter Scheme is a 2021-22 Budget measure designed to
support those who may have been exposed to hazardous chemicals while
participating in fire training at the RAAF Base Point Cook Fire Training
School between 1 January 1957 and 31 December 1986.

From 20 September 2021, access to free screening for melanoma and
colorectal cancer for white card holders that have been accepted as
having ADF firefighter scheme eligible service. Treatment under the
scheme entitles the veteran to the following services in accordance with
existing MBS/RMFS items:

Colorectal cancer screening:

-   Faecal occult blood test
-   Colonoscopy

Melanoma screening:

-   Examination by a general medical practitioner
-   Dermoscopy or dermatoscopy
-   Total body digital photography

See the Process page for more information on checking eligibility under
the ADF firefighter scheme.

Orange Card - ‘DVA Health Card – For Pharmaceuticals Only’

The DVA Orange Card enables the holder to access the range of
pharmaceutical items available under the Repatriation Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (RPBS).

The Orange Card is for pharmaceuticals only, and cannot be used for any
medical or other health care treatment.

Eligibility Checks - 2-NIL ELIG and 2-CHK ELIG

The message 2-NIL ELIG is displayed when the system detects that the DVA
file number does not have entitlement at the date of service claimed.
This message can also be displayed for gold and white cardholders when
eligibility dates are not present. This might indicate that:

-   an interstate transfer is in progress
-   the veteran has lost their entitlement
-   a date of death is recorded
-   the patient resides overseas

Australian gold card veterans who reside overseas have their eligibility
dates removed when they leave Australia. If the veteran returns to
Australia they might be issued with a temporary letter from DVA advising
of their entitlement to have their medical treatment billed to Services
Australia. Payment is to be made in accordance with any attached letter.

The message 2-CHK ELIG is displayed when the service claimed needs to be
verified against the patient's entitlement or when a Gold cardholder
(Personal Treatment Entitlement Card (PTECT)) without eligibility dates
also has White card (Specific Treatment Entitlement Card (STEC))
eligibility types, for example War Caused Injury (WCI), Treatment of
Malignant Neoplasia (TMN). This might be the result of an interstate
transfer in progress.

The Process page contains information on how to process Eligibility
Checks.

New born infants of DVA Gold card holders

In November 2012, the Repatriation Commission agreed to cover the health
care costs of infant(s) of an entitled gold card holder while both the
mother and infant(s) are in hospital.

As a result of this decision the costs of health care provided to the
infant(s) will be covered until the mother has been discharged from
hospital. Any ongoing medical costs of the infant(s) are not covered
unless the infant(s) has an entitlement to health care in their own
right, that is, entitlement to a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
Health Card.

In situations where an infant is formally admitted to hospital as an
in-patient, for example, neo-natal intensive care, health complications,
or is a subsequent child of a multiple birth, DVA will cover the
hospital expenses for the infant until either the mother or the
infant(s) are discharged from hospital, whichever occurs first.

Dependants

Dependants are entitled to a gold card once the veteran’s death is
established as war caused.

Students

When a dependent child reaches the age of sixteen and is remaining in
full time education, their gold card is reissued annually until
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) is advised the student is no
longer studying full time or they reach the age of 25.

Student enrolment advice is usually forwarded to DVA by:

-   31 January for students continuing study at a secondary school
-   28 February for students continuing study at a university or
    tertiary education venue

Students due to complete education may retain entitlements until DVA is
advised full time education is not continuing. Advice a student is
ceasing full time education can be received at any time and DVA will
cancel entitlement accordingly.

DVA may reinstate benefits at a later date if the dependant decides to
continue with full time education however no payments can be made for
the period in which the dependant was not entitled to treatment
benefits.

Cancer treatment

Australian veterans are entitled to receive cancer treatment
irrespective of whether this condition is war caused.

Australian veterans with cancer and no other treatment entitlement are
issued with a white card.

Veterans with entitlement for Treatment of Malignant Neoplasia (TMN)
(cancer) are eligible to receive treatment for all cancer conditions,
not just the initial cancer identified. Eligibility for subsequent
cancer is effective from the same date as the earlier condition,
regardless of the time between diagnoses.

Treatment of hyperkeratoses, or similar conditions, may also be
authorised if the veteran is currently receiving treatment for basal or
squamous cell carcinoma. In these cases a Prior Approval and Referral
System (PARS) record authorising treatment must be raised prior to
payment. If there is no prior approval present refer to Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) South Australia for consideration.

Veterans may receive treatment for other conditions, symptoms or
sequelae associated with the treatment of their cancer. For example, the
provision of an artificial eye to replace one lost as a result of
radiotherapy for malignant neoplasia. In these cases a PARS check
confirming their eligibility for treatment is required prior to payment.
If there is no prior approval present refer to DVA for consideration.

Veterans from all other countries must have their cancer accepted as a
disability by the relevant overseas authority and are only entitled to
receive treatment for the particular cancer accepted.

DVA Reciprocal Health Care Agreements

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) has Reciprocal Health Care
Agreements (RHCA) with:

-   United Kingdom
-   Canada
-   New Zealand
-   South Africa

Veterans from these countries are eligible for treatment under DVA
arrangements for white card holders.

Note: in some instances hospital accommodation items may create a pseudo
Prior Approval and Referral System (PARS) record even though DVA has
declined approval for the admission of an ineligible person. When an
eligibility message is returned for Treatment Other Countries veterans,
check VEPI to see whether there is a PARS record with the status of R.
If the PARS has been declined, reject payment.

Loss of eligibility

Some veterans can lose their treatment eligibility if their service
pension is reassessed. Where there has been a partial loss of
eligibility, veterans will have their gold card cancelled and white card
issued. In these cases, accepted disabilities will be available in pend
processing.

Where eligibility has been lost completely the VEXI screen will indicate
Personal Treatment Entitlement Card (PTEC) as the last card but the
veteran will have no accepted disabilities.

It is possible for a person transferring interstate to have PTEC
recorded with no accepted disabilities, however in the majority of cases
this is due to eligibility loss.

Note: this only applies to veterans.

If there is any doubt regarding a person's eligibility, forward an
Eligibility query form to the VAP Helpdesk.

The Resources page contains control lines and enquiry screen
information, a link to the VAP Code Index, links to the Eligibility
query form and the Department of Veterans' Affairs website.

Related links

Dental services for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP)

Podiatry services for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP)

Optometrical services for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
