-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details to assist Service Officers with
processing radiation oncology claims in a timely and efficient manner
and to make sure national consistency is maintained.

Important information

Processing radiation oncology can be complex and extra care must be
taken when processing these accounts. It is important to check the
patient account/invoice and/or transmitted claims have all the relevant
information provided to assess the claim according to legislation.

If any errors are keyed, or fields are overlooked during processing, an
incorrect benefit will be paid and a latter day adjustment will be
needed.

Note: these patients are extremely ill and processing their
accounts/invoices incorrectly may cause unnecessary pressure on them and
their families.

Claim details - check fields

The level of benefit depends on the:

-   number of fields treated
-   equipment used

If multiple fields are treated, the account/invoice must include both
the single field base item and the additional field derived fee item.

When the charge quoted includes additional fields that have not been
itemised on the account/invoice, do not process the service without
first contacting the health professional for clarification. See the
Process page for details.

See the Resources page for a table of base and derived fee items.

Base and multiple fields items

When processing a radiation oncology claim it is important that the base
item (one field) and correlating derived fee item (2-5 fields) are
associated. The system will return an error message if the incorrect
items have been used.

See the Resources page for more details on:

-   base and derived fee items
-   return messages

Restrictions

Restrictions on radiation oncology items may need manual intervention.
Follow the assessing rules in QITI and refer to the general explanatory
notes on MBS Online when processing and before providing any advice.

See the Resources page for a table that outlines the restrictions and
the appropriate text required to override the restrictions.

Appropriate text

Where multiple items are claimed and restrictions apply, the health
professional must provide text or a notation to support their claim.

The text required may differ depending on the item and whether the claim
is submitted manually or electronically.

Examples of appropriate text include:

-   Times of each service as noted in the Text field (Service Time field
    often defaults to the transmission time for online claims)
-   separate attendance
-   specific body areas, for example right breast, left breast
-   HGL and HGR (for online claims)
-   Sacrum 10am and Femur 2pm
-   Separate episode of care

See the Resources page for a table to assist with processing claims with
text or notation.

Item structure

The items in-group T2, subgroup 3 of the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) are structured according to:

the equipment used

the body region being treated:

-   lung
-   prostate
-   breast
-   other region

whether the region is the:

-   primary site
-   secondary site

Single field base item:

additional field derived fee item:

-   to a maximum of 5 additional fields

See the Resources page for a link to MBS Online.

Record fee charged

Where the account/invoice indicates that the health professional agrees
to accept the Medicare benefit as full payment, staff must key the full
charge on the account/invoice. To make sure that the claimant does not
receive a substantiation statement for the account/invoice, staff must
key a zero ($0.00) for substantiation.

See the Process page for a table explaining how to enter a fee.

Related links

Radiation oncology (radiotherapy)

Medicare online claiming

Verify services for Medicare Safety Net

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
