
Inquire CDMS tab fields for the Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare 011-41030050

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information held within each accessible tab in
the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the Child Dental
Benefits Schedule (CDBS).

Eligible Persons tab

The Eligible Person Details tab displays the personal details for a
child or teenager.

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Eligible Person Details tab.

Guardian/Parents Details tab

The Guardian/Parents Details tab displays the person or persons, and the
address where the notification was sent for CDBS.

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Guardian/Parents Details tab.

Entitlement Details tab

The Entitlement Details tab displays the entitlement details for CDBS.

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Entitlement Details tab.

Notification Details tab

The Notification Details tab displays the notification details for CDBS.

The Resources page contains a table describing the fields displayed on
the Notification Details tab and field descriptions for tabs in the
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the Child Dental
Benefits Schedule (CDBS).

Agency Data tab

The Agency Data tab:

-   displays the original information transmitted to Medicare from
    Centrelink or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
-   displays all eligible children/teenagers; and
-   assists to match records that were unable to be automatically
    matched by the system

Note: where the child/teenager is eligible because they are in receipt
of the payment directly, only the child/teenager's details are displayed
in this tab.

The Agency Data tab is displayed unprotected to specific Tivoli Access
Manager (TAMS)/Security roles. The Agency Data tab will be hidden to
Service Officers who do not have the appropriate security access.
Authorised Service Officers can select radio buttons beside agency
details. Only 1 radio button can be selected at a time. Once selected,
the extensible mark-up language (XML) data appears. All messages are
displayed regardless of whether the message has a pending, log only,
success or failed message status.

Comments tab

The Comments tab is used by Service Officers in the Amend Consumer
Details tab only, to record any interaction with the customer face to
face, on the phone or in correspondence. All contact between Medicare
and the customer must be documented for further follow up.

The Recorded Comments table displays comments that are without end dates
or have end dates in the future.

History tab

When the History tab is selected, the system shall display a history of
all interactions and can be filtered by event type selection. When no
history exists, the system shall display 'No history records to
display'.

Edit button

The Edit button, located at the bottom of the Inquire CDBS Details
screen is to facilitate easy swapping to the Amend CDBS Details screen
and allows a customer’s CDBS record to be amended.

When the Edit button is selected, two options are displayed. Select Yes,
to swap from Inquire CDBS Details screen to Amend CDBS Details screen or
select No, to remain on the Inquire CDBS Details screen.

The Resources page contains field descriptions for tabs in the Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the Child Dental Benefits
Schedule (CDBS).

Related links

Patient eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
