
Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment requirements 011-44110040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about applying a date of death to a
deceased person's Medicare record.

On this Page:

Receiving notification of death

Notification of a deceased person can be processed by:

attending a service centre:

-   the notifier may complete an Advice of Death form (SA116), or
-   the Service Officer may perform a security check on the notifier and
    establish their relationship to the deceased or authority to inform
    Medicare

via mail, receipt of signed written advice must include:

-   date of death, if actual date of death is not known the notification
    date may be included
-   the identity of the person or organisation providing the information
    (for example, on the organisations letterhead)
-   a clear explanation of the relationship or association of the person
    or organisation to the deceased or
-   receipt of a completed (signed) Advice of Death form (SA116)

by phone:

-   perform a security check on the caller and establish their
    relationship to the deceased or authority to inform Services
    Australia

Fact of Death Register

Data received from the Fact of Death Register (FODD) is processed to
update Medicare records in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS).

The FODD data provides:

all registered deaths in Australia and is received daily

Medicare records are updated automatically where an exact one-to-one is
matched against Medicare enrolment data using:

-   first name
-   last name
-   date of birth
-   gender

partial matches are identified and referred for manual review

To check how a date of death was recorded in CDMS look at the Consumer
History Summary Personal Details page in CDMS.

The Resources page contains information on checking how a date of death
has been recorded in CDMS.

End date reason code for 'data cleanse - inactive record' in CDMS

Staff may see an end date descriptor 'data cleanse - inactive record',
applied to some Medicare records in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS).

This reason code is applied to a number of records where the person:

is aged 89 years or older

is not registered for a My Health Record

has no claiming history with:

-   Medicare
-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

This process started after an Australian National Audit Office (ANAO)
audit on the integrity of Medicare customer data was finished. The lack
of claiming history for people in this age group may show they no longer
live in Australia or are deceased.

If a person with this end date descriptor contacts Services Australia, a
security check should be undertaken. They may not be able to answer
questions about healthcare services. If successfully passed remove the
end date. Any questions about this process contact the Eligibility and
Enrolments team.

End date reason code for Linked to Another Consumer

Staff accessing the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) can see
an end date descriptor ‘Linked to Another Consumer’.

The MCDIU team merge consumer records as required, as part of
remediating duplicate Medicare enrolment records. Non-surviving (or
secondary) records were removed from the list of Medicare records for My
Health Record creation.

Removing an end date from a record will result in the automatic creation
of a second My Health Record for the same person

End dates with reason ‘Linked to Another Consumer’ must not be deleted.
Staff must check the individual’s comments tab, which references the
primary record. Staff are to amend the primary record as required.

If there are issues with using the primary record, staff are to contact
the Medicare Consumer Data Integrity Unit Tier 3 team. The Resources
page contains contact details.

Other sources of notification

Services Australia accepts advice of the death of a person from the
following sources:

-   next of kin
-   family members
-   nursing homes
-   hospitals
-   funeral homes or directors
-   medical practitioners
-   executors or executrix of the deceased person’s estate

The details are recorded in Personal in the Consumer Maintenance
Directory System (CDMS).

Deceased child

Where a deceased person is a child, the same policy and procedures are
followed as with an adult.

Deceased newborn

A deceased newborn is a baby who is alive at birth but passes away
shortly afterwards.

Enquiries relating to a deceased baby must be handled with the utmost
sensitivity, see Newborn child enrolments in Medicare.

Stillborn

A stillborn baby is a newborn who is not alive at the time of birth.

Enquiries relating to a stillborn baby must be handled with the utmost
sensitivity.

There are no services listed in the Medical Benefits Schedule (MBS) that
are payable for the treatment of a stillborn child. A stillborn child
must not be enrolled on either the parent's Medicare card or on an
individual Medicare card.

The Resources page contains information on checking how a date of death
has been recorded in CDMS, contact details for the Bereavement/Double
Orphan Pension Helpdesk and Eligibility and Enrolments, and a link to
the Advice of Death form and Services Australia website.

Related links

Initial notification of death

Issue replacement or duplicate Medicare card

Medicare claims for deceased persons

Newborn child enrolments in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
