-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to search and register a customer for
Medicare. It also explains how to search and perform various enquiries
in CDMS.

Customer contacts the agency

When a customer contacts the agency by phone about their application,
suitably skilled Service Officers must:

-   attempt first contact resolution, and
-   complete the enrolment regardless of the date of lodgement

Service Officers not skilled in this work type should follow the
Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility.

Note: all financial hardship and vulnerable customer claims, must be
processed at first point of contact. Service Officers not skilled in
this work type, must escalate to a PSO for assistance.

Mandatory detailed search in CDMS

Service Officers must complete a mandatory detailed search before:

-   registering a consumer
-   amending a consumer

See Table 1 on the Process page for how to do a mandatory detailed
search.

Note: an Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) or Australian
Immunisation Register Supplementary Identification Number (AIR SIN)
record may have been allocated to a consumer before enrolment in
Medicare. For example, an individual may have been created by:

-   the ‘Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier (MS003) form’, or
-   the IHI Service in myGov, or
-   AIR SIN record - manually created by AIR Service Officers

In these cases a customer record will already exist in CDMS. Services
Officers must ensure the existing consumer record is used and linked to
the Medicare enrolment. Do not create a new record.

If more than one record is found, see Duplicate Medicare enrolment and
Consumer IDs in Medicare.

Document verification

-   Identification documents must be verified for all customers in the
    Document Verification Service (DVS) before processing an application
-   The DVS processing form must be completed for each document
    verification attempted, both successful and unsuccessful
    verification must be recorded on the form
-   If an application is received and processed in a service centre, DVS
    is only required if the Service Officer is not satisfied with the
    validity of the documents

See Identity verification for Medicare enrolments and re-enrolments in
the Document Verification Service (DVS) for more details.

My Health Record questions for a customer

My Health Record preferences are processed in the Medicare entitlement
screens in CDMS.

Applicants can answer My Health Record questions for themselves and
children under 14 years of age.

Forms can be used to enrol additional persons 14 years and over. These
additional persons must complete and sign their own My Health Record
questions on the form.

The Resources page contains:

-   eligibility document requirements to register a customer for
    Medicare in CDMS
-   details on group and personal history categories
-   contact details
-   letters
-   result codes
-   data tables for Births, deaths and marriages, and
-   country codes for Australian visas

Related links

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Sensitive Information Indicators in the CDMS

Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT
payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
