
Accounts receivable and banking for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15050010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how the Compensation Finance
team process incoming payments for Medicare Compensation Recovery. It
also outlines how the Compensation Finance team receipt and allocate
bank payments to the correct Medicare Compensation Recovery case and how
the Medicare Compensation Recovery team validate those payments.

Banking

The Compensation Finance Team is responsible for banking all incoming
payments associated with a claim for compensation. Incoming payments by
cheque or Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) are banked or deposited into
the 'DHS Medicare Official Recovery of Compensation for Health Care and
Other Services Special Account' using Systems, Applications and Products
Financial Accounting (SAPFI).

All compensation payers and solicitors must have a unique account number
before making an EFT payment to Services Australia. If a compensation
payer does not have a unique account number they can email the
Compensation Finance team and a unique account number will be created.
Refer to Payments, refund and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery
for more information about incoming EFT payments.

Receipting and allocation of incoming payments

The Compensation Finance Team is responsible for allocating all incoming
payments to the correct injured person. Compensation Finance advise
Medicare Compensation Recovery once this has occurred by providing a
copy of the:

-   remittance advice received from the compensation payer
-   receipt details including the date and the amount of the payment
-   unique account reference number, and
-   name of the injured person that the payment was allocated to

All incoming payments are matched to an injured person by allocating it
to one of the following:

-   Work Identification Number (WIN) for cases already registered in the
    Compensation Case Management System (CCMS)
-   Medicare card number for cases that have not been registered
-   8600XXXX or 8700XXXX for overseas visitors or an injured person that
    cannot be easily identified
-   WXXXXXXXXX for debts owed by an injured person that have previously
    been referred to Debt Recovery Parramatta (DRP), or
-   8000XXXX number for debts owed by compensation payers that have
    previously been referred to Debt Recovery Parramatta (DRP)

Medicare Compensation Recovery Service Officers are responsible for
checking that any incoming payment has been allocated to the correct
injured person and case before processing a work item. Where an error
has been identified or where the payment has been allocated to a
Medicare number instead of a WIN, the Service Officer must request the
Compensation Finance Team to process an allocation change using the
'Allocation change' email template.

The Resources page contains a link to the email template.

Methods of banking

Incoming Cheque payments

Banking is performed daily by the Compensation Finance Team and all
cheque details are entered into an Excel banking spreadsheet. This is
uploaded into Systems, Applications and Products Financial Accounting
(SAPFI) and a reconciliation of all cheque deposits is performed. Once
the reconciliation is complete, the Compensation Finance Team:

-   deposit all cheques into a Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA)
    branch
-   provide the CBA with a bank deposit book and a copy of the Excel
    banking spreadsheet for processing on behalf of the Reserve Bank of
    Australia (RBA)
-   have the bank deposit book stamped by the CBA and the deposit
    appears on the next day bank statement from the RBA

A copy of the Excel banking spreadsheet and a SAPFI print of all
payments with any associated documentation received with the cheques is
then forwarded to Medicare Compensation Recovery for validation and
processing that day.

If the Compensation Finance Team is unable to verify the injured person
for a cheque payment, the cheques are recorded in the return cheque
register and the cheque along with any associated documentation is
returned to the compensation payer requesting more information to be
provided.

Incoming Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) payments

All incoming EFT payments are credited directly to the 'DHS Medicare
Official Recovery of Compensation for Health Care and Other Services
Special Account' and appear on the banking ledger 11606 in Systems,
Applications and Products Financial Accounting (SAPFI).

The Compensation Finance Team receive remittance advice by email or post
directly from the compensation payer for any deposits made by EFT. The
emails are normally received the day before the EFT deposit is made and
the remittance advice is checked against the banking ledger 11606,
matched to the injured person and entered into an Excel banking
spreadsheet. This is uploaded into SAPFI and a reconciliation of all EFT
deposits is performed.

Once the reconciliation is complete, a copy of the Excel banking
spreadsheet and a SAPFI print of all payments and remittance advices is
sent to Medicare Compensation Recovery Service Delivery for validation
and processing that day.

Any unidentified deposits are followed up with a telephone call or email
to the depositor by the Compensation Finance Team. If this is
unsuccessful, the Compensation Finance Team may request a trace for the
deposit from the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) to obtain further
information or request the EFT deposit to be returned. For further
information on Accounts receivable and banking for Medicare Compensation
Recovery including process steps for Compensation Finance Service
Officers, email the Compensation Finance Team.

The Resources page contains links to letters, email templates forms and
contact details.

Related links

Payments, refund and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Legal and requests for information for Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
