
Family Tax Benefit Part A in Medicare Safety Net 011-43080030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to respond to enquiries relating to Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A entitlements. Note: from 1 July 2016 Norfolk
Island is covered under Medicare provisions.

PBS patient search for FTB A enquiries

A Service Officer can access the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) to check if a person has a recorded FTB A status.

A customer's FTB A entitlement is stored within Services Australia's
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient database. Service Officer's
use the PBS Patient Enquiries menu to perform an enquiry on this
information in the PBS patient database. The Service Officer can view
the FTB A entitlements for a specified customer reference number (CRN)
or Medicare card number.

The FTB (A) Entitlement Enquiry (RFTB) screen is an enquiry only screen
and the details cannot be adjusted.

The Process page contains information on how to access and search the
RFTB screen.

FTB Entitlement Enquiry screen

The details displayed on the FTB Entitlement Enquiry (RFTB) screen can
be used to confirm FTB A entitlement.

If the NOTIFY PBS field is populated with a Y the customer's record will
need to be refreshed by PBS. The Process page contains instructions for
accessing the Patient Enquiry system. and CDMS does not reflect the FTB
A concessional.

When searching for FTB A entitlements using the F selection criteria,
use either the CRN number or the Medicare card number. For the most
comprehensive search of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) FTB A
entitlement dataset use the CRN number.

Searches for FTB A details cannot be performed using patient name or
address details.

If any other details are entered, an error message will display.

The Resources page contains information about PBS preference help
messages and PBS preference error messages.

Preference help key

In the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) system, the preference help
key differs from the Medicare preference help key:

-   [F1] - Medicare preference help
-   [F4] - PBS preference help

The Resources page contains further information.

EMSN FTB A threshold

Families eligible for FTB A are eligible for the Extended Medicare
Safety Net (EMSN) FTB A threshold.

Accumulation rules for EMSN FTB A threshold

A family's out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses accumulate towards the Extended
Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) FTB A threshold. Once the threshold is met,
the family is entitled to higher Medicare Safety Net benefits. The EMSN
benefit is 80% of the OOP expenses or the EMSN benefit cap, whichever is
the lesser amount.

Service Officers can view a family's OOP expenses by selecting Medicare
Safety Net from the drop down list in CDMS, then entering one of the
identifiers:

-   Medicare card number
-   Consumer ID, or
-   Medicare PIN

Note: OOP expenses are the difference between the charge and the benefit
paid for out-of-hospital services.

See also: Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN).

Eligibility for EMSN FTB A threshold

Only families who are eligible for FTB A are eligible for the Extended
Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) FTB A threshold.

Note: individuals receiving FTB A who are not registered as a family,
are not eligible for the EMSN FTB A threshold.

Service Officers can check the family's FTB A status via one of the
following:

-   The CDMS system selecting Medicare Safety Net from the drop down
    list
-   Accessing the FTB (A) Entitlement Enquiry (RFTB). The Process page
    contains instructions for accessing the patient enquiry screen
-   Through the family assistance system within a service centre (with
    the customer's permission)

If the Medicare Safety Net system does not reflect the FTB A status
stated by the customer:

-   complete the Tier-3 Medicare Safety Net escalation form, and
-   email to Medicare Consumers Program Support - Medicare Consumers
    Section - Medicare Branch

Commencement of eligibility for EMSN FTB A threshold

Family Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) FTB A threshold eligibility
commences when the family has met all of the following criteria:

-   registered for a family Medicare Safety Net
-   eligible for an FTB A payment
-   reached the current EMSN FTB A threshold
-   been confirmed as a family for that year

The FTB A payment information is sent from Centrelink to Medicare
electronically.

Centrelink will only advise Medicare of the first time a recipient
receives or defers an FTB A payment in each calendar year. Notification
of further payments will not be forwarded to Medicare where a family is
receiving regular payments from Centrelink.

If a family is receiving fortnightly instalments of FTB A and changes
their payment choice to zero rate during the calendar year to receive
their entitlement at the end of the financial year the customer will
continue to receive the FTB A threshold for the remainder of that
calendar year. The customer will not be eligible for the FTB A threshold
commencing 1 January of the next calendar year.

A family receiving an FTB A payment as a lump sum payment for the
current financial year will be eligible for the FTB A threshold
commencing the start of the next calendar year. For example, if a
customer receives an FTB A payment for the 2015-2016 financial year in
August 2016, the family FTB A safety net threshold will commence 1
January 2017.

The Resources page contains further information about payment choices
and eligibility for the EMSN FTB A threshold.

Backdating eligibility for EMSN FTB A threshold

Where a FTB A payment is made after the eligible Medicare Safety Net
calendar year, eligibility for the Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN)
FTB A threshold cannot be backdated. Therefore, no Medicare Safety Net
benefits are payable for that calendar year even if the family meets the
threshold.

The Resources page has:

contact details for the Assessing and Benefits team

a list of:

-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) preference help messages
-   PBS preference error messages and their description

details of how payment choices for FTB A will affect eligibility for the
Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) FTB A threshold

a link to the:

-   Medicare Safety Net query form PP041
-   Tier-3 Medicare Safety Net escalation form, and
-   Medicare Safety Net - Inquire on Medicare Card Number user guide

Related links

Family registration and confirmation in Medicare Safety Net

Medicare Safety Net thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
