
Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme in Medicare 011-41060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate
(CLaCP) Scheme in Medicare.

On this Page:

Cleft lip and Cleft Palate (CLaCP)

Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate (CLaCP) conditions are congenital defects
resulting from the lip failing to close, or the palate failing to fuse,
during the early stages of pregnancy.

Services for the correction of these conditions are listed in category 7
of the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

These services are normally described as dental services. However, for
the purposes of the MBS notes relating to CLaCP the word ‘medical’ is
interpreted to include 'dental'.

Patient eligibility and age limits for CLaCP

To be eligible for treatment under the scheme, a patient must be a
prescribed dental patient.

A prescribed dental patient must:

-   be enrolled in Medicare
-   before turning 22 years of age, be certified by a health
    professional as having a cleft lip, a cleft palate or other eligible
    condition by an eligible health professional
-   have started treatment before turning 22 years of age, and
-   be under the age of 28 years when receiving treatment

Where a patient is over the age of 28 years and requires repairs to
reconstructive work previously provided under the scheme they may be
eligible for these additional services if approval is sought, see
Applications for over 28 years.

Oral and maxillofacial services in Group C2 require referral from an
orthodontist, as stated in MBS Note CN.0.11. The Resources page contains
a link to MBS Online.

Patients not eligible for CLaCP

Medicare benefits for the CLaCP Scheme are not payable for visitors to
Australia or temporary residents.

Health professional eligibility for CLaCP

In order to receive Medicare benefits, all treatment under the Scheme
must be carried out by eligible health professionals who are residing in
Australia.

There are 3 categories of health professionals eligible to provide
treatment under the Scheme are:

-   orthodontists
-   oral and maxillofacial surgeons
-   dentists

Health professionals recognised by Services Australia can bill Medicare
for CLaCP services listed in category 7 of the MBS.

More information regarding health professionals eligibility can be
located in MBS Note CN.2.1 The Resources page contains a link to MBS
Online.

Payment plans for CLaCP treatment

Health professionals and patients may enter into a payment plan
agreement as CLaCP treatment can continue for a long time and it can
help to split costs evenly.

An account may only have a charge for 3 months of treatment, split over
3 separate dates.

Where the date of services is unclear, contact the health professional
to confirm both the date of service (DOS) and the full charge amount for
this 3 months of active treatment. For example:

Claim received with the below dates:

-   Item 75045, DOS 15/07/2019, Charge $280.00
-   Item 75045, DOS 15/08/2019, Charge $280.00
-   Item 75045, DOS 15/09/2019, Charge $280.00
-   Item 75048, DOS 15/10/2019, Charge $280.00
-   Item 75048, DOS 15/11/2019, Charge $280.00
-   Item 75048, DOS 15/12/2019, Charge $280.00

Confirmed the actual treatment dates and full charge with the health
professional:

-   Item 75045, DOS 15/09/2019, Charge $840.00
-   Item 75048, DOS 15/12/2019, Charge $840.00

Prescribed dental patient certification

Patients do not have to register with Services Australia before
receiving treatment.

When providing treatment under the scheme, a health professional must
certify their patient is a prescribed dental patient ensuring that they
meet the eligibility requirements.

Health professionals must include the text certified dental patient on
the patient’s account or in the text field of a Medicare claim for
benefits.

This requirement applies to all patients in the scheme.

Existing patients who were previously registered were issued a
prescribed dental patient card to receive treatment. It is no longer
required for patients to produce this card.

The Resources page contains a link to MBS online.

Applications over 28 years

If a patient is 28 years of age or older and has been certified as a
prescribed dental patient prior to turning 22 years of age under the
scheme, an eligible health professional can apply for approval to
undertake repairs to previous reconstructive surgery.

The health professional is required to provide clinical details
outlining the need for the repair. Applications should include a copy of
the treatment plan, confirmation that the patient meets the eligibility
requirements below and is a prescribed dental patient:

the patient must have had a registered medical or dental practitioner
issued certificate stating that they were suffering from a relevant
condition prior to the age of 22 years

they must have received treatment for that condition prior to turning 28
years; and

the Minister’s delegate confirms in writing that they are satisfied
that:

-   because of exceptional circumstances the patient requires repair of
    previous reconstructive surgery in connection with the condition;
    and
-   the patient needs to undergo a course of treatment

A treatment plan devised by an eligible health professional for the
repair of previous reconstructive surgery should be forwarded to
Services Australia for confirmation of eligibility and must include:

a time period for which patient eligibility for claiming related
treatments should be reinstated

dates the treatment is expected to commence and be completed

proof of previous eligibility and treatment under the scheme, including
the patient’s:

-   full name
-   date of birth
-   address
-   condition
-   date (or approximate) of original surgery
-   original treating practitioner (if known)

a clinical report outlining:

-   practitioner undertaking the repairs
-   the nature of the repair
-   the previous reconstructive surgery
-   the work to be undertaken
-   imaging reports should be provided where available

Where an application for a patient over the age of 28 years is received
ensure all required documentation is attached and emailed to the
Medicare Assessing helpdesk who will seek approval from the Department
of Health.

See the Resources page for mailing details, contacts and a link to MBS
online.

Other identified conditions

A Ministerial Determination is in place for other identified conditions
enabling the payment of Medicare benefits. CLaCP and other conditions
for which a patient may be considered a prescribed dental patient are
listed in the Medicare Benefits Schedule – Note CN.3.1.

The conditions have been listed using terminology they are generally
known under. Some conditions are similar to, or known as other
conditions on the list.

Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate items 75039, 75042, 75045 and 75048

The Medicare benefits for Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate treatments are
based on a 36 month period. Each item includes a supply of fixed
appliances and 3 months of active treatment.

General assessing rules:

-   A total of 12 services can be claimed over the 36 month period (1
    initial item and up to 11 subsequent treatment items)
-   Item 75039 (single arch) is the initial item for a course of
    treatment to correct and align either the mandibular or maxillary
    occlusion
-   Item 75042 (single arch) is to be used for subsequent active
    treatment
-   Item 75045 (2 arch) is the initial item for a course of treatment to
    correct and align both the mandibular and maxillary occlusions
-   Item 75048 (2 arch) is to be used for subsequent active treatment

Health professional billing

Due to the length of the CLaCP treatment , most health professionals
will set up a payment plan for the patient. The patient will pay monthly
and the account will show monthly payments for a treatment service every
3 months.

When operators are processing claims for items for 75039, 75042, 75045
and 75048, it is important to enter the correct charge amount as it is
crucial for Medicare Safety Net purposes.

Contact information for mail applications and phone enquiries

For contact information see Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate (CLaCP)

Note: all CLaCP telephone enquiries are to be answered in the first
instance, there is no dedicated team within service delivery to answer
these enquiries.

When a health professional, patient or parent/carer contacts Services
Australia regarding a CLaCP enquiry do not provide the Contact
information for providers phone number as they will be redirected back
to the Medicare general line. If assistance is required for an issue not
covered by this document, contact a Programme Support Officer (PSO).

CLaCP claims processing and escalations

CLaCP claims in the general queue are payable by Service Officers, the
ONLY time the claim will require escalation is when a warning message in
the Medicare mainframe instructs that a restriction lift is required.

A restriction lift is required in the following instance:

-   Age restriction – this occurs when the patient is over 28 years of
    age and has been approved by the Department of Health for further
    services under the scheme

In order to have the restriction lifted by the Medicare Assessing
helpdesk a copy of the letter from the Department of Health stating the
patient is eligible for repairs to previous surgery must be emailed to
the Medicare Assessing helpdesk.

For more information on actioning a restriction lift, see Assessing MBS
item restrictions.

The Resources page contains information on the services a registered
dental practitioner can provide, links to MBS online.

Related links

Assessing MBS item restrictions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
