
Medicare number and Medicare card requests for prisoners 011-19012231

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Medicare eligibility for
prisoners, initial enrolment processes and replacement card requests
received by or on behalf of prisoners. A prisoner may also be referred
to as an inmate or an incarcerated person.

Requests

These requests may include:

-   Replacement of a lost, stolen or damaged card
-   Reissue of an expired card
-   Request to be copied or transferred from the existing card to one of
    their own, or
-   An initial enrolment where the prisoner has never been enrolled
    before

Note: Medicare number and Medicare card requests for prisoners must be
assessed and actioned by Service Officers who have the eligibility skill
tag. Applications received in a service centre must be scanned into
PaNDA via the normal process.

It is acceptable for Medicare trained Prison Liaison Officers (PLO) to
complete a Medicare transaction for a prisoner providing it is in
accordance with the requirements outlined in this policy.

Medicare eligibility for prisoners

Healthcare for prisoners is the responsibility of the relevant state or
territory governments. However, a prisoner’s eligibility for Medicare
does not cease when they enter prison. As Australian residents,
prisoners meet the definition of ‘eligible person’ under subsection 3(1)
of the Health Insurance Act 1973, which governs Medicare. Prisoners who
meet the definition under subsection 3(1) may be eligible for Medicare
enrolment or the reissue/replacement of a Medicare card.

However, while prisoners may be considered an eligible person for
Medicare purposes, they are generally not entitled to Medicare benefits
unless in exceptional circumstances. Health services for prisoners are
covered by the relevant state or territory governments.

Exceptions apply where a prisoner is on day release or home detention,
and medical treatment has been sought by the prisoner without that
treatment having been provided, arranged or required to be provided by
the prison authorities. In this situation, Medicare benefits are
payable. To obtain benefits, the prisoner must be assessed as eligible
for Medicare.

Services Australia will receive Medicare number requests, or replacement
or reissued Medicare card requests, for prisoners where they require
access to Highly Specialised Drugs whilst incarcerated or prior to their
release from prison.

The References page contains a link to the Legislation.

Access to Highly Specialised Drugs under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Under PBS, prisoners can have access to medications listed under the
Highly Specialised Drugs programme. This requires the treating
prescriber to contact the agency (on a designated phone line for health
professionals) for authority approval to prescribe the medicine. To
obtain approval, a prisoner must have a valid Medicare number.

Prisoners may not know their Medicare number or if their number is still
valid. Medical practitioners and pharmacists can contact the agency (on
a designated phone line for health professionals) to confirm Medicare
eligibility for a prisoner and obtain the Medicare number.

Where the Medicare card is valid (meaning it has not expired as per the
most recent card issued in CDMS), the medical practitioner or pharmacist
will confirm the number and no further action will be required.

Where the Medicare card is expired (card number no longer valid in
CDMS), the health professional will be advised that the prisoner does
not have a valid Medicare number and the prisoner will need to submit a
request for their Medicare number to be re-issued. This is consistent
with the standard policy for all Medicare customers. A Medicare
enrolment application form will need to be completed and submitted with
supporting documents to confirm their identity and eligibility. In
situations identity documents can’t be provided, a letter from the
prison, on prison letterhead, which confirms the prisoner’s identity is
required.

Where a prisoner has never been enrolled in Medicare, they must complete
a Medicare enrolment application form and provide a letter from the
prison, on prison letterhead, which confirms the prisoner’s identity
along with identity and eligibility documents. Eligibility must be
confirmed before they can be enrolled.

Releasing a prisoner’s Medicare card number

Service Officers can only release Medicare card numbers to health
professionals who have contacted the agency by calling either Medicare
Provider enquiries or the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Improved
Monitoring of Entitlements (IME) Enquiry line via the PBS general
enquiries line following existing processes. Information for health
professionals can be found on the Services Australia website. The
Resources page has a list of all contact details.

Medicare numbers for prisoners cannot be released to a third party, such
as staff from Correctional Services facilities unless verbal consent has
been obtained from the prisoner at the time of the phone call.

Information can only be provided to a third party without the prisoner’s
verbal consent where it is confirmed they hold Power of Attorney (POA),
have a Guardianship and/or Administrative Order or are registered as an
Authorised Representative for Medicare purposes. This is consistent with
the current Medicare policy for all Medicare customers.

Any forms or written requests (other than a legal POA, Guardianship,
Administrative Orders, or a Medicare Authorised Representative
arrangement) giving authority for Medicare to provide prisoner
information to Prison Correctional Staff must not be actioned and
notated in CDMS.

Prisoners may call the Medicare general enquiries line to obtain their
Medicare number and/or request a replacement card (however, this may be
difficult for a prisoner due to phone restrictions during
incarceration). The Resources page has a link to the Medicare general
enquiries line.

Where a prisoner cannot contact the agency themselves, a Medicare
enrolment application form will need to be completed and submitted with
a letter provided by the prison on prison letterhead.

Medicare card requests from prisoners

Prisoners must submit a Medicare enrolment application form with a
letter issued by the prison on prison letterhead which confirms the
prisoner’s identity. If the prisoner has never been enrolled in
Medicare, eligibility documents will also need to be provided. The
Medicare enrolment application form (MS004 or 3101) and all required
documents can be returned by email or post. Details can be found on the
form. The Resources page has a link to the form.

As the current Medicare enrolment form (MS004) may not necessarily meet
the needs of prisoners, authority from Medicare Public Eligibility -
National Office has been given to Correctional Services Officers to
submit the previous version of the form Medicare enrolment form (3101)
until otherwise advised by the agency. This form is no longer available
online, however has been made available to Correctional Services
Officers through separate correspondence.

Once the enrolment application has been assessed and processed, a valid
Medicare card will be sent to the prisoner via the address outlined on
the application form. This may be either the prison address or the
prisoner’s preferred mailing address. However, if the prisoner is
enrolled on a family card, refer to additional information under
Prisoner enrolled on a family Medicare card.

Note: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander prisoners may complete
either the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander enrolment and amendment
form (MS018), or the Medicare enrolment form, however a cover letter
from the prison on prison letterhead must also be provided confirming
the prisoner’s identity. The Resources page has a link to the form.

Prisoner enrolled on a family Medicare card

Where a prisoner requests a Medicare card to be sent to a prison address
(as per address notated on the Medicare enrolment form) and they are
enrolled on a Medicare card with other people, in most cases they will
need to be copied or transferred onto a card of their own. They will use
this card during the term of their incarceration. Examples of when a
prisoner should be either copied or transferred is outlined below:

Enrolled with other adults:

A prisoner’s Medicare card cannot be sent to a prison address if other
adult family members are enrolled on the same card. This includes people
aged 15 years and over.

If the prisoner has not requested to be transferred or it cannot be
confirmed if they wish to be transferred to their own card, they must be
copied onto their own card.

Enrolled with children (under the age of 15 years):

Where the prisoner is the only adult on the Medicare card, but is
enrolled with their children (under the age of 15 years), who are
enrolled onto both the prisoners card and another card, the prisoners
card (that includes their children) can be sent to the prison address.

In this instance, the prisoner does not need to be copied or transferred
onto their own card.

If the children were only enrolled on the prisoner’s card (and they were
not enrolled on another card as well), the prisoners Medicare card
(which includes his/her children) must not be sent to the prison
address.

The prisoner must be copied from the card they share with the children
to their own card. The children cannot be included on the Medicare card
being sent to the prison.

Note:

-   only where children are enrolled on more than one Medicare card can
    the prisoner remain on a Medicare card with their children and have
    the card sent to the prison address. The prison address cannot be
    recorded as the mailing address for the children if they are only
    enrolled on one Medicare card with the prisoner
-   where a prisoner has indicated all family members and a mailing
    address other than the prison address on the Medicare enrolment
    application form, the prisoner does not need to be copied to their
    own card

Prisoner has never been enrolled in Medicare

Where a prisoner has never been enrolled in Medicare, they must complete
a Medicare enrolment application form and provide a letter from the
prison, on prison letterhead, which confirms the prisoner’s identity
along with identity and eligibility documents.

Under the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act), a person must be eligible
in order to be enrolled in Medicare. The agency does not have the
discretion to extend Medicare eligibility to a person who is not
eligible under the Act.

Note: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander prisoners may complete
either the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander enrolment and amendment
form (MS018), or the Medicare enrolment form, however a cover letter
from the prison on prison letterhead must also be provided. The
Resources page has a link to the form.

Customer released from prison

A person who has been released from custody is no longer a prisoner,
therefore is a member of the public. The standard Medicare card
enrolment policies now apply.

The only exception to the standard policy is that prison release papers
provided by the customer are acceptable for confirming the customer’s
identity and residency.

To request a replacement card, the customer can call the general
enquiries phone line to request a replacement Medicare card (and must be
authenticated). See Authenticating a Medicare customer.

See Request from a customer who has been released from prison for more
information.

The Resources page contains links to the contact details within the
Services Australia website, and relevant forms.

Related links

Medicare cards

Access to Medicare self service - set up, checking, cancelling and
enabling

Using Medicare self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
