
Amended notices and reviews for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15030070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how the notice of charge (NOCH)
or notice of past benefits (NOPB) can be amended when disputed by the
injured person or compensation payer relating to Medicare Compensation
Recovery.

Request for amended NOCH or NOPB - general

An amended NOCH or NOPB can be considered in certain circumstances.
Criteria for review will depend on whether:

-   the claim is pre or post settlement
-   the notice was from a verified statement or all services were taken
-   the notice was valid or expired at the date of review request or
    date of judgement or settlement (DOJ/DOS)

While additional specific review circumstances are outlined later,
general circumstances for review of a notice include:

-   there is an identified processing error and services or costs have
    been incorrectly included
-   in response to a request from the compensation payer when they have
    already paid the account
-   a care cost amount (in full or in part) does not relate to the
    compensable injury or illness. Medical evidence is required to
    remove previously identified care costs and must be escalated to
    Programme Management
-   some or all of the identified services do not relate to the
    compensable injury or illness

Remove previously verified services

Where a request is received to amend a NOCH or NOPB by processing a new
statement by claimant to remove previously verified services, the
statement must be clear. Either:

-   the services to be removed are crossed out or have a line through
    them
-   some of the previously verified services are re-ticked, others left
    unticked, or
-   it has a comment beside the service indicating it does not relate

Initials are not required when services are to be removed.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend notices.

See Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Reviews before judgment or settlement - valid NOPB - all services taken

General reasons for review also apply as listed above, however Services
Australia may consider that a completed statement by claimant should not
be used to amend a valid NOPB - all services taken. The agency will
evaluate the completed statement by claimant on a case-by-case basis.
Factors to consider include whether:

the statement by claimant is substantially correct

written evidence has been provided from the compensation payer or
claimant’s solicitor that the case cannot be finalised by judgment or
settlement without an accurate notice, as the claim must be:

-   endorsed by a judge and a trial date has been set, or
-   endorsed or sanctioned by the Public Trustee

the notice is due to expire prior to an upcoming trial date or
sanctioning conference

the injured person has claimed further eligible benefits consistent with
the compensable injury or illness, since the Medicare history statement
(MHS) was issued

If the agency determines the statement by claimant should not be used to
amend the NOPB - all services taken, a new MHS may be issued to the
injured person or claimant.

Service Delivery APS5 can approve to process a statement by the claimant
with:

a recompleted statement by the claimant, and

written evidence from the compensation payer or claimant’s solicitor
that the case cannot be finalised by judgment or settlement without an
accurate notice, as the claim must be:

-   endorsed by a judge and a trial date has been set, or
-   endorsed or sanctioned by the Public Trustee

Where the agency determines the statement by claimant can be used to
amend the NOPB - all services taken, a new verified NOPB will be issued.
An APS5 or above must approve before using a completed statement by
claimant to amend the valid NOPB - all services taken.

When a valid NOPB - all services taken is due to expire in less than 4
weeks and a judgment or settlement has not been fixed and is not likely
to be fixed in the near future, suspend the case indefinitely. Upon
receipt of a new request for MHS, issue a new MHS to the injured person
or claimant.

The Process page contains information on how to 'Amend valid notice of
past benefits', 'Delete valid notice of past benefits - all services
taken and issue new Medicare history statement'.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegation required
to amend NOPB at pre judgment or settlement stage (Table 2) and
information to help determine the validity of statement by claimant
(Table 4).

Reviews before judgment or settlement - valid verified NOPB

Where a valid verified NOPB exists (from a completed statement by
claimant) and the case has not reached judgment or settlement, only
consider an amended NOPB in circumstances where:

there is an identified processing error and services or costs have been
incorrectly included – Service Delivery APS 1 can approve

compensation payer supplies evidence they have already paid the account
– Service Delivery APS 5 can approve

a care cost amount (in full or in part) does not relate to the
compensable injury or illness – must be escalated to Programme
Management with letter from treating doctor that

-   some or all of the care costs do not relate to the compensable
    injury or illness, or
-   the increase in the level of care was not related to the compensable
    injury or illness

The Process page contains information on how to 'Amend valid notice of
past benefits'.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend NOPB at pre judgment or settlement stage (Table 2).

Reviews before judgment or settlement- expired NOPB

General reasons for review also apply as listed above. With an expired
NOPB prior to judgment or settlement, a subsequent statement by claimant
can be processed to remove some of or all previously verified services.

The statement by claimant must be clear. A Service Delivery APS3 can
process the statement to remove services or if unsure they can consult a
Programme Support Officer or Team Leader for help.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend NOPB at pre judgment or settlement stage (Table 2) and links to
letters and templates.

See Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Reviews after judgment or settlement – all services taken

Services Australia can review the NOPB (advance payment) or the NOCH -
all services taken within 2 years of a judgment or settlement being
fixed. General reasons for review also apply as listed above. The
injured person must apply in writing (letter or email) by returning a
completed and valid statement by claimant. Circumstances for review
include:

-   not all the services taken were related to the compensable injury or
    illness
-   the judgment or settlement amount has been reduced due to
    apportionment of liability to the injured person – evidence required
    from the compensation payer

The Process page contains information on how to process an 'Amended
notice of past benefits (advance payment) or notice of charge'.

The References page contains links to legislation and the agency's
delegations.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend NOPB and NOCH at post judgment or settlement stage (Table 3)
and links to letters and templates.

See Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Reviews after judgment or settlement - verified NOPB

There is no delegation in the Health and Other Services (Compensation)
Act 1995 to review a verified NOPB (advance payment) or verified NOCH
issued in accordance with a completed statement by claimant. However,
consideration will be given to review the notice within 2 years of a
judgment or settlement being fixed and general reasons for review apply
as listed above. The injured person must apply in writing (letter or
email) and evidence might be required.

The subsequent statement by claimant must be clear.

Medical evidence is required to remove previously identified care costs
and must be escalated to Programme Management.

Where evidence has not been provided until after the case has been
finalised, a review of the notice is completed manually.

Where the date of injury has changed on notice of judgment or settlement
(NOJ/NOS):

-   consider whether to register a new case
-   see General information for Medicare Compensation Recovery

If a decision is made to retain the existing case:

-   where the only change is the date of injury advised on the NOJ/NOS
    is later than the previously registered date, Service Delivery APS3
    can process to remove services prior to the new date of injury
-   for non–advance payment cases, process the NOCH manually to reflect
    the new date of injury where the amendment will result in a debt to
    the compensation payer. See Table 2 on the Process page

The Process page contains information on how to process an 'Amended
notice of past benefits (advance payment) or notice of charge'.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend NOPB at post judgment or settlement stage (Table 3).

See:

-   Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery
-   Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery
-   Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Delegation and evidence for reviews after judgment or settlement - verified NOCH (valid at date of settlement)

General reasons for review also apply as listed above. For a NOCH valid
at the DOJ/DOS, Service Delivery APS5 can approve to remove some of or
all previously verified services that no longer relate as:

there has been a change in the nature of the injury or illness at the
time of judgment or settlement and the services previously identified no
longer relate, for example the case was registered with back and leg
injuries but only settled for the back injury with

-   a recompleted statement by claimant and
-   for change in the nature of injury or illness, Statutory Declaration
    from claimant explaining this and that the services do not relate
    and
-   written evidence from compensation payer e.g. notice of settlement

Where there are no changes to nature of injury of illness, Service
Delivery APS5 can approve to:

remove services that might relate to the compensable injury or illness,
with:

-   a recompleted statement by claimant and
-   a Statutory Declaration completed by the claimant that the services
    do not relate to the compensable injury/illness

Where there are no changes to the nature of injury of illness, Service
Delivery APS5 can approve to

remove services that are clearly unrelated to the compensable injury or
illness, with:

-   a recompleted statement by claimant

Service Delivery APS3 can approve to reduce the notice of charge by the
percentage of apportionment applied where written evidence has been
supplied by the compensation payer.

Escalate any case to Programme Management if unsure.

The Process page contains information on how to process an 'Amended
notice of past benefits (advance payment) or notice of charge'.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend NOCH at post judgment or settlement stage (Table 3) and links
to letters and templates.

See:

-   Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery
-   Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Delegation and evidence for reviews after judgment or settlement - verified NOPB (expired at date of settlement)

General reasons for review apply as listed above. For a notice of past
benefits that has expired at the date of judgment or settlement a
Service Officer APS5 can approve to remove some of or all previously
verified services that no longer relate as:

there has been a change in the nature of the injury or illness at the
time of judgment or settlement and the services previously identified no
longer relate. For example, the case was registered with back and leg
injuries but only settled for the back injury. The required evidence
must be provided:

-   a recompleted statement by claimant and
-   written evidence from compensation payer e.g. notice of settlement

Where there are no changes to nature of injury of illness, Service
Delivery APS3 can approve to

remove services that are clearly unrelated to the compensable injury or
illness, with:

-   a recompleted statement by claimant

If unsure, contact PSO or TL.

Where there are no changes to nature of injury of illness, Service
Delivery APS5 can approve to

remove services that might relate to the compensable injury or illness,
with:

-   a recompleted statement by claimant and
-   a Statutory Declaration completed by the claimant that the services
    do not relate to the compensable injury/illness

Service Delivery APS3 can approve to reduce the notice of charge by the
percentage of apportionment applied where written evidence has been
supplied by the compensation payer.

Escalate any case to Programme Management if unsure.

The Process page contains information on how to process an 'Amended
notice of past benefits (advance payment) or notice of charge'.

The References page contains links to legislation.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend NOPB at post judgment or settlement stage (Table 3) and links
to letters and templates.

See:

-   Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery
-   Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Review of decision to refuse to give an amended notice

A decision by Services Australia to refuse to give an amended notice
normally occurs when the injured person has failed to:

-   satisfy the agency that not all of the services taken were related
    to the injury or illness, and/or
-   seek a review of the amount within 2 years of a judgment or
    settlement being fixed

The delegation to refuse to give an amended notice - all services taken
is at APS5 level and above.

Application may be made in writing by the injured person for a review of
the decision to refuse to give an amended notice and must be made within
28 days after the injured person is notified of the decision. If an
application for reconsideration is made, the subsequent review must not
be reconsidered by the person who refused to give the amended notice and
the case must be referred to Programme Management for further
consideration.

The person reconsidering the decision must affirm or vary the decision
with 28 days after the application for reconsideration is made. If a
decision has been reconsidered, the injured person can then apply to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal for further review of the decision as
affirmed or varied.

The References page contains links to legislation and the agency's
delegations.

The Resources page contains a list of evidence and delegations required
to amend a notice.

See:

-   Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery
-   Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Role of the AAT

The AAT provides an independent review of administrative decisions made
by government departments, agencies and some non-government bodies.

Both individuals and government agencies use the services of the AAT.

Medicare Compensation Recovery, statements or amended statements that
are determined to be not substantially correct under Sections 18, 23A or
23B of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995, (the HOSC
Act) are the only decisions that are appealable to the AAT.

When an injured person or claimant disputes a decision

An injured person or claimant may dispute a decision made by Services
Australia, when:

-   the agency determines a statement by claimant under section 18 of
    the HOSC Act is not substantially correct (because seemingly related
    items have not been identified)
-   the agency determines a statement after judgment or settlement under
    section 23A of the HOSC Act is not substantially correct (because
    seemingly related Medicare benefits or care costs have not been
    identified), or
-   the agency refuses to give a notice under section 18(7) of the HOSC
    Act (because it has been more than 2 years since the date of
    settlement or judgment)

Internal review

There is no avenue for internal review of a not substantially correct
decision as opportunities to provide supporting evidence are given as
part of the process. An injured person or claimant who is unsatisfied
with such a decision may apply to the AAT for a ruling.

Receiving notification of an AAT appeal

Forward notification of an AAT appeal to the Programme Management
mailbox as soon as it is received.

When the notification of an AAT appeal is the first notification of a
dispute, all documentation and previous decisions made regarding the
disputed case must be forwarded by Programme Management to the AAT.

Formal AAT decisions

When an AAT decision is made in favour of the agency, the compensation
case will proceed and money will be recovered in accordance with that
decision.

When the AAT decision is made in favour of the injured person or
claimant, the agency is bound by the terms of the decision and will
proceed accordingly.

Charges for lodging an application

The AAT will inform the injured person or claimant of any fee associated
with lodging an application or whether the injured person or claimant is
exempt from paying any such fees.

Contact the AAT:

-   in person
-   by telephone, or
-   in writing (by letter, fax or email)

The AAT website has the contact details for each State and Territory.
See the Resources page for a link to the AAT website (containing contact
phone number and email address).

Related links

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

General information for Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
