
Latter day adjustments (LDA) and HELD payments for patient claims 011-43050000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on patient claims for latter day
adjustments (LDA) and HELD payments in Medicare. Note: as at 1 July
2016, Norfolk Island is covered under Medicare provisions.

On this Page:

Latter day adjustments (LDA)

An LDA is required when any details of a previously processed claim
requires amending with new or altered information.

Only staff fully trained in the full end-to-end procedures are to action
latter day adjustments, and staff in face-to-face (F2F) areas must not
action LDA. In such cases, escalation of the adjustment is required.

The processes outlined in this document assumes the reader is familiar
with patient claims processing concepts, methods and transactions
including:

-   the existing Patient Claims LDA transaction NHRI
-   claim processing transaction NPOI/NPFI
-   Services Australia online transactions

The transaction NHRI, enables a Service Officer to recall patient
history to complete an LDA for situations including:

incorrect patient

incorrect item number

incorrect date of service

incorrect health professional

the service was paid as an out of hospital service (85% benefit), but
should have been paid as an in hospital service (75% benefit)

benefit has been incorrectly issued in favour of the:

-   claimant instead of a health professional
-   health professional instead of a claimant

restriction of items claimed on a previous date

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefit Schedule and
contact details for Medicare Health Programme Support Officers (PSO)
where assistance is required.

When performing any adjustment, check the following:

-   EFT or Credit EFTPOS status is paid or HELD
-   patient cheque (claim processed pre 1 July 2016) has been presented
    on patient history
-   Pay Doctor via Claimant (PDVC) cheque has been presented on patient
    history

If the cheque is unpresented, an adjustment cannot be actioned. Return
the request to the health professional using the unpresented cheque
letter template advising that no action can occur until the cheque is
either banked, returned to the agency or becomes a stale cheque. The
Resources page contains the Un-presented cheque letter template.

The Process page contains information on the procedures that staff
undertake regarding patient claim adjustments.

Processing Indicator (PI) 58

Wherever possible the LDA process must be performed. Although there are
some occasions using the LDA process is not possible such as if a
consultation and a surgical procedure are claimed using different
claiming channels.

If the LDA process cannot be performed, Service Officers can use PI 58
to reduce the schedule fee of the highlighted item by the schedule fee
of the restricted item on history to adjust the benefit.

The Process page contains information on the LDA process.

LDA resulting in overpayment

When an adjustment results in an overpayment, any outstanding amount
requires follow-up action as per the Services Australia management of
debts policies.

Overpayment letters should be addressed to the person who received the
Medicare benefit. For example, if the Medicare benefit was paid as a
PDVC (payee code 2) and the cheque is presented, the letter would be
addressed to the health professional who provided the service.

Note: practices may send through a patient claim adjustment where they
have indicated they have refunded the patient the full amount originally
paid or, the practice accepts the responsibility of repaying the debt to
Medicare. Where a practice has indicated this in the adjustment request,
a Service Officer would raise the overpayment and the OPAY letter would
be addressed to the health professional.

The Process page contains information on the procedures that staff
undertake regarding overpayments on incorrect payments.

Adjustment types

There are five adjustment types that can be processed:

-   correcting service details for a patient
-   transfer service/s from 1 patient to another
-   suppress service/s
-   delete service/s
-   insert service/s

Adjustments to a patient claim with a 'HELD' Medicare benefit

If an error is identified in a processed patient claim and an adjustment
is required to a claim that has a ‘HELD’ Medicare benefit, the ‘HELD’
payment must be rejected before the adjustment can be actioned.

This may include circumstances where a health professional has
transmitted the patient as the claimant (for example, child submitted as
claimant). Service Officers must determine who the correct claimant is
by either contacting the health professional or asking the customer to
confirm:

-   What date was the service?
-   Approximately what time was the service?
-   Who was the health professional?
-   How much was paid for the service?

If the customer can successfully answer these questions the claim should
be adjusted to reflect the correct claimant.

The Process page contains the procedure to follow to adjust a claim with
a ‘HELD’ Medicare benefit.

Patient claims ‘No EFT’ letter

A patient claims ‘No EFT’ letter is triggered automatically when the
first payment for a paid claim, substantiation or patient claim LDA is
HELD due to no EFT being recorded in the Consumer Directory Management
System (CDMS) or provided with the claim, substantiation or LDA.

The patient claims ‘No EFT’ letter is issued via the claimant’s
nominated communication method, such as myGov account or Australia Post.

Subsequent patient claims ‘No EFT’ letter

A subsequent patient claims ‘No EFT’ letter will only issue if the
customer's address is updated within a claim to an address a ‘No EFT’
letter has not previously been sent to. This may occur when a Service
Officer:

-   actions an LDA
-   verifies a service for Medicare Safety Net
-   processes a manual patient claim and the Medicare payment is HELD

The address used within the claim can mean:

-   the claimant's card address as stored in CDMS
-   the claimant's address transmitted within the electronic patient
    claim
-   a temporary address entered during the processing of a manual
    patient claim
-   a new permanent address entered during processing of a manual
    patient claim

Abend error message - 9 GET MAIN

The 9-GET MAIN abend error occurs when a Service Officer is using the
Latter Day Adjustment patient history control line NHRI. The abend error
occurs when the selected patient has more than 500 lines worth of
history. To get around the abend, Service Officers are required to use
control line modifiers to limit the amount of lines returned. One of the
below control line modifiers are to be used:

-   NHRI,XXXXXXXXXX,IRN,period/DDMMYY-DDMMYY
-   NHRI,XXXXXXXXXX,IRN,DATE/DDMMYY
-   NHRI,XXXXXXXXXX,IRN,PROV/PROVIDERNUMBER

Transfer patient history

The transaction NHHI, enables a service officer to transfer services to
another patient’s history.

The control line to recall patient history is NHHI, card number, patient
name or Individual Reference Number (IRN).

For example:

-   NHHI,1234567891,JOE
-   NHHI,1234567891,2

The Process page contains the procedure for Patient history.

Identify transferred services

Once a transfer transaction is completed, depending on the result of the
adjustment, the following reason codes are displayed:

-   889 against the original line(s)
-   812, 814 or 841 against the restated line/s

Cross reference indicators

When a transfer has taken place a cross reference indicator X is
allocated to both the original and restated lines.

The indicator is:

-   used to retain the audit trail for information on patient records
-   displayed in the second character of the TX column on patient
    history in conjunction with the transfer range of reason codes

Suppress services

The transaction NHHI, enables a service officer to suppress services
incorrectly recorded on patient history.

Suppress is only used:

-   when no other adjustment transaction applies to the adjustment, and
-   investigation of the services cannot determine who the benefit was
    paid to or where the service should have been allocated

Suppressed services:

-   Should not be communicated to claimants nor included on any manual
    statements prepared for claimants
-   Always result in an overpayment. No recovery action is to be
    initiated. When the situation warrants debt recovery from the
    patient, NHRI action operations and procedures should be used to
    process the adjustment

To suppress services, 3 different action codes can be used, depending on
the reason the services do not belong to the patient.

See also: Transfer and suppress a recalled claim for bulk bill LDA
claims in Medicare.

The Resources page lists the rules regarding suppressed services.

Adjustment reason codes for transfer and suppress transactions

Each reason code instructs the system to generate an explanation on the
statement when the benefit has either been paid or rejected, and to
record on patient history the reason the action took place on each line.

Transfer transaction

The following lists the adjustment reason codes for transfer
transactions:

Original lines:

-   889 - Details of previous Medicare assessment - transferred

Restated lines:

-   812 - Details of transferred Medicare assessment - underpayment
-   814 - Details of transferred Medicare assessment - overpayment
-   841 - No change to original benefit - record transferred for history
    purposes

Result lines:

-   815 - Overpayment of transferred benefit recorded
-   881 - Adjustment to transferred Medicare benefit previously paid

Suppress transaction

The following lists the adjustment reason codes for suppress
transactions:

Original lines:

-   898 - Details of previous Medicare assessment - suppressed

Restated lines:

-   890 - Details of suppressed unrelated service - HIC
-   891 - Details of suppressed unrelated service - MOL
-   892 - Details of suppressed unrelated service - Fraud

See also: Transfer and suppress a recalled claim for bulk bill LDA
claims in Medicare.

The Resources page lists the rules regarding suppressed services.

1-PREV CON message

Co-claiming message 1-PREV CON returns when certain consultation items
performed by the same health professional are on a patient’s history and
restrict against a Group T8 item, with:

-   a schedule fee equal to or greater than the threshold
-   the same date of service

Note: see the PREV CON co-claiming threshold for the consultation item
in QITI PF22.

The Resources page contains a matrix with the process for co-claiming
1-PREV CON message returns, templates and links to the contact details.

The Resources page contains details of transfer situations involving
Safety Net, rules regarding suppressed services, rules for same day
delete transaction, group rules for selected services group, selection
limits, radiotherapy items, Report Management and Distribution System
(RMDS) reports, rules for quality control, rules applying to ROMI,
Safety Net and substantiation, refine adjustment information, the
Patient claim adjustment - unpresented cheque letter template, and
contact details.

Contents

Adjust Medicare patient claim on a previously adjusted service

Related links

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
