
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about verification of services for
Medicare Safety Net.

Note: from 1 July 2016, Norfolk Island is covered under Medicare
provisions.

Verify services

Paid in full services a doctor submits online are verified automatically
by the system at time of processing. They do not require more
verification.

Unpaid services a doctor submits online need verification. The claimant
must provide proof of payment for the outstanding balance.

When processing proof of payments, if the relevant Medicare Safety Net
threshold is reached and confirmed for family registrations, the system:

-   calculates, and
-   generates the additional Medicare Safety Net benefit

When an individual is nearing or has crossed the Medicare Safety Net
threshold, a letter for unverified payments (Letter A reaching the
threshold, Letter B crossing the threshold) is sent.

Individuals who get Letter A or B need to submit receipts to have
unverified services processed (verified) in order to get higher benefits
once the threshold is reached.

Services are only verified once.

Services paid by instalments must not be verified unless both the:

-   last payment has been made, and
-   the full amount paid for the service is notated on the account
    receipt

The Process page contains more details about verifying services.

Privacy for family members

If a person asks for verification details for other members of the
family, tell the person that due to reasons of confidentiality it is
inappropriate to:

-   comment, or
-   provide combined statements

Service Officers must not enter into a debate with a person about the
rights of the person to have access to sensitive and personal details
about another family member. Tell the person it is Services Australia's
policy to protect the privacy of an individual's personal details.

Verification receipts

Customers can submit their verification receipts using the following
claiming channels:

-   Medicare Online claiming (MOA)
-   Medicare Express Plus mobile app
-   Post
-   Service centre

When registered family members submit their receipts, the system tallies
the gap payments. When the system identifies the registration has
reached the threshold and the family composition is confirmed, any
future out-of-hospital services within that calendar year are paid at
the higher benefit.

If the customer submits the incorrect receipts for verification, add a
comment in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

The Process page contains details about how to print verification
receipts.

Health professional accepts PDVC cheque as full payment

A health professional can accept a pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheque
as full payment for services rendered. The claimant will need to provide
proof that the health professional has accepted this as full payment. In
these instances, no verification amount is registered on the NSCI screen
but the service line remains.

Service Officers must key a zero ($0.00) amount for verification. The
specific lines verified with a zero amount display when:

-   re-accessing the NSCI screen, and
-   the service details will no longer appear on Safety Net letters.

See Table 3 on the Process page for more details.

Unverified payments letter

Service Officers can issue an unverified payments letter (letter U)
through CDMS for any or all members of a Safety Net family registration
who have unverified services.

See Medicare Safety Net letters for more details.

Unverified payments statement online

[] Family contacts (FC) and spouse/partners (SP) can view and print an
unverified payments statement using their Medicare online account.

See Using Medicare self service for more details.

Verify a claim

Verification is where the out of pocket (OOP) amount is recorded by
Medicare to allow those amounts to be counted towards the Safety Net
threshold.

Where the claimant has paid the out of pocket amount and the outstanding
balance of the account is the Medicare benefit owed to the health
professional the claim must be verified.

Service Officers must verify the services at the time of processing a
claim using the:

-   NPOI screen, or
-   after a claim has been processed (using the NSCI screen)

Note: verification occurring at the time of processing reduces the
inconvenience placed on the claimant, as there is no need to get, and
present duplicate accounts or account receipts.

The Resources page contains the methods of verifying a claim.

Partially paid accounts

Claims may be submitted where the health professional is paid the
Medicare benefit as a pay doctor via cheque and the claimant pays the
remaining amount or just a proportion of the remaining amount.

For claims where the partial payment is less than the out of pocket
amount, verification cannot be done until proof of payment is provided.

Partially paid accounts and verified amount is more than the calculated out of pocket amount paid

Where the claimant pays more than the owed out of pocket (OOP) amount
only the actual difference between the Medicare benefit and the health
professional's charge is verified. The system returns the warning
message 8-PPMT>OOP but verification still occurs automatically on the
NPSI screen.

The additional amount paid is a matter between the claimant and the
health professional.

For example:

A claimant is charged $60 for a Level B surgery consultation (Item 23):

-   the claimant pays $31.50
-   the Medicare benefit is $34.30
-   the health professional receives $31.50 (incorrect payment) and
    $34.30 (100% Medicare benefit)
-   total monies received by the health professional is $65.80 which is
    $5.80 above the original charge of $60

Note: only the difference between the Medicare benefit and the total
charge is verified ($25.70). This is the actual difference between the
total charge ($60) and the Medicare benefit ($34.30).

Partially paid account and the verified amount is less than the calculated out of pocket amount

When verifying a claim in the NSCI, the claimant pays less than the
calculated out of pocket amount and it is entered in the Fee field with
a P prefix, the system returns the error message 1-PPMT NOT. A zero
partial payment amount must then be rekeyed.

Note: where a partial payment is made (and an outstanding balance
remains for that service) then entered against an item on the NSCI
screen and updated by the Service Officer (U to UPDATE/ENTER), no
additional out of pocket payment can be verified against the item as it
no longer appears on the NSCI screen.

The claim therefore cannot be verified until the claimant has produced
an account or account receipt indicating the full out of pocket amount
has been paid or the claimant provides evidence that the health
professional has accepted a reduced amount as full payment for the
service and the amount outstanding is the Medicare benefit owed to the
health professional.

Verifying online claims

[] Claims that have a partial payment may be submitted via online
channels.

Online claims submitted by the doctor are verified automatically if the
partial payment is equal to the out of pocket amount and does not break
the Medicare Safety Net threshold.

When a claim that has a partial payment that is equal to the out of
pocket amount breaks the Safety net threshold, the message 8-SUB REQ
appears prompting the Service Officer to manually verify the claim.

For partially paid claims where the amount paid is less than the out of
pocket amount, this amount cannot be verified until proof of payment is
provided.

The Process page contains more details about how to verify claims.

See Process digital self service claims for claims received via a
digital channel.

Note: Safety Net verification requests submitted via MOA are often
rejected with reason 162 (duplicate service). This is because Service
Officers may not know the claim has been submitted for verification. If
verification is actioned via a MOA claim, reject the MOA claim with
reason code 151.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Assessing and
Benefits team and details of the methods of verifying a claim.

Related links

Medicare Safety Net thresholds

Medicare Safety Net letters

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Order and Authorised
Representative for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
