-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details on cheque trace requests for patient
claims in Medicare.

Cheque trace requests

A cheque trace may be requested by either the:

-   provider or their representative
-   claimant

Cheque trace requests may only be made when the cheque has been
presented. They can be lodged over the phone, in person at a Medicare
Service Centre, or in writing.

The Resources page contains more details about trace requests from a
claimant or health professional.

Note: if a request has been made for an Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT)
trace, see EFT dispute policy.

Releasing claims information

If the claim is a Pay Doctor via Claimant (PDVC) cheque or bulk bill
cheque, the Service Officer may disclose information to providers for
the purposes of:

-   processing Medicare claims
-   making appropriate payments in relation to those claims
-   administering any other legislative provisions governing the
    Medicare program

If a claim has been finalised the Service Officer can answer queries
about the benefit amount if

-   a payment in favour of the provider has been issued, and
-   only if the provider or representative can identify the service the
    payment relates to

A claim is considered to be finalised when either:

-   the claim has been assessed and payment issued for the Medicare
    benefit
-   a statement has been issued explaining why there is no benefit
    payable

If there is a dispute between the claimant and the provider regarding
the payment of an account and the cheque has been banked, a trace of the
funds may be requested to determine their whereabouts.

Where a trace request is made for a PDVC cheque and the details of the
trace have been received, Medicare cannot release the bank account
information to the requestor due to privacy concerns.

Example of releasing claims information

A health professional requests a cheque trace. The trace details show
that the cheque was deposited into a bank account that is not related to
the provider. For example, the name of the provider does not match the
name of the bank account. The bank account details of where the money
was deposited must not be given to the provider.

Note: checking PDS, BRNA or BRVA (for Veterans Affairs Processing claim
payments) for health professional bank account information may be useful
to confirm the account details returned by the Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA).

When in doubt about the names of the provider or claimant and the name
of the bank account matching, confirm with the person making the request
the name of the account the money should have been deposited into.

When the funds are not in the nominated bank account of the cheque
payee, the RBA will seek authorisation from Administered Treasury,
Services Australia Canberra to retrieve the funds. The RBA requires a
statutory declaration from the payee of the cheque and the receiving
financial institution before the RBA will action any third party request
to recall funds.

When Medicare receive a request from a cheque payee, a statutory
declaration form can be sent to them if required. When the payee returns
the statutory declaration, a third party request is sent to the RBA.

See also: Release of claims information in Medicare.

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details for the Assessing and Benefits team
-   information on a trace request for cheque, and
-   a link to the Request for cheque trace details form

Related links

Medicare benefit not received (EFT dispute)

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Release of claims information in Medicare

Cheque processing in Medicare

90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
