-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how incoming correspondence for Medicare
Compensation Recovery enters the Medicare Compensation Recovery System
(MCRS) and how work is allocated to Service Officers for processing.

Incoming mail

Medicare Compensation Recovery receives the below documents:

hardcopy mail:

-   Service Officers must scan all hardcopy mail received via a
    Multi-Function Device (MFD) and email it to the Medicare
    Compensation Recovery mailbox, see Table 1 on the Process page

facsimiles:

-   are automatically converted to email, see emails below

emails, (usually with attachments):

-   are received by the Medicare Compensation Recovery mailbox
-   forward any relevant external emails to the Medicare Compensation
    Recovery mailbox and add them to a claim in MCRS. For example,
    emails sent by Program Management which are relevant to a claim
-   Service Officers can send additional emails to this mailbox to add a
    document to a specific claim if required. For example,
    correspondence sent to finance for action or emails from the
    Rejection inbox

Preparation for processing

Kofax software automatically captures, identifies incoming
correspondence received in the Medicare Compensation Recovery mailbox
and stores it to FileNet.

Emails and attachments are:

-   converted to portable document format (PDF)
-   batched and named by the form with the highest priority
-   assigned to MCRS Enquiry cases, and
-   allocated to Service Officers for processing in MCRS via Work
    Optimiser – Medicare

Note: if a single document contains information for multiple claimants
and claims, it must be:

-   manually redacted for each claim, and
-   resent to the mailbox as separate documents

See Table 1 on the Process page.

See the Correspondence types and KOFAX labelling priority table for
details about:

-   processing and assessing incoming correspondence, including
-   how to access work, and batch document names when more than one is
    received together in a single MCRS Enquiry case

Unrecognised email attachments and rejections

Where an email (size, links or imbedded info) or attachments (file type)
cannot be recognised by Kofax, the message and attachment/s are sent to
the MCRS Rejections mailbox.

Kofax recognise the emails, or attachment/s when:

only these email attachment file types are used – PDF, JPG, PNG, TIF,
TIFF, BMP, GIF and TXT

-   file types DOC and DOCX are accepted in most cases depending on how
    much rich content the document contains e.g. bold, underline,
    colours, fancy fonts, custom formatting etc
-   other file types such as ZIP, HEIC or ACCDB will most likely be
    rejected

the total size of the email including attachments is less than 5MB

-   this is to reduce the risk of customers providing large documents,
    especially when they use the photo function to take pictures of the
    documents

emails and attachments do not include

-   embedded images or videos and/or URLs (email or web addresses)
-   ‘read receipt’ requests
-   links to documents stored in online storage facilities like Dropbox
    or Google Docs

attachments are not password protected/encrypted or in a WinZip or RAR
file

The MCRS Rejections mailbox must be checked daily by the Operational
Support team to action each email. See Table 2 on the Process page.

Where possible, attachments are converted in-house so that they can be
read by Kofax, and resent to the Medicare Compensation Recovery mailbox.
Otherwise, an email will be sent to the originator advising them to
resend the information, noting the above rules to minimise the
possibility of email rejections.

Remittance advice

Most remittance advice has details listed in the Email extraction, Kofax
often assigns remittance advice to claims in MCRS. As per instructions
on the Notice of Judgement or Settlement form (MO022), stakeholders must
send remittance advices to the Compensation finance inbox, not to the
Medicare Compensation Recovery mailbox inbox.

Service Delivery staff do not action remittance advices, unless the
advice has only been sent to the HIC inbox and not sent to finance.

If a remittance advice is only sent to Medicare Compensation Recovery,
staff must contact the sender and tell them to re-send the remittance
advice email directly to the Compensation Finance email address listed
on the MO022 form.

If multi-remittances are allocated to an enquiry in MCRS, Service
Officers must follow the unlinking documents or manually separate email
correspondence process, whichever is appropriate for the scenario. Do
not add multi-remittances to claims for privacy reasons.

Unclassified enquiries

If Kofax is unable to determine the appropriate work-step for the
correspondence, the work is allocated in Work Optimiser as an
‘unclassified document’.

Unclassified documents may contain documents intended for Compensation
Recovery for action.

There may also be correspondence that is not intended for the program.
These may include forms for other programs or agencies. For example:

-   Medicare disclosure
-   National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA), or
-   Medicare Public

Medicare Compensation does not action any correspondence if they are not
the intended recipient. An automated response is sent to all senders
(maximum once per day) confirming receipt of their email, which includes
advice that no action is taken with such correspondence.

Email extraction

Kofax extracts the below information from incoming emails:

Form code

-   Kofax will search the bottom left corner of each page
-   If Kofax identifies more than one form code, it will label the whole
    batch based on highest priority, see the Correspondence types and
    Kofax labelling priority table

Work Identification Number (WIN)

-   Kofax will search whole pages for text which matches the format of
    WINs – 9 digits (8 numbers and an alpha check letter allocated to
    each compensation claim by MCRS or the Compensation Case Management
    System)
-   If a document contains more than one, Kofax will use the first WIN
    identified

A form code extraction allows the document batch to be named based on
the form code with the highest priority. The extracted WIN can be
searched for in MCRS.

Note: errors in WIN extraction may occur if there are multiple WINs, or
if handwritten WINs cannot be read.

If the WIN has been misread, details of the attachment/s can be updated
to link to the correct WIN during the Enquiry case, before it is
finalised. See Search for or update an existing claim or register a new
claim.

Storage and retention of hard copies after scanning

Once hard copy documents have been scanned and emailed to the Medicare
Compensation Recovery mailbox, retain hard copies for 70 days and then
securely destroy.

Store hard copies temporarily in archive boxes in order by date of
receipt. Archive boxes must be labelled with the date period covered by
documents in the box, in line with the Medicare Public scanned document
retention schedule.

Work Optimiser – Medicare

Medicare Compensation Recovery uses Work Optimiser – Medicare to
allocate work items created by MCRS.

Work Optimiser – Medicare automatically allocates work items for MCRS to
Service Officers for action based on:

-   security roles assigned in ESSentials
-   skill tags assigned in ESSentials
-   work type processing priorities determined by the Workload
    Management Health Operations and Planning Branch

MCRS creates work items for allocation in Work Optimiser – Medicare
when:

-   an email is received (Kofax, FileNet and MCRS process described in
    preparation for processing)
-   a work item requires a decision by a staff member with a different
    skill tag or higher delegation level
-   a work item needs to be reassigned after being worked on by a staff
    member with a different skill tag or higher delegation

For:

information about how to access MCRS and Work Optimiser – Medicare,
skill tags and work types, see Medicare Compensation Recovery System
(MCRS)

instructions on how to use Work Optimiser – Medicare for MCRS, see Table
3 on the Process page

general information about how to manage work in Work Optimiser, see:

-   Work Optimiser for staff and
-   Work Optimiser for Team Leaders and Analysts

Related links

Work Optimiser for staff

Work Optimiser for Team Leaders and Analysts

Workload Management

Process correspondence – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare Compensation Recovery System (MCRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
