
Action public email enquiries for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) 011-20092919

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about actioning emails sent to the
Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) Information Line.

Services Australia privacy and security policy

Due to Services Australia privacy and security policy, any personal,
protected or identifiable information is not to be emailed externally
(unclassified), even if the customer has emailed this information to the
agency. Emails sent externally to members of the public (as
unclassified) must not contain:

ID/Medicare numbers and Date of Birth (DOBs)

Remove any address and surnames provided in the customers email

do not include surnames in your response (signature)

remove links automatically created when copying templates from an email
to another email

internal or external website hyperlinks

-   when referring the customer to a website, provide direction to a
    specific location. For example: 'For details about the AODR go to
    the Donate Life website and search'
-   hyperlinks must be removed prior of replying to an email. To remove
    a hyperlink: click on a character in the hyperlink, right mouse
    button click and select ‘Remove Hyperlink'. Note: this may not work
    as when trying to remove the hyperlink after selecting send, it will
    add the link back. The best practice is to direct the customer to a
    website address.

Public enquiries and requests via email

The Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) Information Line receive
enquiries and requests via the public email AODR.

Policy approved templates are available for relevant responses. In some
cases, the recipient may be contacted via telephone or require the
template to be altered which becomes a non-standard response. These
cases must be escalated to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) to forward
to Programme Management for approval. AODR can then respond with the
received approved response.

For non-standard response scenarios, always contact via phone and not by
email where possible.

Where the consumer has contact details recorded on the system or states
them in the email, attempt to contact the consumer via phone call. Two
call attempts are recommended.

Programme Management are responsible for updating templates when changes
to the organ donor register apply. All escalations or feedback regarding
templates must be via an AODR PSO.

Note: as at 16/06/2016, Quality Assurance is not required on standard
email templates via the AODR public email mailbox.

The Resources page contains contact details and links to Services
Australia, external websites and internal Cyber Security hub.

Related links

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Manage work items in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
