
Referrals for assessing in Medicare 011-42040010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information to assist Service Officers in
understanding referrals.

Referrals

When a patient is referred from an eligible health professional,
Medicare benefits are payable for certain services provided by
specialists, consultant physicians, allied health professionals and
dentists.

A referral is a written request to a specialist or consultant physician
for the:

-   investigation, opinion, treatment or management of a condition or
    problem of a patient, or
-   performance of specific examinations or tests

A referral must be made by the referring health professional based on
clinical necessity and cannot be made retrospectively.

Health professionals who can refer a patient

General practitioners are the primary source of referrals.

A referral may also be issued by:

-   another medical practitioner
-   registered dental practitioner (where the referral has arisen from a
    dental service)
-   registered optometrist (where the referral is made to an
    ophthalmologist)
-   participating midwife (where the specialist is an obstetrician or
    paediatrician)
-   participating nurse practitioner

Referring health professional is not in Australia

Referrals from health professionals practicing outside of Australia are
not valid for Medicare purposes as they are not eligible for a Medicare
provider number.

The referring health professional must have a provider number for
benefits to be paid on the referred service.

Information required in a referral

For a referral to be valid and the referred item to be eligible for a
Medicare benefit, the referral must include the:

-   relevant clinical information about the patient’s condition for
    investigation, opinion, treatment and/or management
-   signature of the referring health professional
-   date of referral
-   period of referral

The Resources page contains additional information about what is
required in order for a referral to be valid as stated in the Health
Insurance Regulations 2018.

Issuing a referral

Medicare benefits are payable for an attendance, even when it is for the
sole purpose of issuing a referral letter or note.

If there is no personal attendance between the patient and the medical
practitioner, no Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) item will apply.

A new referral letter is required for:

-   treatment after the specified referral period has expired
-   any new or unrelated condition requiring specialist attention

Note: a new referral allows the payment of Medicare benefits at the
specialist or consultant physician at the referred rate. It does not
always mean the patient has started a new course of treatment.

Referral validity

A referral is valid for a set period depending on the referring health
professional’s qualifications and the individual needs of the patient
based on the opinion of the referring health professional.

Referrals (the written request) leads to a course of treatment which may
be anything from a single consultation, to multiple treatments or
therapeutic services. A referral is valid indefinitely until the first
service from the treating health professional. Once the first service
has been provided the referral period starts.

Example

A patient sees their general practitioner (GP) on 1/05/2019 for a
referral to a specialist. The patient is unable to make an appointment
with the specialist until 20/10/2020.

Their referral (the written request) will still be valid until their
appointment. Once they have had their appointment on 20/10/2020, the 12
month referral period starts. Any services provided after 19/10/2021 are
not covered by the original referral issued on 1/05/2019. The patient
will need a new referral from their GP for further treatment after
19/10/2021.

Note: the referral remains valid when the referring health professional
retires or is deceased. Referral details will be accepted as long as the
referring provider number was open at the date of the referral.

Referral issued by medical practitioner (other than specialist or consultant physician)

A referral issued by a medical practitioner (other than a specialist or
consultant physician) is valid for a period of 12 months from the date
of the first service. The referring medical practitioner can make the
referral period longer or shorter (for example, 3, 6, 18 months, or
indefinitely) depending on the clinical need.

Referral issued by specialist or consultant physician

A referral issued by a specialist or consultant physician is valid for 3
months from the date of the first service.

Note: where the referred patient is an admitted patient, the referral is
valid for 3 months or for the time of the admission in hospital,
whichever is longer.

Referral issued by participating midwife

A referral issued by a participating midwife is valid for a maximum of
12 months after the first service provided under that referral. The
referral is valid for 1 pregnancy only.

Referral issued by a participating nurse practitioner

A referral issued by a participating nurse practitioner is valid for a
maximum of 12 months after the first service provided under that
referral.

Referral issued by an optometrist

A referral from an optometrist to an ophthalmologist is valid for 12
months unless the optometrist specifies on the referral that it is for a
different period (for example, 3, 6 or 18 months or valid indefinitely).

Benefit rates for referred and unreferred services

Where a patient has a valid referral to a specialist or consultant
physician, the Medicare benefit rate for that service is higher than it
would be if there were no referral.

Unreferred services attract benefits at the non-vocationally recognised
general practitioner rate. Specialist and consultant physicians
providing services that have not been referred should use the Category
1, Group A2 items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Claiming a referred MBS item

Where a submitted claim for a Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) item
number requires a referral, the date of which the referral was issued
must be transmitted in the claim or notated on the invoice. However, the
referral period starts from the date of the first service under that
referral.

For more information about processing claims for referred MBS items, see
the information relevant to the claiming channel:

-   Claims processing in Medicare
-   Bulk bill claims in Medicare
-   Simplified billing claims in Medicare

Acceptance of a referral by a different specialist or consultant physician

When a patient attends a different health professional to the one named
on the referral, the referral is still valid as long as the other
referral requirements are met. This may occur when specialists and
consultant physicians work on a roster or rotation between locations.

Note: once a specialist or consultant physician has accepted a referral,
only they or their locum can see a patient under that referral. If the
patient needs to see a different practitioner of the same specialty,
another referral would be required or the patient may be seen under an
unreferred attendance item in Category 1, Group 2 of the Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Referrals do not need to be addressed to a specific doctor or field of
speciality. The referral is valid if the specialist or consultant
physician has the appropriate discipline to treat the referred
condition.

For more information about locums, see Professional services related to
Medicare patient claims.

Single course of treatment

A single course of treatment involves an initial attendance by a
specialist or consultant physician and the continuing management of the
condition. It continues until the patient is referred back to the care
of the referring health professional.

Also included is any further review of the patient’s condition by the
specialist or consultant physician that may be necessary.

When a new referral is required

A new referral letter is required if a new course of treatment is
required to manage the patient’s care.

Situations that constitute a new course of treatment and allow an
initial attendance item to be paid are:

the presentation of an unrelated illness requiring referral to the
specialist or consultant physician’s care (a new referral would be
required), or

where all of the following are met

-   the referring health professional deems it necessary for the
    patient’s condition to be reviewed
-   the patient is seen by the specialist or consultant physician
    outside the period of which the patient was originally referred, and
-   the patient was last seen by the specialist or consultant physician
    more than 9 months earlier for that condition

Note: the issuing of a new referral following the expiry of a previous
referral for the same condition does not always mean they have started a
new course of treatment. The new referral is to allow the payment of
Medicare benefits for the attendance at the referred rate.

Different referral types and situations

Referrals can be issued under a range of circumstances and situations.
The Resources page contains information about different referral
situations and their validity, including:

-   emergency referrals
-   public hospital referrals
-   private hospital referrals
-   lost, stolen or destroyed referrals
-   self-referral
-   locum referrals

Record keeping requirements for referrals

A specialist or consultant physician must retain the letter of referral
for 2 years from the date the first service was provided to the patient
as outlined in Section 20BA(1)(d) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the
Act). The References page contains a link to the Act.

Hospitals are also required to retain a patient's hospital records that
show evidence of a referral for 2 years from the date the service was
provided.

Sending referrals between health professionals

Referrals can be sent directly to specialists via fax. If this happens,
the referring health professional must:

-   ensure the original was transmitted successfully
-   retain the original referral on the patient’s record, either in hard
    copy or electronically

Specialists receiving faxed referrals must ensure that the transmitted
copy is able to be read and is not kept on thermal paper.

Electronic referrals

See Medicare electronic claiming for information about eReferrals
(referrals sent between health professionals via email or other online
systems).

Referral pathways for accessing allied health services

Medicare benefits are available for certain services provided by
eligible allied health professionals to patients upon referral from an
eligible referring health professional.

There are different referral arrangements for referrals to allied health
professionals. See the below tabs for more information on these referral
pathways.

Referrals for chronic disease, disability and mental health services

Where a referral is for a Mental Health Treatment Plan (MHTP) the
referral is valid until the referred number of sessions have been
completed.

For more information about referrals for chronic diseases:

Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare

Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative)

Helping Children with Autism (HCWA) and Better Start for Children with
Disability programs in Medicare

Referrals for allied health services for people of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent

People of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent may be eligible
for allied health services under Medicare following a health assessment
by a medical practitioner.

Information about referral requirements for these services is available
in note MN.11.1 in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

The Resources page includes a link to the MBS.

Rules for subsequent items

For any subsequent specialist or consultant physician services, the
system will scan the patient’s history, for a referral that matches the
current claim.

Depending on the referral details provided, a return message may prompt
for a reason (RSN) code to finalise the claim.

The Resources page includes a table outlining these RSN codes.

The Resources page contains links to external websites and Services
Australia's health professional education guides, answers to common
enquiry types, common referral types/situations and a list of
requirements and exemptions for valid referrals.

Related links

Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare

Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative)

Helping Children with Autism (HCWA) and Better Start for Children with
Disability programs in Medicare

Claims processing in Medicare

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Simplified billing claims in Medicare

Professional services related to Medicare patient claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
