
Change requests in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10120000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines how to manage change requests in the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR). This includes verbal updates, change of
address, and requests for Medicare services outside the AIR.

Security check

Service Officers must complete an AIR security check before updating any
personal information or releasing vaccination information.

Change of address requests for individuals in CDMS and mainframe

Service Officers can action a change of address request for a Medicare
enrolled individual in CDMS. These changes automatically update in
mainframe overnight.

Requests are updated in mainframe for a Supplementary Identification
Number (SIN) record if they are from:

-   a parent or guardian of a child under 14
-   an individual who is not registered in Medicare

Do not change an address in CDMS or mainframe:

-   if the caller does not pass the AIR security check
-   at the request of a vaccination provider
-   from a notification by email
-   to an overseas address
-   from any AIR forms. Note: except for reminder letters or where the
    form requires a SIN record to be created. Enter the address on the
    form into mainframe when a new SIN record is created

See also: Amend address in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Address changes for Medicare registrations

Individuals enrolled in Medicare can request changes to their address:

using their Medicare online account through myGov

by calling (also known as a verbal update)

in writing, this must include:

-   the handwritten signature of the individual, or the parent or
    guardian if the child is under 14 years
-   the old and new address
-   details to identify the writer in CDMS

a returned reminder letter if the parent or guardian of a child under 14
years has signed the letter

Email correspondence cannot be accepted as there is no hand-written
signature.

Note: AIR staff must only change the GROUP address in CDMS, see Amend
group address details.

Address changes for SIN records

Individuals who are not enrolled in Medicare may have a Supplementary
Identification Number (SIN) record.

There are 2 types of SIN records:

-   AIR SIN records - manually created by AIR Service Officers when
    vaccination providers record vaccination information on the AIR.
    Changes to personal details in SIN records are done on mainframe and
    update the AIR record immediately
-   Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) SIN records - generated when
    an individual requests an IHI online in the IHI Service in myGov.
    IHI SIN records must be updated in CDMS and mainframe

For more information on address changes for SIN records, see Amend
individual registration on the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Address changes for parents or guardians who have separated

If a parent or guardian of a child under 14 requests proof of
vaccinations and advises that their address has changed as they have
separated from their partner:

-   do not update the address in mainframe or CDMS
-   print the vaccination information from the AIR site and mail to the
    parent or guardian with a standard letter to the new address
    nominated by the caller (after performing the security check). See
    also: Milestone statements
-   refer the caller to the Medicare enquiry line for the address or
    Medicare card change. See the Resources page for a link to Medicare
    phone numbers on the Services Australia website

Note: the above applies to individuals aged 14 or over who are still on
their parent or guardian's Medicare card but indicate they no longer
live at the address recorded.

Address changes for families on multiple Medicare cards

Where a family is on multiple Medicare cards and a caller wants to
change the group address in all registrations in CDMS, they must either
be:

-   on the Medicare registrations being changed
-   the addressee name

If they are not on the registration or they are not the addressee, tell
the caller that only the addressee of the Medicare card can change the
address.

CDMS change of group address

Service Officers must follow the security check and change of group
address procedures when updating a group address in CDMS.

See: Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Change of personal details

Personal details in CDMS

Service Officers may change the following personal details for a
Medicare enrolled individual in CDMS:

-   Bank details
-   Update minor errors. See Amend a person’s Medicare enrolment details
-   Contact phone number
-   Email address
-   Issue new card for customers. See New card requests for expired
    cards and Issue a replacement or duplicate Medicare card

Personal details in AIR

Requests to change personal details for individuals who do not have
Medicare entitlement (individuals with a SIN record in the AIR) can be
actioned in the AIR system.

See Amend individual registration on the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR).

Request for replacement Medicare card

Service Officers can action requests for a replacement Medicare card
(for example, where it has been lost or stolen) after performing an AIR
security check.

See Medicare cards.

Change to family component

Enquiries about a change to the family component in the Medicare
registration (for example, separation from a partner, removing or adding
individuals) can be:

-   referred to a service centre
-   transferred to the Medicare enquiry line

Do not change the address in CDMS in these circumstances.

The Resources page has links to phone numbers on the Services Australia
website and Office Locator.

AIR staff verbal updates for vaccines on the AIR for incorrect/missing details

Note: this is for AIR staff only.

Vaccination providers can only record vaccination information online
through their practice management software (PMS) or the AIR site or
manual forms.

In extremely limited cases, AIR Service Officers can take a verbal
update from a vaccination provider only over the phone and record the
details manually. This includes where the provider is unable to update
through the appropriate channel and the individual:

-   urgently requires proof of vaccination for employment purposes
-   urgently requires proof of vaccination for travel
-   urgently requires proof of vaccination to visit a nursing home or
    health facility
-   Family Tax Benefit for the individual has been or will be reduced
-   Child Care Subsidy for the individual has been rejected or cancelled

Note: updating the record with missing vaccination information may not
result in a reassessment of an adverse payment outcome. The individual
should contact Centrelink general enquiries to discuss what action is
required.

Verbal updates can be taken for:

-   encounter claims (possible payment for the vaccination provider)
-   history claims (no payment is made)
-   overseas history claims (no payment is made)

Note: verbal updates cannot be taken for medical contraindications,
natural immunity or catch-up schedules. See Immunisation medical
exemptions in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Centrelink Service Officers must follow approved escalation protocols.
Do not tell customers to call the AIR and request a verbal update. See
View and update a child's immunisation status and assess or update
immunisation exemptions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Cold chain breach

Vaccines may become less effective or destroyed when not refrigerated
between 2 and 8 degrees Celsius. This is known as a 'cold chain breach'.
Vaccination providers must contact their state or territory health
department if this happens.

See Cold chain breach if a vaccination provider advises a vaccine was
given under cold chain breach conditions.

The Resources page contains scenarios to help Service Officers record a
verbal update in the AIR, and links to the Services Australia website
and Office Locator.

Related links

Individual registrations in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Overseas immunisations and processing history forms in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

Process claims in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
