
Computed Tomography (CT) services assessing in Medicare 011-20021119

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines computed tomography (CT) Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) items.

General diagnostic imaging information

For general diagnostic imaging assessing rules see Diagnostic imaging
assessing rules in Medicare.

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items

CT services are in Category 5, Group I2 of the MBS. The item range is
56001 – 57364.

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online.

Information for health professionals

Health professionals can use MBS Online or the Department of Health
website.

MBS explanatory note IN.0.12 has information about CT services.

The Resources page has a link to the explanatory note.

What are CT scans

A CT is a scan of an area of the body or organ at various depths which
enables the area scanned to be examined in sections. The scan is
directly entered into a computer for comparison.

There are separate items for services performed on different types of
scanners (for example, body or brain).

Professional supervision for CT scans

CT services are only eligible for a Medicare benefit if the service is
performed under the professional supervision of a specialist in
diagnostic radiology.

The Resources page has information about specific CT services and the
professional supervision requirements.

Equipment age (capital sensitivity)

Diagnostic imaging equipment must meet certain requirements to be
eligible for Medicare benefits.

Equipment must:

-   be under the effective life age
-   have been upgraded and is under the maximum extended life age, or
-   have an exceptional circumstances exemption for unforeseen delays in
    replacing or upgrading equipment

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about capital sensitivity and claiming MBS items.

See QITI for effective life age of equipment relevant to specific items.

Multiple CT services (DIMSR)

CT services are subject to the Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services Rule
(DIMSR).

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about the DIMSR.

CT scanning of multiple regions

The MBS includes items that cover common combinations of regions. When
this occurs, the item covering the combination of regions should be used
and not the items relating to individual regions.

Where regions are scanned which are not covered by a combination item,
benefits are payable for each examination.

The Resources page has a table with individual and composite items.

See Composite items assessing in Medicare for information about how to
process claims with return message 6-CMP.

CT scanning of extremities (56620 – 56630)

Benefit for these services are attracted only once regardless of
whether:

-   one or more regions is scanned
-   more than one extremity is scanned, or
-   one or more attendances were required to complete the service

Note: the service also includes any scans of the extremities prior to
the injection of intravenous contrast.

CT scanning requiring multiple attendances

If a service described in an MBS item is performed over multiple
attendances (same or different day), the benefit can only be paid once
for that service.

Items 56220 to 56238 and 56620 to 56630 in particular can only be
claimed once regardless of the number of patient attendances required to
complete the service.

Health professionals must make sure they have completed all aspects of
the service before billing the item.

CT scans of the spine

CT items exist which separate the examination of the spine into the
cervical, thoracic and lumbosacral regions. These items are 56220 to
56238 inclusive.

They include items for CT scans of 2 regions of the spine (56233 and
56234) and for all 3 regions of the spine (56237 and 56238).

Some restrictions apply. See the related explanatory notes in the MBS in
IN.0.12- Group I2 - Computed Tomography (CT) for further information.
The Resources page has a link to the explanatory note.

With intrathecal contrast medium (Item 56219)

The item incorporates the cost of contrast medium for intrathecal
injection and associated x-rays. Benefits are not payable for this item
when rendered in association with myelograms (Item 59724).

Where a myelogram is rendered under item 59724 and a CT is necessary,
the relevant item would be scan of spine without intravenous contrast
(Item 56220, 56221 or 56223).

For those CT scans where a contrast medium is used:

-   any CT scans taken of that region before the injection of the
    contrast medium are included in the service, and
-   do not attract a separate benefit

With intravenous contrast medium

For CT scans where a contrast medium is used:

-   any CT scans taken of that region before the injection of the
    contrast medium are included in the service, and
-   do not attract a separate benefit

Upper abdomen and pelvis

Items 56501 and 56507 are not eligible for Medicare benefits if
performed for the purpose of performing a virtual colonoscopy (also
known as CT colonography and CT colography).

CT Colonography is covered by item 56553.

Computed tomography of the coronary arteries (Items 57360 and 57364)

Payment of Medicare rebates for items 57360 and 57364 is limited to
specialists or consultant physicians who have fulfilled the training and
credentialing requirements developed by the Conjoint Committee for the
Recognition of Training in CT Coronary Angiography (CTCA).

These items are not to be used to image the coronary arteries:

-   chest items 56301, 56307, 56801, 56807, 57001 and 57007

The Resources page contains:

-   links to Services Australia and external websites
-   information on professional supervision requirements for CT services
-   scanning of multiple regions for CT services (composite items)

Related links

Composite items assessing in Medicare

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

Provider eligibility for R-type diagnostic imaging services for Medicare

Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) registration
for Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO)

Medicare online claiming

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
