
Identify and resolve duplicate Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 011-03010110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policies and procedures on how to identify,
flag and resolve duplicate IHI.

On this Page:

Identify duplicate IHI

An IHI can be identified as a potential duplicate if a Healthcare
Provider or Service Officer has determined that the same person has been
issued more than 1 IHI.

Note: this function is available via Business to Business (B2B) where a
Provider has authenticated access to the HI Service.

A Healthcare Provider or Service Officer cannot flag the same set of
IHIs that have potential duplicate flags already set.

Manual flagging of duplicate IHIs

Where it had been determined the same individual has been allocated more
than 1 IHI, the 2 or more IHIs may have potential duplicate flags
applied.

This function is only available in the below scenarios:

-   Neither IHI is associated with a Medicare enrolment record
-   The IHI to be retained as the primary is associated to a Medicare
    enrolment record

Potential duplicate IHIs may be identified and flagged by a:

-   Service Officer or a Healthcare Provider via Medicare service
    channels
-   Healthcare Provider via a web service request (B2B)

Only Service Officers can:

-   add free text to the IHI they have flagged
-   flag IHI with a status of Retired as a potential duplicate

IHIs that have been flagged as a potential replica cannot be flagged as
a potential duplicate until the replica investigation has been
completed.

An IHI can still be accessed and updated when it has a potential
duplicate flag set.

Resolve duplicate IHIs via a Service Officer

IHIs may be identified and flagged as duplicates via B2B but must always
be resolved by a Service Officer.

The IHI to be retained becomes the primary and the incorrectly created
IHI becomes the secondary.

The Medicare enrolled IHI must always be selected as the primary IHI,
where a Medicare enrolled IHI is flagged as a potential duplicate with
either:

-   an unverified IHI
-   a verified non Medicare enrolled IHI

Where a verified non-Medicare enrolled IHI is flagged as a potential
duplicate with an unverified IHI, the verified non-Medicare Enrolled IHI
must always be selected as the primary IHI.

Where both IHIs identified as potential duplicates are Medicare enrolled
records, the resolution processes are conducted by the relevant Medicare
team (currently Medicare Customer Data Integrity Unit).

Duplicate IHIs with an IHI status of deceased, retired or expired can be
either reinstated first and then resolved or resolved without
reinstating.

The status of the:

-   primary IHI is unchanged
-   secondary IHI is changed to resolved

When a search is performed on the secondary IHI or demographic details
the primary IHI is returned.

Where the Service Officer determines that the IHIs have been incorrectly
flagged as duplicates of each other, the duplicate flags may be removed.

Related links

Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare

Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
