
Individual registrations in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10040000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for an individual's registration in
the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

AIR registration options

Individuals are registered on the AIR when:

-   they enrol in Medicare
-   they apply for an Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI)
-   vaccination information is received from vaccination providers

Medicare enrolment

Individuals who are enrolled in Medicare are automatically included on
the AIR. Their personal details are copied from their Medicare enrolment
file and added to the AIR.

Part of the record received from Medicare includes a Personal
Identification Number (PIN). This is a unique number used as a personal
identifier by the AIR.

Changes to Medicare details, including end dates are updated overnight
on the AIR.

Individuals who are not eligible for Medicare

Individuals who are not eligible, or not yet enrolled for Medicare can
have records on the AIR. These individuals are allocated a Supplementary
Identification Number (SIN).

Individuals are registered directly onto the AIR when vaccination
information is received from a vaccination provider. This creates an AIR
SIN record.

If an individual applies for an IHI, and they do not already have a
record on the AIR, the system will automatically create an IHI SIN
record for them.

Note: AIR Service Officers can identify SIN records created for IHI
individuals by checking the AIR registration history. The message ‘IHI
SIN CREATED’ will appear next to a system identifier.

If the individual is later enrolled in Medicare, their Medicare record
is added to the AIR. The system tries to match records through data
matching to:

-   avoid duplicate records
-   prevent inaccurate or incomplete vaccination history

If the personal details are different and the system is not able to
identify a unique match, an individual may have multiple records. AIR
Service Officers manually match or merge these records in the ‘daily
resolution’ process.

Contents

Amend individual registration on the Australian Immunisation Register
(AIR)

Merge or match individual records and SIN records in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
