[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the National Cancer Screening Register.

The National Register

The National Cancer Screening Program (the National Register) is a
national electronic infrastructure for the collection, storage, analysis
and reporting of cancer screening program data for the National Cervical
Screening Program and the National Bowel Cancer Screening Program.

The Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care is the
custodian of the information in the National Register and has contracted
Telstra Corporation Limited (Contracted Service Provider) to build and
operate the National Register.

The National Register is bound by the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (the
Privacy Act), including the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs), and
the National Cancer Screening Register Act 2016 (the NCSR Act). These
Acts regulate how the National Register collects, records, uses, stores
and discloses information about individuals and to whom it can be
released.

Personal information

Individuals’ information was migrated from state and territory cervical
screening registers and the National Bowel Cancer Screening Register,
previously administered by Services Australia. This included
individuals’ demographic information, Medicare numbers and other
information in relation to cervical and bowel cancer (for example,
diagnosis and screening test results).

Individual personal information is sourced from Services Australia,
healthcare providers, pathology providers, hospitals, state and
territory governments and/or a personal representative if nominated.

Personal details are incorrect

If the customer’s personal details are incorrect they will need to phone
the National Register Contact Centre .

Enquires and complaints

The National Cancer Screening Register is the first point of contact for
all enquiries relating to cervical or bowel cancer screening. The
contact centre team may refer enquiries to the Department of Health and
Aged Care if the enquiry is specific to the operation of the National
Cervical Screening Program or the National Bowel Cancer Screening
Program.

Privacy contact

If a customer believes that their privacy has been breached contact the
National Register’s Privacy Contact.

The Resources page contains links to contact details.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
