
Rapid Addressing for Medicare 011-40130000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the features of Rapid Addressing
for Medicare. Rapid Addressing is designed to increase the speed of
address updates and ensure accurate recording of customer addresses.

On this Page:

Access to Rapid Addressing

Rapid Addressing is integrated into the following CDMS screens:

CDMS:

-   Register Consumer (all programs – e.g. Medicare, AODR, etc.)
-   Amend Consumer (all programs)
-   Amend Medicare card
-   Register Medicare card
-   Amend CAPS Program Details
-   New CAPS program Details
-   Register IHI Consumer –mailing and residential
-   Amend IHI Consumer – mailing and residential
-   Address Search (all programs and IHI)
-   Amend AODR Entitlement
-   Amend NBCSR Entitlement

Rapid Addressing is available for:

-   Service Officers in CDMS screens that have functionality to record
    or amend addresses. Note: Rapid Addressing will not be implemented
    into the Medicare Provider Directory System (PDS) create and amend
    provider registration screens as previously advised. This
    implementation has been deferred until further notice.
-   [] Customers, through their Medicare account online.

Rapid Addressing assists Service Officers and customers to record an
address by providing address suggestions from Australia Post files based
on the characters entered by the user. Staff can manually enter an
address that does not exist in the Australia Post files by selecting the
address suggestion under the - Your input - heading in the list.
However, Service Officers should only select this option if the address
entered does not appear in the list provided and they are satisfied that
it is correct.

Address conflicts

Where there is a conflict in the correctness of the
locality/postcode/state combination provided by the customer and that
suggested by Rapid Addressing, the Rapid Addressing suggestion should be
considered the correct combination. Service Officers should always
ensure that they have selected the correct address before completing the
address update.

Under no circumstances must a Service Officer advise a customer:

-   their address is ‘not known to Australia Post’ and is therefore
    wrong
-   to contact Australia Post if they believe the address combination
    provided by Rapid Address is incorrect

In these circumstances, Service Officers should manually enter the
address and select the entry from under the - Your input - heading in
the list of suggestions provided.

Non Australian addresses

There is no change to the way non-Australian addresses are entered. If a
country other than Australia is selected as a residential address to add
or amend, rapid addressing does not initiate. This is because Rapid
Addressing accesses the Australia Post address files and only works for
Australian addresses.

Update address using rapid address entry

Commence address entry in the Locality or postcode field. As characters
are entered into the Locality or postcode field, suggestions are
displayed. Once the locality or postcode details have been completed the
user is navigated to the Street address field where Rapid Addressing
again provides suggestions based on the user input to complete the
address update.

The following address types are able to be updated using Rapid
Addressing:

-   consumer residential address
-   consumer mailing address

Select a suggestion

A suggestion can be selected by using the mouse to navigate to the
selections and clicking on the selection. Selection by keyboard is using
the arrow keys for navigation and either the tab or enter key to select.

Locality or postcode

The Locality or postcode field displays as blank when either there is no
existing address data or when the clear button has been activated. When
updating an existing address, this field displays the existing locality
of the address and must be confirmed if updating the street number or
street, otherwise it should be overtyped with the new locality.

To code an address, users begin by entering a locality or full postcode.
A list of suggested localities should display after entering at least 3
characters or the full postcode. User input also displays as a suggested
address under - Your input - heading and should only be selected if
required (for example, for a new subdivision that is not yet known to
Australia Post).

Once the Locality or postcode field has been populated, a Street address
and Embellishment field appears above the Locality or postcode field.
The street address can then be recorded in the same manner.

Suggestion format

Address suggestions provided by Rapid Addressing may differ from how
they were input by the user. The address displayed by Rapid Addressing
is the preferred format.

Street address

A list of suggested streets displays after the first letter typed in the
Street address field, provided there are matches in the Australia Post
File. The Street details field can be coded by first typing either the
street number (including prefixes such as Unit or PO Box), or the street
name. The - Your input - heading also displays as a suggested street and
should only be selected if necessary.

If starting by the street name, a list of street numbers displays after
the street is selected. In some instances, the street may actually be in
a neighbouring locality or in multiple localities. Extra care should be
taken to ensure that the correct selection is made.

Update an existing address

For existing addresses, the town/locality is pre-populated to the
Locality or postcode field which can be overtyped. The user does not
need to type anything before being able to see suggestions based on the
existing town/locality.

Once the locality, state and postcode are confirmed by a selection from
the suggestions list, the address line and Embellishment field can be
updated. Address suggestions display. The user can either select from
the list of suggestions or start typing over the pre-populated data.

Create a new address

When creating a new address, Rapid Addressing displays automatically
with the Locality or postcode field. Once this field is complete, the
user is prompted to complete the Street address and Embellishment field.
Once the Validate button is selected, the address details are saved.

Embellishment - additional address information

Additional address information, for example:

-   property and building names, or
-   ‘Care of’ information

need to be entered within the Embellishment field.

Non-standard address types

The Resources page contains a list of non-standard address types and a
relevant description for each address type.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
