
Goods and Services Tax (GST) charged to Medicare patient claim accounts 011-43010110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when the Goods and Services
Tax (GST) is charged to Medicare patient claims. The GST is a
broad-based tax of 10 per cent on most goods, services and other items
sold or consumed in Australia.

Government intent

A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1998 legislates how the
GST is applied and specifies the goods and services subject to GST and
those that are GST-free (exempt).

In general, health services are GST-free if the service is 'generally
accepted in the medical profession as being necessary for the
appropriate treatment' of the patient. Examples of GST-free health
services include:

-   health services covered by Medicare
-   general practitioner and specialist consultations
-   diagnostic, surgical and therapeutic procedures (for example,
    opthalmology, neurology, optometry, radiation oncology,
    anaesthetics, radiology, ultrasound) and pathology.

GST-free Medicare services

Medical services are GST-free if they are provided by a health
professional and the Medicare service meets the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) criteria and a Medicare benefit is payable.

GST charged to Medicare patient claim account

If a Medicare benefit is payable for a medical service, Australian
taxation law states that these services are GST-free. The References
page contains a link to the legislation.

If a claimant provides a Medicare account or receipt for a service that
has a Medicare benefit payable and that account or receipt includes a
charged amount for GST, the claimant can seek reimbursement of the GST
amount from the health professional.

If a claimant provides a Medicare patient claim account or receipt that
includes GST, the Service Officer can either:

-   Process the claim with a new charge amount, deducting the GST amount
    from the original charge amount, then provide the claimant with a
    copy of the account or receipt and a letter advising Medicare
    services are GST free (see Resources page for a link). The claimant
    would then have the opportunity to contact the health professional
    and request a refund for the GST charged amount
-   Before processing the claim, contact the health professional to
    confirm the Medicare service and the correct charge amount, notating
    the amended information on a VG4 or sticky note
-   If the claimant attends a service centre, offer to not process the
    Medicare claim and suggest they could consider returning to their
    health professional for an amended Medicare account without GST
    charged. If the claimant agrees with this option, give them the
    original Medicare account or receipt

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) website for information about the GST and health (including
medical services), and a link to the letter to advise that Medicare
services are GST free.

Related links

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
