
Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15030010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about a notice of past benefits and
notice of charge relating to Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Notice of past benefits

A notice of past benefits is a summary of the recoverable amounts for
that claim. It is based on the statement by the claimant (if returned)
and a list of the Medicare benefits and care costs verified by the
claimant, which is attached. If the statement is not returned, no list
is attached as all services are taken as related to the claim.

Issue notice of past benefits or notice of charge

If the claim has not reached judgment or settlement, issue a notice of
past benefits. This becomes a notice of charge where a case is settled
within 6 months. A notice of past benefits expires after 6 months.

If the claim has reached judgment or settlement, issue a notice of
charge. This notice is payable in full by the compensation payer within
28 days. A notice of charge does not expire.

No statement by claimant returned - all services taken

Send a notice of past benefits - all services taken where the statement
by claimant:

-   is not returned and no Section 23A notice has been received
-   by the due date
-   by the latest date where an extension was granted
-   following a request to provide more information - were a z2452 -
    Provide more information to process the Medicare history statement
    and declaration letter was sent

All services listed on the Medicare history statement will be taken as
related to the claim. All nursing home benefits, residential care
subsidies and home care subsidies identified in a previous notice of
past benefits will be carried forward.

Multiple notices of past benefits

The injured person or compensation payer may submit a request for a
Medicare history statement when there is a valid notice of past
benefits. Services Australia (the agency) may send more than one notice
of past benefits during the life of a compensation case.

Where a notice of past benefits has been issued and a subsequent request
is received prior to judgment or settlement or reimbursement
arrangement, decide whether to action the request. See background tab
and table 5 in Process tab in Assess Medicare Compensation Recovery
correspondence.

Errors in notice of past benefits

The compensation payer should be immediately advised where an error is
found in a valid notice of past benefits to ensure the latest
information is used when negotiating the settlement or judgment amount.

No valid notice of past benefits at judgment or settlement

The agency will accept payment of a recently expired notice of past
benefits provided it:

-   only expired within 28 days from the date the amount of compensation
    was fixed under a judgment or settlement, and
-   would otherwise have been valid (for example, relates to the date of
    injury and nature of illness/injury for which the compensation was
    paid)

Where the agency has accepted such a payment, the s24(4) timeframe is
not applied as the recently expired notice of past benefit is treated as
a notice given during the preceding 6 months.

Where no valid notice of past benefits or completed section 23A
statement has been received at the time of judgment or settlement, a
notice to claimant is sent to the injured person or claimant. Do not
send a notice to claimant if the agency accepted payment of a recently
expired notice of past benefits.

When accepting a section 23A statement, the amount from any expired
notice of past benefits relating to the claim, becomes the amount
payable in the notice of charge.

Calculation of s33D due date for notice of charge- with no extension to
return statement

Under section 33D of HOSC Act, if an advance payment has been made, the
date to issue a notice is 3 months from receiving the later of either:

-   A complete and valid notice of judgment or settlement from the
    compensation payer, or
-   The advance payment

Under section 33D of HOSC Act, there are no amounts recoverable by the
agency where:

-   more than 3 months has passed since a complete notice of judgment or
    settlement or advance payment was received
-   no extension was granted, and
-   a notice of charge has not been issued

If the Section 33D date has passed, do not issue a Medicare history
statement to the claimant/injured person, or notice of change to the
compensation payer. Process within the system to issue a nil CP055M
(z1931) to the claimant/injured person when the case is finalised.

Calculation of s33D due date for notice of charge after an extension

If an extension was granted to return a statement by claimant, the new
33D date is 28 days after the new statement return date if:

-   the new statement return date is after the original section 33D(1)
    date (3 months after the date of receipt of notice of judgment or
    settlement or advance payment, whichever is later)

For example, if the section 33D (1) date was 2 April 2020, but the
extension to return the statement was granted until 10 April 2020, a
notice of charge must be issued by 8 May 2020. That is, 28 days after
the new statement return date.

Calculation of s24 (4) due date for notice of charge

Under section 24(4) of HOSC Act, where there has been no advance payment
made:

-   the agency has a maximum of 3 months to issue a notice of charge to
    the compensation payer from the date a completed notice of judgment
    or settlement was received

If the s24(4) date has passed and a notice of charge has not been
issued:

-   there are no amounts recoverable by the agency
-   See Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery,
    Process page Table 1 and 2

See Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery
for steps to issue a z2438 Notice of charge - reconciled letter:

-   Background page - Notice of judgment or settlement, and
-   Process page - Table 2

Where the agency has accepted payment of a recently expired notice of
past benefit, s24(4) timeframe does not apply, and the amount paid
remains recoverable.

Notice of charge

Send a notice of charge to the compensation payer, injured person or
claimant advising of the amount payable to or amount payable (refund) by
the agency.

Send a copy of the notice of charge to the injured person's authorised
third party when the agency holds a valid third party authority (MO021
form) to release information.

A notice of charge will itemise the amounts owed to the agency as
follows:

-   Amount of past Medicare benefits
-   Amount of past nursing home benefits, residential and home care
    subsidies
-   Previous voluntary recoveries
-   An advance payment (if paid)
-   The total amount payable to the agency (after any apportionment) or
    any refund amount

Process late statement

If the statement by claimant is received by the agency before the notice
of past benefits or notice of charge is issued, it can be accepted. A
notice of past benefits or notice of charge - all services taken should
not be sent.

If at the time of processing the statement by claimant has not been
received, all services must be taken as relating to the compensation
claim. Issue a notice of past benefits or notice of charge - all
services taken.

Payments received before a notice of charge is issued

There are 2 situations where the agency can receive payments prior to
issuing a notice of charge. These include when the compensation payer:

-   Chooses to pay a notice of past benefits or other amount - the
    amount paid will be added as a voluntary recovery prior to the next
    notice of past benefits or notice of charge, or
-   Makes an advance payment – the amount paid for the advance payment
    is reflected in the notice of past benefits sent to the injured
    person or claimant

When a notice of charge is issued

After a section 23A statement is received

A section 23A statement may be submitted by the injured person if they
have not received:

-   any relevant Medicare benefits since the date on their expired
    notice of past benefits, or
-   a notice of past benefits

The amount payable on the notice of charge will either be:

-   the amount on the expired notice of past benefits, or
-   nil

After an advance payment is received

The recoverable amount is reduced by the advance payment, and a notice
of charge will be issued to the injured person or claimant, and:

-   if there is money still outstanding, the amount is payable to the
    agency by the injured person within 28 days after receiving the
    notice, or
-   if there is a refund owed, that amount is paid by the agency to the
    injured person (unless an authority is received to pay a Public
    Trustee)

After a voluntary recovery is received

The recoverable amount is reduced by the voluntary recovery amount, a
notice of charge will be issued to the compensation payer, and:

-   If there is money still outstanding, the amount is payable by the
    compensation payer
-   If there is a refund owed, the amount is paid by the agency to the
    person that made the payment, usually the compensation payer or
    insurer

Note: if the compensation payer or insurer wants the money to be paid to
the claimant, they must provide written authorisation for the agency to
do so.

Notice of reimbursement arrangement, no previous payments received

Where a compensation payer has notified the agency of a reimbursement
arrangement, if a Medicare history statement is:

returned by the due date:

-   a notice of charge with an itemised list of services identified by
    the injured person or claimant will be issued to the compensation
    payer

not returned, or is returned after the due date

-   a notice of charge - all services taken will be issued to the
    compensation payer. This will not have an itemised list attached

When the amount can be reduced on a notice of charge

Percentage of apportionment

Where the injured person contributed to their injury or illness
(contributory negligence), a percentage of liability is set at judgment
or settlement. This is known as an apportionment and it reduces the
judgment or settlement amount.

The notice of charge is reduced by the percentage of apportionment
attributed to the injured person. For example, if the injured person was
apportioned 20% liability, the notice of charge amount would be reduced
by 20%.

Judgment fixes the amount to be paid and is less than the notice of
charge

Where the 'amount of past medical expenses' and/or the 'amount of past
care costs' is fixed by a court at the time of judgment, this fixed
amount becomes the amount payable to the agency. The agency cannot
recover more than the total fixed compensation amount.

The Resources page contains links to the appropriate Medicare
Compensation Recovery forms.

Related links

Assess Medicare Compensation Recovery correspondence

Payments, refunds and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Amended notices and reviews for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Declarations for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Legal and requests for information for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare history statement request for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of reimbursement arrangement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Authority to release information and acting on a person's behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Voluntary recoveries for Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
