
Telephone claiming service for Medicare 011-43150000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the National policy and procedures for the
telephone claiming service for Medicare. Note: as at 1 July 2016 Norfolk
Island is covered under Medicare provisions.

Telephone claims

Telephone claims

Medicare provides a telephone claiming eservice for patient claims that
is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The service is available
to rural and remote customers who do not have access to online services.

To claim by telephone, claimants can call the Medicare Telephone Claims
line, pass a security check and provide the Services Australia Service
Officer with the required details of the medical service. The Resources
page contains a link to Medicare contact information on the Services
Australia Website. When processing a telephone claim the date of
lodgement is the date of the phone call.

To align with all other Medicare claiming channels within the agency,
claimants are required to provide proof or evidence of their claim in
order to receive a Medicare benefit. This means all telephone claims are
required to be pended, until the claimant sends in their
receipts/accounts prior to any payment being made to the claimant.

Service Officers must advise the claimant all Medicare benefits for paid
patient claims will be paid by EFT.

For more information see Account and receipt documents for Medicare
claims processing.

The Process page contains information about telephone claiming
procedures and recalling and processing a telephone claim from pend.

Self service facility

There are currently 60 remote service centres that provide self service
facilities for the purpose of Medicare telephone claims. The service
centres provide reply-paid envelopes for claimants to submit their
claim.

To assist claimants from self service facilities, Service Officers must:

-   complete the usual telephone claiming process
-   advise claimant to place all relevant paperwork in the pre-paid
    envelope and submit it to service centre staff

Note: these claims are then placed in the office's outgoing mail to be
forwarded to the Assessing and Benefits team.

Pended claims reason code 385

Telephone claims pended with reason code 385 are copied from the pend
file and incorporated into a daily Report Management and Distribution
System (RMDS) report called Medicare pended telephone claims (RSN 385).

Service Officers use this report to contact claimants when resolving
outstanding claims or where claims documentation has not been received
within 4 weeks of the date of lodgement.

Quality control guidelines

For the purposes of quality control, it is considered an error if a
Service Officer did not permanently store bank account details provided,
unless the claimant advised that the details were temporary for that
claim only.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Assessing and
Benefits team, the Privacy note, Claimant Declaration, Bank Account
Declaration, Telephone source office codes and links to the Medicare
telephone claims via Centrelink Service Centre self-service facility,
Claims details verified by phone (VG4) form, Standard Letter Templates
and the Services Australia Website.

Related links

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Unauthorised Medicare activity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
