
Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card 011-44150020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information about copying or transferring a
person or child to another Medicare card.

Family and domestic violence

Services Australia plays a critical role in providing support to people
with family and domestic violence concerns. The agency gives access to
the services and support they may need. Family and domestic violence can
pose a serious risk to the safety and wellbeing of our customers. It is
important to discuss all options with the customer.

Identification documents required

The applicant listed as person 1 on the copy/transfer form must provide
their identity document. The form must be signed, or consented by all
those listed who are 15 years or older. If person 1 is under 15 years of
age, a parent or guardian will need to provide their identification.

See Standards for Medicare forms for more details.

The applicant will need the following documents:

completed Application to copy or transfer from one Medicare card to
another form (MS011)

identification, which can include:

-   current Australian driver's licence
-   current Australian passport
-   Australian birth certificate
-   ImmiCard
-   current foreign passport with an Australian visa
-   Certificate of Identity

Note: the exception is when actioning a newborn enrolment and the new
parent is still enrolled on their original family card. See Errors and
exceptions with newborn child enrolments in Medicare for more
information.

When processing a copy or transfer to a new or existing card Service
Officers must check the Medicare Safety Net. See the Step 2 in Table 2.

The Process page provides more information.

Copy or transfer a person over 15 years using a form

Transfer or copy to a new Medicare card

When a person transfers to a new Medicare card they will no longer be on
the previous Medicare card.

When a person is copied to a new Medicare card they remain active on
both their new and existing Medicare cards. The cardholder must sign or
consent on the Application to copy or transfer from one Medicare card to
another form (MS011) where the transfer or copy is to another person’s
Medicare card.

Transfer or copy to an existing Medicare card

When a person transfers to an existing Medicare card they will no longer
be on the previous Medicare card. When a person is copied to an existing
Medicare card they remain active on both Medicare cards.

The cardholder must sign or consent on the Application to copy or
transfer from one Medicare card to another form (MS011) where the
transfer or copy is to another person’s Medicare card.

When processing a copy or transfer to a new or existing card Service
Officers must check the Medicare Safety Net. See Step 2 in Table 2.

See Standards for Medicare forms for more details.

Copy or transfer a child under 15 years using a form

To copy a child under 15 years of age to a new or existing Medicare
card, one parent must sign or consent on the Application to copy or
transfer from one Medicare card to another form (MS011). When processing
a copy or transfer to a new or existing card Service Officers must check
the Medicare Safety Net. See Step 2 in Table 2.

See Standards for Medicare forms for more details.

When a child is copied onto more than one Medicare card:

-   the last address update for the child displays in CDMS, and
-   the address displayed may relate to the child's other Medicare card

Services Officers must not disclose the child's address to parents or
guardians.

To transfer a child under 15 years of age to a new or existing Medicare
card, both parents or guardians (if applicable) must sign or consent on
the MS011. If both parents or guardians cannot sign or consent,
supporting documents must be provided. For example:

-   Apprehended Violence Order
-   Family Court Order showing sole parental responsibility

Applicants requesting the child or children under 15 years to be
transferred where both parents or guardians cannot sign or consent
electronically, must be escalated to Medicare Eligibility Helpdesk for
consideration. See Table 5 for more information.

Service Officers must not disclose the child’s address to parents or
guardians.

See Standards for Medicare forms for more details.

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in Document Verification
System (DVS). The Process page has details on how to verify and record
this information prior to processing the application.

Copy or transfer to a new card online

[] Some customers can get a new Medicare card and number online by using
their:

-   Medicare online account (MOA) through myGov, or
-   Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Customers who do not have a Medicare online account will need to create
myGov online account and link Medicare service to it. See How customers
create a myGov account and link services.

Customers can select 'My card' then the 'Get a new card and number'
option to:

-   get their own card and number. For example, they have become
    independent
-   get a new card and number with other people. For example, they are
    separated and need a new card with their children

The 'Get a new card and number' option is available to customers who:

-   have a Medicare online account
-   wish to copy or transfer to a new Medicare card only (not an
    existing card)
-   are 15 years or older
-   do not hold an interim (blue Medicare card) or RHCA (yellow)
    Medicare card
-   are not on 2 Medicare cards or more
-   are not the only member listed on the Medicare card
-   have not requested a copy or transfer 4 times within the last 12
    months

Note: if the 'Get a new card and number' option is not displayed the
customer has not met the above criteria. The customer needs to complete
an Application to copy or transfer from one Medicare card to another
form (MS011), see Resources for a link.

Group contact transfers to a new card

-   If a group contact chooses to leave their current card, CDMS
    automatically assigns a new group contact
-   The next oldest remaining person aged 15 years or older on the card,
    becomes the new group contact
-   If the remaining person/s on the card are aged under 15 years, the
    group contact cannot transfer to a new card online

See Medicare cards, Group contacts.

Eligibility to add a child aged under 15 years

Customers can add a child to their new card online if the child is:

-   under 15 years
-   listed on the card they use to sign in
-   not on 2 Medicare cards or more
-   to be copied to the new card

Note: when adding multiple children, all children must meet the
eligibility criteria to complete the process online.

Customers cannot add a child aged under 15 years online if:

-   they wish to remove the child from their current card
-   the child is not listed on their current card

These customers must complete an Application to copy or transfer from
one Medicare card to another form (MS011). Supporting documents may be
required.

See To copy or transfer a child under 15 years using a form.

Add a child aged 15 years or older

Customers adding a child aged 15 years or older can select the 'Add
someone to my card' option after they submit their request for a new
card online.

See Copy or transfer to an existing card online.

See also: Using Medicare self service and the Resources page for a user
guide to help customers get their own Medicare card and number online.

Copy or transfer to an existing card online

[] Some customers aged 15 years or older can copy or transfer to an
existing card online by using their:

-   Medicare online account (MOA) through myGov, or
-   Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Customers who do not have a Medicare online account will need to create
myGov online account and link Medicare service to it. See How customers
create a myGov account and link services.

Copying or transferring to an existing card online is a two-step invite
process:

-   A person on the existing card (the inviter) creates an invite code
    through the 'Add someone to my card' option, then gives it to the
    person they want to add to their card (the invitee). The inviter
    must give the invite code to the invitee, whether that be verbally,
    via SMS or email. The invite code will not be sent automatically to
    the invitee
-   The invitee enters the invite code through the 'Manage my card
    invites' option, then chooses whether they want to copy or transfer
    to the inviter's card

When the copy or transfer to an existing card is completed successfully:

-   The inviter will be notified via a myGov message and/or notification
    in their Medicare online account
-   Two Medicare cards will be sent to the inviter's postal address

Eligibility to invite someone

The 'Add someone to my card' option is available to customers who:

-   are 15 years or older
-   hold a green Medicare card
-   do not have a long name enrolment
-   do not have 9 active IRNs on the Medicare card they used to sign in
-   have a group contact listed on the card
-   are not in the care of a state or territory child protection
    authority
-   do not have a guardianship, administrative order or other court
    order recorded in CDMS
-   do not have an Authorised Representative recorded in CDMS
-   have not requested a copy or transfer 4 times within the last 12
    months

Note: if the 'Add someone to my card' link is not displayed, the
customer does not meet the above eligibility criteria.

Customers must also have the below about the person they are inviting:

-   current Medicare number and IRN
-   full name as shown on the Medicare card
-   date of birth
-   consent from the person they're inviting to provide this information
    online. Consent can be obtained verbally

Where a customer wants to invite a person who is not eligible to be
invited, they will see a message asking them to complete the MS011 form.

Eligibility to be invited

A person can be invited to join an existing Medicare card online if
they:

-   are 15 years or older
-   hold a green Medicare card
-   do not have a long name enrolment
-   are only on one Medicare card number
-   are not in the care of a state or territory child protection
    authority
-   do not have a guardianship, administrative order or other court
    order recorded in CDMS
-   do not have an Authorised Representative recorded in CDMS
-   have not requested a copy or transfer 4 times within the last 12
    months

To accept an invite through the 'Manage my card invites' option, the
invitee must have:

-   a valid invite code given to them by the inviter
-   the Medicare card number, IRN and full name as shown on the card of
    the person who invited them
-   consent from the person who invited them to provide this information
    online

Group contact transfers to an existing card

-   If a group contact chooses to leave their current card, CDMS
    automatically assigns a new group contact
-   The next oldest remaining person aged 15 years or older on the card,
    becomes the new group contact
-   If the remaining person/s on the card are aged under 15 years, the
    group contact cannot transfer to an existing card online

See Medicare cards, Group contacts.

Withdraw or decline an invite

A copy or transfer to an existing card will not be completed online if
the:

-   inviter withdraws the invite via the 'Manage my card invites' option
-   invitee chooses not to redeem the invite code
-   invite code expires after 7 days

Where a customer has concerns about a person using their information to
create an invite code, discuss the customer's options to get a new
Medicare card and number.

See also: Using Medicare self service and the Resources page for a user
guide to help customers copy or transfer to an existing Medicare card
online.

Remove a person from a card

When a customer advises that a person over 15 years should no longer be
shown on their Medicare card, Service Officers must advise the customer
to transfer themselves to a new Medicare card.

If the customer does not agree to this, Service Officers must not remove
the other person off that Medicare card without their authority:

-   either person may transfer to a new Medicare card, by using online
    services or a form, and
-   it is the responsibility of the persons enrolled to decide who will
    transfer off the Medicare card

When a customer advises that a child under 15 years should no longer be
shown on their Medicare card, Service Officers must check if the child
is listed on more than one Medicare card number.

If they are on more than one Medicare card number, Service Officers:

-   can end the association on the customer's card
-   must add a comment under Personal in CDMS, and
-   must check the Medicare Safety Net

Ending a customer's association on a card

Where a person is active on 2 cards, this will show in CDMS Group in
member's details. A person may not realise they are enrolled on 2
Medicare cards and when they transfer onto a new or existing card, CDMS
will not automatically end the association on both cards. The end of
association date will only be automatically inserted on the card number
used to transfer from. Service Officers should ask the customer if they
want to be removed from the other card.

A person's association can be ended over the telephone, or online.

If the person is over 15 years of age and is copied on 2 Medicare cards
and there are no claims history for the person within the last 12-month
period on the original Medicare card, end the association with the
Medicare card. A comment should be put in Personal in CDMS. See the
Process page, Table 9 for more information.

Where there are claims history present for the person on the original
Medicare card the association cannot be ended without authority of that
person.

Service Officers must check the Medicare Safety Net. See the Process
page, Table 9 for more information.

End association online

Some customers can end their association on one of their Medicare cards
online, using their:

-   Medicare online account through myGov, or
-   Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Customers:

-   who do not have a Medicare online account must create a myGov online
    account and link Medicare to it. See How customers create a myGov
    account and link services
-   can sign in online with the card they want to keep, then select My
    card, and Leave my other card
-   do not need to know their other card number to leave it

Note: for privacy reasons customers will not see information about the
card they want to leave. If the customer does not know the Medicare card
details, there is a risk that there may be changes to the card that the
customer is unaware of. For example, address details and persons listed
on the card.

A customer can obtain their Medicare card number over the telephone. To
release a Medicare number see: Authenticating a Medicare customer.

The Leave my other card option is available to customers that:

-   have a Medicare online account
-   are only on 2 Medicare card numbers
-   are 15 years or older
-   have a group contact listed on the card
-   are not in the care of a state or territory child protection
    authority
-   do not have a guardianship, administrative order or other court
    order recorded in CDMS
-   do not have an Authorised Representative recorded in CDMS
-   do not have a pending newborn enrolment application
-   do not have any restrictions on the card they want to leave. For
    example stop, expired, MPI1 flag

Note: if the customer isn't eligible to leave a card online, they will
see a message asking them to phone Medicare.

Group contact ends their association online

-   If a group contact chooses to end their association on a card, CDMS
    automatically assigns a new group contact
-   The oldest remaining person aged 15 years or older on the card,
    becomes the new group contact
-   If the remaining person/s on the card are aged under 15 years, the
    group contact cannot leave that card online

For more details, see:

-   Using Medicare self service, and
-   Resources User help guide- Help customers leave a card online when
    they have 2 Medicare cards

Customer incorrectly ends their association online

If a customer incorrectly ends their association online, Service
Officers must advise the customer:

-   that another eligible person on the card can invite them to be added
    to the card they left online. See: Copy or transfer to existing card
    online
-   they must copy to a new card if they were the only person listed on
    the card they left. They cannot be copied back onto the card they
    left. See: Copy or transfer to a new card online
-   alternatively, they can complete the Application to copy or transfer
    from one Medicare card to another form (MS011)

Child in crisis

When a child under 15 years needs their own card but cannot get
authorisation from a parent, they can

give a letter of consent from a trusted member of the community.

A trusted member of the community is, but not limited to, a:

-   teacher
-   social worker
-   minister of religion
-   youth refuge worker
-   police
-   member of the legal profession
-   medical practitioner

Do not refuse an application without checking with Medicare eligibility
and enrolments (Health Services Delivery Division (HSDD) Eligibility
team). They will escalate to Medicare Public Eligibility (Services
Australia Canberra) when necessary.

Missing persons

When asked to remove a 'missing person' from a family card, tell the
customer the missing person will stay on the card. The family members on
the card will be transferred to a new card. This keeps the other family
member's individual reference numbers (IRN) consistent on the new card.

When the missing person is a parent of children under 15 years, the
children are copied onto a new card. The missing person and the children
stay on the existing card. The Production Control address must be used
by ticking the check box in the Group address field in CDMS. This stops
unnecessary grief if letters for the missing person are mailed to the
family address.

Documents reporting the person as missing are not needed. The family
members must supply standard documents and signatures on the Application
to copy or transfer from one Medicare card or another form. The family
can then transfer to a new card.

Alternative identity proofing requirements for Medicare

Although the majority of the customers can meet the identity proofing
requirements, some customers, including a number of vulnerable cohorts,
may face genuine difficulty because they do not have, or they are unable
to obtain the necessary information or identity credentials. This may
include people:

-   who are homeless
-   affected by natural disasters
-   affected by family and domestic violence
-   whose birth was not registered
-   with intellectual difficulties
-   with psychiatric illnesses
-   living in remote areas of Australia
-   Indigenous Australians who are unable to provide identity documents
    can use the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Medicare enrolment
    and amendment form

Note: this process must only to be used for existing Medicare customers
who are unable to provide identity documents. Customers enrolling for
the first time in Medicare must meet the normal identity requirements.
The current process must be followed for customers who cannot provide
supporting documents.

See the Resources page for alternative identity assessment questions.

The Resources page contains:

-   details of consent requirements when a request is received to copy
    or transfer a child to a new or existing Medicare card
-   link to the Medicare form on the Services Australia website,
    'Application to copy or transfer from one Medicare card to another'
    form
-   transfer/copy a child to a new Medicare card – My Health Record
    script
-   alternative identity assessment questions
-   link to contact details
-   link to user help guides
-   FAQs for customers inviting someone to their card and who have been
    invited to an existing card online and for Service Officers

Related links

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Medicare enrolment and amendment
form

Errors and exceptions with newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Escalation process for Medicare eligibility

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using Medicare self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
