
Call transfers for Medicare and PBS telephony 011-40120030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about call transfers for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) telephony.

First call resolution

Services Australia has a first call resolution policy.

Service Officers:

-   must take responsibility for calls and try to finalise them at the
    first point of contact
-   who cannot resolve the call, must direct the call to the correct
    business area

For all internal transfers use the Team Communicator in Services
Australia Workspace to search for the relevant transfer line. Only use
direct transfer numbers where Services Australia Workspace is
unavailable.

Warm and cold transfers

Service Officers will get certain calls where either a warm or a cold
transfer is accepted. This will depend on the type of enquiry and how
much information the caller provides.

Cold transfers

Cold transfers include:

Transfer to another business line - general enquiry queue

MyGov helpdesk:

-   login issues
-   if there is a name discrepancy follow Medicare name change
    guidelines

Medicare Compensation Recovery

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - General enquiries

Warm transfers

Services Australia has a warm transfer policy so callers do not have to
repeat themselves while getting 'lost in transit'. This lessens caller
frustration and saves time for everyone.

Warm transfers include:

-   Medicare eligibility and enrolments
-   Medicare Health Programme Support Officers (PSO)
-   Medicare Document Verification
-   External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)
-   Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS) - customer contact,
    applications, ceasing entitlement and reviews

Transfer calls to service centres

Smart Centre staff must only transfer calls to service centres if a
caller:

-   has lost personal property
-   been to a service centre and needs to follow-up with the original
    staff member. For example, the staff member requested documents from
    the claimant
-   is from Services Australia and needs to contact a service centre
    directly to follow-up with original staff member when helping a
    mutual client
-   has been asked to contact the service centre but has lost the
    telephone number provided
-   (practice staff or provider) always contacts their local service
    centre with this type of enquiry
-   explains it is a personal call

Before transferring a call to a service centre, Smart Centre staff must:

-   try to resolve the enquiry at first point of contact
-   warm transfer to the service centre

Service centre staff contact details for customers

Service centre staff must give their contact details (e.g. first name, P
number) to a customer when requesting more information from the
customer.

This helps Smart Centre staff transfer return callers who need to speak
to the original staff member in the service centre.

Call escalation and internal helpdesks

Smart Centre staff can contact Medicare Tier 2 internal helpdesks for
advice or call escalation. See Medicare Health Programme Support
Officers (PSO) for details.

For all internal transfers use the Team Communicator in Services
Australia Workspace to search for the relevant transfer line. Only use
direct transfer numbers where Services Australia Workspace is
unavailable.

See below links for specific contact details:

-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - General enquiries
-   Medicare eligibility and enrolments

PBS Complex Drugs Programs

If a Service Officer cannot answer an enquiry about an authority
application processed by the PBS Complex Drugs Programs team:

-   transfer the call to the processing area that specialises in the
    condition or program
-   see the Call escalation to Complex Drugs Programs table

Enquiries about medicines and conditions that are 'General PBS listed'
should be resolved within the Service Officer's team.

Before cold transferring calls to the Complex Authorities line in
business hours:

-   tell the prescriber they have called the wrong number
-   give them the right number and Interactive Voice Response (IVR)
    option for future use

See Complex Drugs - IVR option for a list of conditions and IVR options
for transferring calls. The medical condition treated will determine who
manages the item.

Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

VAP process provider claims on behalf of the Department of Veterans'
Affairs.

For VAP claims, if the caller is a:

member of the public:

-   tell the caller that they need to contact DVA directly, and
-   transfer the call to Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

provider:

-   give the caller the right telephone number for VAP enquiries, and
-   warm transfer the call to the relevant Veterans' Affairs Processing
    (VAP) area

Lost or missing cheques

Where the enquiry relates to a lost or missing cheque or cheque trace
(not a follow up on the status of the original request), Service
Officers must:

-   complete the relevant lost/missing cheque or cheque trace forms, and
-   forward to state of origin via email

Call requests

This section is for calls where providers have submitted specific
details for:

-   review on a previously rejected claim, or
-   a proposed procedure

Complex assessing

Restrictive services or assessment of claims (complex assessing)
enquiries must be referred to a Programme Support Officer (PSO).

Examples of when a Service Officer refers to a PSO:

-   multiple services rules applied to a procedure or benefit has been
    affected
-   claim has been paid under a composite item number instead of the
    item number quoted
-   provider asks for interpretation of an item descriptor or
    explanatory notes in the Medicare Benefits Schedule and Operational
    Blueprint does not address the enquiry

Specialised assistance

If a PSO cannot help with the enquiry at the first point of contact, the
PSO:

-   takes responsibility for the call, and
-   resolves the issue by getting advice from the relevant Tier 2 area

See Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programmed Support
Officer (PSO).

The Resources page contains links to contact details for call transfers.

Related links

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Escalate calls in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
