
QITI assessing information system 011-42020020

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the QITI assessing information
system.

On this Page:

QITI functions

QITI is an assessing information system in the Medicare mainframe that
provides a description of each Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) item. By
entering the date of service of the MBS item within a claim, QITI will
provide information specific to that item number at the given date. This
ensures that claims are assessed based on the MBS rules as at the date
of service.

QITI incorporates function keys which work as shortcuts to specific
information screens, other information stored in QITI includes:

-   Speciality codes needed by a practitioner for each MBS item
-   Assessing information to assist with the assessment of a Medicare
    claim
-   Schedule fee and benefit details
-   MBS item restrictions
-   Time dependency rules
-   Item association rules

Assessing information screen

To view an overview of assessing information, select the function key
‘4-ASS INFO’.

This is the landing screen of QITI and it automatically defaults to this
display when searching a specific item number and date. It displays a
short description of the MBS item and gives a brief overview of what
rules, restrictions and requirements may apply for the specific MBS
item. For example it displays a quick overview if the following apply:

-   Minimum and maximum age restrictions
-   RHCA restrictions
-   Aftercare period
-   Time dependency rule
-   Referral type required
-   Item association rule

Schedule fee – MBS screen

To view the Schedule fee details, select the function key ‘5-FEE/BEN’.

This screen displays the:

-   Schedule fee type and amount
-   Medicare benefit type
-   Medicare Safety Net threshold amounts
-   Medicare Safety Net capping information
-   Gap benefit threshold

Note: this page automatically defaults to the out of hospital benefit.
To query the in-hospital benefit, the Table field must be amended from
M01 to M01H.

The Resources page lists the fee types and benefit type fields and
associated explanations which appear on the Schedule fee page.

Servicing provider qualifications screen

To view the provider qualifications screen, select the function key
‘6-PROVQUAL’.

This screen displays a list of provider specialty codes which allow
claiming of the specified item.

In most cases there will be more than one page of provider
qualifications, press:

-   [PF8] to view each additional page
-   [PF7] to return to a previous page

By pressing [PF8] to move forward through this screen the following
pages can also be viewed:

-   Servicing provider qualifications
-   Requesting/referring provider qualifications
-   Ineligible servicing provider qualifications
-   Equipment requirement (for LSPN purposes)

Referring or requesting provider qualifications screen

To view the referring or requesting provider qualifications screen,
select the function key ‘13-REQ PROV’.

This screen lists the referring or requesting provider qualifications
required to allow the servicing practitioner to claim the item being
queried.

In most cases there will be more than one page of servicing, requesting,
or referring provider qualifications, press:

-   [PF8] to view each additional page
-   [PF7] to return to a previous page

By pressing [PF8] to move forward through this screen the following
pages can be viewed:

-   Requesting Provider Qualifications
-   Referring Provider Qualifications (for allied health service)
-   Equipment Requirement (for LSPN purposes)

Assessing rulings screen

To view the assessing rulings screen, select the function key ‘10-ASS
RULE’.

Assessing rulings include instructions or further information to assist
with the assessment of Medicare claims. Most assessing rules are
qualified by a reference date and registry file number. The rulings
appear in chronological order with the most recent ruling on the first
page.

It is important when checking assessing rulings that the date of service
is checked against the reference date. Old rulings still appear on QITI
as they remain valid for the period that they applied to.

Press [PF8] to view each additional page.

Assessing rulings are updated when:

-   help desk queries concerning the item are resolved
-   advice is received from the Department of Health and Aged Care, or
-   MBS changes are implemented

All requests for updates to item assessing rulings should be directed to
an Assessing and Benefits team who will forward the request to the
Assessing Helpdesk.

Item restrictions screen

To view the item restrictions screen, select the function key
’11-RESTRICT’.

The restrictions screen displays item numbers which restrict with the
queried item. In the Restrictions from item field, key the other item to
check if it restricts with the enquiry item.

The system returns the message ITEM XXXXX FOUND and highlights the line
(in both main columns) that the restriction appears on.

The restrictive items are listed in two main columns consisting of five
sub-columns.

See Restrictive items assessing in Medicare for more information about
the assessment of restrictive items.

The Resources page provides a list and explanation of the sub-columns
displayed in the restrictions screen of QITI.

Time dependency screen

To view the time dependency screen, select the function key ’20-TIMEDEP’

The time dependency screen displays any rules which limits the number of
times a service can be provided within a specified period of time in
order to attract Medicare benefits.

Time dependency rules can be applied where there is:

-   limitations on the number of services that can be performed in a day
    or specified time period
-   requirements for notating a time difference or separate occasion
    between the services
-   a specific number of related items which can be claimed in a certain
    time period

Return messages for QITI

The following return messages will display on the QITI page when the
system doesn’t recognise a command, or the input data:

-   Item keyed is not valid
-   Item not valid at inquiry date
-   Item not valid for table
-   Item not valid for state
-   Item invalid for table at inquiry date
-   Invalid inquiry date keyed
-   Invalid table keyed
-   Invalid State keyed (M01V table only)
-   Invalid [PF] key selected
-   Future inquiry date keyed
-   No assessing rulings for this item

The Resources page contains a link to the Understanding QITI module
providing a more detailed information on how and why the information is
set up the way it is on QITI. The page also contains QITI control line
access information and other general use, a list of QITI function keys
and their description, an explanation of the fields on the assessing
information page, a list of the fee and benefit type fields and
associated explanations which appear on the Schedule Fee page, and a
list and explanation of the sub-columns on the Item restrictions page.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
