
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services assessing in Medicare 011-20021107

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers about MRI
services in Medicare and assessing the claims.

General diagnostic imaging information

For general diagnostic imaging assessing rules see Diagnostic imaging
assessing rules in Medicare.

Equipment age (capital sensitivity)

Diagnostic imaging equipment must meet certain requirements to be
eligible for Medicare benefits.

Equipment must:

-   be under the effective life age
-   have been upgraded and is under the maximum effective life age, or
-   have an exceptional circumstances exemption for unforeseen delays in
    replacing or upgrading equipment

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about capital sensitivity and claiming MBS items.

See QITI for effective life age of equipment relevant to specific items.

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items

MRI services are in Category 5, Group I5 of the MBS. The item range is
63001 - 63560.

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online.

Information for health professionals

Health professionals can read MBS explanatory note IN.0.18 for
information about MRI services or the Department of Health website.

The Resources page has a link to these resources.

Requests for MRI services

Some health professionals are limited in which MRI services they can
request.

The Resources page has a list of health professionals and the MRI items
they can request.

There are no exemptions to request requirements for MRI services (unlike
some other diagnostic imaging services).

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for information about
requests for diagnostic imaging services and exemptions.

Providing MRI services

MRI services can only be provided by health professionals with
particular training or qualifications.

The Resources page has a list of health professional types and the MRI
services they can provide.

Eligible providers with the required Specialty code 118 must have this
applied to each location they will be performing MRI services at, as
well as on their Stem, as this code is location specific. No Medicare
benefits will be payable for MRI services performed at any provider
location that does not have this specialty code valid as at the date of
service (DOS).

Specialty code 655, for Cardiac MRI, is a Stem level specialty code, so
providers are able to perform this service at any of their locations if
they have this specialty code valid on their stem for the DOS.

Multiple MRI services (DIMSR)

MRI services are subject to the Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services
Rule (DIMSR). See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for
more information about the DIMSR.

Claiming frequency for MRI services

Some MRI services are subject to frequency limits. For example, 3 times
in a 12 month period or once in a patient's lifetime. MRI frequency
information is located at the beginning of relevant MBS MRI Subgroups
and in the 'Full item description' on QITI [PF9].

Note: frequency restrictions are considered rolling restrictions and not
based on calendar or financial years.

The below text notations do not apply to these services and do not
bypass these benefit limitations:

-   'not for comparison'
-   'specifically requested'
-   'non-contiguous'

The Resources page contains the below links to the Department of
Health’s website:

-   MBS Online
-   Magnetic Resonance Imaging
-   Improving access to Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Services Fact
    Sheet

Multiple Musculoskeletal MRI (MMMRI) – Items 63322-63361

The Multiple Musculoskeletal MRI rule is a fee reduction process that
applies to the schedule fee when more than 1 musculoskeletal MRI item in
MRI subgroups 12 and 13 (63322-63361) is performed by a provider for the
same patient on the same day.

This rule applies even if the scans are performed at different
attendances on the same day.

The fee reduction formula applies as below:

-   100% of the Schedule Fee for the item with the highest Schedule Fee
-   50% of the Schedule Fee for each additional item

Where there are multiple musculoskeletal MRI items performed that have
the same fee value, the item with the lower item number will be taken to
have a higher value.

The Resources page contains an example of how this functions.

Application of both MMMRI and DIMSR

When a provider performs a further diagnostic imaging (DI) service that
is not musculoskeletal MRI, the Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services
Rule (DIMSR) will apply in addition to the MMMRI rule.

Where the MMMRI rule has applied, the affected musculoskeletal MRI items
are treated as 1 combined service.

This means a fee reduction in relation to DIMSR will apply only once per
day for musculoskeletal MRI items even if more than 1 musculoskeletal
MRI item has been claimed for that date of service.

When calculating Medicare benefits for vascular ultrasound services the
below will apply:

-   firstly, the MMMRI rule (MMMRI – 100%, 50%) is applied
-   then the DIMSR (Rules A, B and/or C) are applied

The Resources page contains an example of how this is applied.

MRI of the breast to evaluate Poly Implant Prosthesis (PIP) breast implants

Items 63501 – 63505 and 63498 – 63499 are specifically for the
evaluation of PIP breast implants. These items were introduced in 2012
to support patients who suspected their implants were manufactured by
Poly Implant Prosthesis (PIP).

The Resources page has a link to more information about the intent of
these items and how they should be used.

Co-claiming restrictions with MRI scans

Consultations with MRI

From 1 November 2021, a consultation cannot be claimed if performed in
conjunction with an MRI scan item.

Restrictions will apply to the following consult items:

-   52
-   53
-   54
-   57
-   104 and
-   105

There are circumstances where a consultation is necessary for treating a
patient’s condition. Only services that are meaningful will attract a
benefit as an exception. A consultation is meaningful if:

the health professional utilises clinical expertise to consult with the
patient to alter, or potentially alter, the course of the patient’s
management and treatment

the health professional takes primary clinical responsibility for the
management decisions made during the consultation

the consultation includes components of:

-   history taking
-   physical examination
-   discussion with the patient
-   preparing management plans
-   referral for additional opinion or tests

Not all of the above conditions are required, however having some will
indicate that the consultation is meaningful.

Note: health professionals need to include supporting text on their
claims outlining why the consultation was needed. See Assessing MBS item
restrictions for acceptable text examples.

A request to undertake a diagnostic imaging service does not constitute
a valid referral for a specialist referred consultation. To claim a
specialist referred consultation (item 104 or 105), the health
professional must have also received a valid referral from a medical
practitioner for the investigation, opinion, treatment and/or management
of a condition or problem or for a specific examination(s) or test(s).

MRI scans for the head and spine

From 1 November 2021, there are restrictions on co-claiming an MRI scan
of either the head or spine with one or more additional MRI scans of the
same region at the same attendance.

For example, an MRI scan of the head will restrict with another MRI scan
of the head and an MRI scan of the spine will restrict with another MRI
scan of the spine. The highest schedule fee item will be paid for
multiple services for MRI scan of head or spine performed at the same
attendance.

More than one item can be paid where:

-   the requester states there is a clinical need for separate and
    distinct scans, and
-   the health professional has indicated this on their claim

Restrictions will apply to items in:

-   MRI scans of the head: Subgroup 1 to 5 of Group I5 - Range 63001 to
    63131
-   MRI scans of the spine: Subgroups 6 to 10 of Group I5 - Item range
    63151 to 63280

Note: only one item should be claimed for scans irrespective of the
number of conditions being investigated and the number of sequences
required to complete the scan unless the requester indicates there is a
clinical need for separate and distinct scans.

The Resources page contains:

-   information on eligibility to provide and request MRI services
-   examples of the Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services Rule (DIMSR)
-   Multiple Musculoskeletal MRI rule
-   frequently asked questions
-   answers for cardiac MRI, and
-   links to external websites

Related links

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
