
Anaesthetic services assessing rules in Medicare 011-42060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers relating to
anaesthetic services administered during operative procedures. It also
contains examples of accounts and statements relating to anaesthetic
procedures.

Anaesthetics

Anaesthesia is the procedure of inducing insensibility to sensation and
pain.

An anaesthetic is administered during operative procedures and can be
either a:

-   general anaesthetic which renders the patient unconscious
-   regional or field nerve blocks where a substantial part of the body
    is anaesthetised, and the patient remains conscious
-   neuroleptic anaesthetic which renders the patient semi-conscious

Anaesthetic services are listed under Category 3 Therapeutic Procedures
of the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS). The Resources page contains a
link to MBS Online.

When searching for information about anaesthetic services in the MBS,
refer to the item number in the first instance. This will provide:

-   a full description of the item
-   the item’s schedule fee, and
-   advise if there is an explanatory note containing additional
    information about the item

Alternately, search the MBS using key words.

All relevant explanatory notes including QITI need to be reviewed before
Service Officers provide advice.

If clarification of the item description or explanatory note is needed,
refer to an appropriate Service Centre Manager, Team Coach or Team
Program Adviser.

Regional or nerve blocks

Regional or field nerve blocks

Regional or field nerve blocks are a form of anaesthetic used to
anaesthetise a substantial segment of the body for an operation or
procedure. They are commonly used during labour, as an anaesthetic for
minor procedures and may be used where the patient’s condition prevents
the use of a general anaesthetic.

Benefits are not payable for nerve blocks which are not of a major
nature. The descriptions of the various items cover those blocks that
are deemed to be major blocks, for example, item 18264 (pudendal nerve).

Major nerve blocks

A major nerve block is interpreted as the anaesthetising of either:

-   a substantial segment of the body supplied by a large nerve
-   an area supplied by a smaller nerve, where the technique demands
    expert anatomical knowledge and a high degree of precision

Local (non-major) nerve blocks

Nerve blocks not meeting the above criteria are considered to be local
anaesthetics which do not attract benefits when performed in association
with a surgical procedure.

For example:

-   digital ring analgesia
-   local infiltration into tissue surrounding a lesion
-   paracervical (uterine) blocks
-   sciatic blocks
-   blocks of individual nerves of arm or leg
-   blocks of various nerves of the head and/or face

Control of post-operative pain

A number of services have been included in the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) for the control of post-operative pain.

Items 22031 – 22041 apply for post-operative pain where the service is
provided in association with anaesthesia and surgery as outlined in the
item descriptors. Benefit is not payable where nerve block items other
than those listed above are used for the control of post-operative pain
in association with anaesthesia and surgery.

Items 18222 and 18225 apply where top-up is required to maintain
regional anaesthesia or analgesia when the service is performed by a
health professional other than the operating surgeon. This does not
preclude benefits for an obstetrician performing an epidural block
during labour.

See also: MBS explanatory note for these items. The Resources page
contains a link to MBS Online.

Epidural anaesthesia during labour

Epidural anaesthesia is covered by the following Group T7 Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) items:

-   18216, 18219
-   18226, 18227 for after hours services

Whether administered by the medical practitioner undertaking the
confinement or by another medical practitioner.

Subsequent top-ups for the control of pain are covered by either item
18222 or 18225.

Where an epidural block is topped up in the operating theatre for the
purposes of Caesarean section, Medicare benefits for that anaesthetic
service should be paid under item 20850, Initiation of management of
anaesthesia for Caesarean section.

Benefits would also be payable for the epidural anaesthetic performed
earlier in labour for pain relief.

Note: Service officers must check the claim and patient history to
ensure separate times are noted before overriding any restrictions.

Relative Value Guide

To bill Relative Value Guide (RVG) items, health professionals must
record the start and end times for all procedures billed under RVG items
range:

-   23010 - 24136

Start and end times are to be recorded in patient notes and not as part
of the claim.

Not associated with operations

When the block is not associated with an operation, for example, during
labour or for intractable pain, benefit is payable under Group T7 of the
Schedule.

From 1 March 2022, there are certain items that include the following
phrase in their description:

-   'not in association with a service to which an item in Group T8
    applies, unless the nerve block is performed using a targeted
    percutaneous approach'

Where a block is administered to a patient on the same day as an
anaesthetic for an operation, the account or claim must show:

-   that the services were provided on separate occasions, or
-   performed using a targeted percutaneous approach (for relevant items
    with this wording in their description)

Before overriding any restrictions, Service Officers must check the
claim and patient history for:

-   separate times, or
-   supported text stating 'targeted percutaneous approach’ or ‘TPA’

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
MBS Online, plus examples of accounts and statements relating to
anaesthetic procedures.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
