
Identify and resolve replica Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 011-03010100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policies and procedures to identify and
resolve replica IHIs in the HI Service.

On this Page:

How replica IHIs are caused

Replica IHIs can be caused when:

-   Duplicate Medicare records are incorrectly merged and subsequently
    unmerged
-   The HI Service allocates the same identifier to 2 or more
    individuals due to a system malfunction
-   The health sector incorrectly assigns the same identifier to 2 or
    more individuals. Note: this cause is not handled by policy or
    procedure within Services Australia

Note: the 2 or more IHIs that are potentially compromised will be
suppressed and new IHIs allocated.

On any subsequent search for either of the compromised IHIs, the message
no record found is returned.

Identify potential replica IHIs

Note: the below information does not cover the inappropriate assignment
of identifiers within the health sector. Follow-up action might occur to
rectify the external health sector issues.

There is no automatic replica identification process. If a Healthcare
Provider or Service Officer suspects that more than 1 person has been
assigned the same IHI, a potential replica flag must be applied manually
for later investigation.

When an individual's IHI is flagged as a replica:

-   their consumer online account is not affected
-   they are not notified
-   free text comments must be added to the IHI with reasons to support
    adding potential replica flag

A Service Officer can flag an IHI as a potential replica regardless of
the IHI status. A Healthcare Provider can notify a Service Officer if
they suspect that the same IHI is being used to identify more than 1
individual.

An IHI which is currently flagged as a potential duplicate cannot be
flagged as a potential replica IHI until the duplicate investigation has
been finalised.

Resolve replica IHI

Note: the resolution of replica records must be referred to Tier 3
support for follow-up action.

Tier 3 Service Officers can investigate and resolve replica unverified
or verified non-Medicare enrolled records.

A separate manual replica resolution process occurs on Medicare enrolled
records.

A Service Officer must record comments and results against a potential
replica IHI.

If a Service Officer determines that the IHI has been:

-   incorrectly identified as a replica, they can remove the potential
    replica flag
-   correctly identified as a replica, they must resolve the replica IHI
    and create new IHIs for the individuals involved

Related links

Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare

Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
