
Online statement and features for bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare 011-43040050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about online statement features for
bulk bill latter day adjustments (LDA) claims in Medicare. Note: as at 1
July 2016 Norfolk Island is covered under Medicare provisions.

On this Page:

View statement details

The on-line DPSI transaction displays the patient details included in a
claim.

If an adjustment has occurred the DPSI of the original claim displays
the reason codes:

-   888 original line
-   889 transferred
-   898 suppressed
-   816 underpayment
-   818 overpayment

against the original lines that were adjusted.

To view the restated lines the adjusted claims date of lodgement (DOL)
is required on the DPSI control line. Only restated lines are displayed.

Note: these screens should not be printed by operators and sent to
providers.

Duplicate statement

If an original claim is requested where adjustments have taken place,
the adjustment details will not be displayed on the duplicate statement.

Duplicate adjustment statement

When a duplicate statement is required for the details of an adjusted
claim, both original and restated lines are printed, unlike the view of
on-line DPSI for these claims.

Suppressed services

Suppressed services are not printed on duplicate statements and can only
be viewed online.

These adjustments are processed for internal record keeping purposes
only and must not be communicated to providers or patients.

Once only adjustments

When the DHAU control line is entered the system updates patient claims
history with all original, new and restated details. With the
implementation of the bulk bill later day adjustment on adjustment, all
adjustments to item data will be performed on the DHAC screen.

One active adjustment claim

The bulk bill LDA system allows only one active adjustment claim for
each original claim at a time. An active claim is one which does not
have a status of ADJ PAID, ADJ HIST or ADJ OPAY. If processing commences
on another adjustment claim for the same original claim while an
'active' claim exists the system returns the error message EXIST ADJ.

Use the DCEI screen to establish the status of the existing adjustment
claim. Using the appropriate control line access the adjustment claim
and if possible process the additional adjustments.

If it is not possible to process the additional adjustments, for
example, the claim has passed through background assessing and the
patient details requiring adjustment have been removed from the claim,
process these adjustments in a separate adjustment claim after the
'active' claim has been finalised.

Subsequent adjustment claims

To initiate a subsequent adjustment the operator is to enter the
original claim date of lodgement (DOL) on the DHSI control line.

When an adjustment claim has been processed, any subsequent adjustment
claim/s for the same original claim must have a different DOL. The
system sets the DOL for the adjustment claim to the day after the
original DOL.

Entry of the DHSI control line for a second adjustment claim before the
overnight process has been completed results in the system returning the
error message 3-STATUS.

Note: Service Officers cannot adjust the same claim more than once on
any given day.

The DCEI screen must first be assessed to determine the status of the
existing adjustment claim.

The processing procedures from this point vary depending on the status
of the claim see the Resources page for further details.

Adjustments on split claims

When an adjustment claim is received for a split claim, it is possible
not all of the adjustments are contained in only one part of the split
claim.

The adjustment claim must be divided into two or more adjustment claims
so that the adjustment vouchers in each claim correspond with those
contained in each part of the original claim.

Statistics system OSS

The following screens have been altered to reflect the action taken in
the adjustment:

-   PDB - Processing bulk bill
-   PDE - Processing bulk bill EDI
-   PDS - Processing bulk bill scanning
-   PDM - Processing bulk bill manual

The following outlines the changes to the three lines that report
details of adjustment processing. This is due to transfer actions
including 2 PINS.

-   Old line - claims = New line - claims
-   Old line - PINS = New line - vouchers
-   Old line - lines = New line - lines

RMDS reports

Changes have been made to the existing data validation (RMDS) reports
and 2 new reports have been created. The Resources page contains a list
of existing and new RMDS reports.

Codes and messages

As each stage of adjustment processing is completed the status of the
claim changes and is recorded on the DCEI screen.

If the date of lodgement (DOL) is included in the control line the
progressive status of the claim is displayed in the bottom left-hand
corner of the screen.

The Resources page lists the DCEI progressive status values an
adjustment claim may have.

Bulk bill LDA system return messages

The Resources page contains a list of the return messages which are
unique to the DH** Bulk Bill LDA system. Many of the return messages
generated in the bulk bill claims processing system, form part of the
DH** bulk bill LDA system. However, the explanation for some of these
messages varies significantly. Until the operator becomes familiar with
the bulk bill LDA system, these messages should be accessed and read
carefully.

The Resources page contains the processing procedures for subsequent
adjustment claims, a list of existing and new RMDS reports, DCEI
progressive and final status values for adjustment claims and a list of
new return messages and definitions.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
