
Amend address in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare 011-40060050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information to assist when amending an address in
CDMS for Medicare. It contains information on Australia Post
abbreviations, punctuation and the flow on effects an address change
will have in various systems.

Family and domestic violence

Services Australia plays a critical role in providing support to people
with family and domestic violence concerns. The agency gives access to
the services and support they may need. Family and domestic violence can
pose a serious risk to the safety and wellbeing of our customers. It is
important to discuss all options with the customer.

CDMS address re-standardisation

Address re-standardisation in CDMS commenced on 28 August 2010. This is
an automated process of address matching and re-standardisation to all
CDMS addresses. This will result in changes to some addresses to ensure
that they are in line with Australia Post standards.

See also: DPID matching for Medicare enrolments

Unable to select Validate

For some address changes Service Officers are not able to select the
Validate option. This is because the standardised address is too long to
store.

When this occurs, select the Continue option.

Public enquiries

Service Officers may receive enquiries from members of the public who
are concerned with a change to their address. Service Officers should
advise that the address has been changed to meet Australia Post
standards.

If the updated address is determined not to be accurate re-key the
correct address into the system.

For further information, email the Provider Directory System (PDS) and
CDMS Helpdesk. For contact details, see Provider Directory System (PDS)
and Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) helpdesk.

Adding new postcodes to CDMS

To add a new postcode to CDMS email the Medicare Public Eligibility team
helpdesk. For contact details, see Medicare Consumers Program Support -
Medicare Consumers Section - Medicare and Veterans Health Branch.

Address abbreviations and fields

The address fields in CDMS are:

embellishment line, used for:

-   care of ('c/o')
-   rural property names
-   complex names, for example, apartment
-   building and shopping centre names

address line 1 (mandatory)

locality, state and postcode

When overriding, note:

-   The slash '/' should be used to signify an address that includes a
    Flat or Unit Number only
-   The dash '-' should be used to show a 'Ranged Address' (an address
    that includes a number range). It should have no spaces between the
    dash and the numbers, for example 142-146 Smith St
-   Do not use full stops or commas, for example, use RMB 2010 and PO
    Box
-   Address lines are limited to 24 characters. It might be necessary to
    enter the appropriate abbreviations

Types of addresses in CDMS

Within CDMS, a customer may have a:

-   customer residential address
-   customer mailing address

If they have an entitlement to Medicare, there will also be a group
address.

The Resources page contains a table outlining the effect of updating
each address type.

Production Control address

A Production Control address should only be used when a Medicare card is
issued for less than 3 months and either the:

-   applicant will have left the country before receiving their Medicare
    card
-   card is for a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) and there is
    absolutely no address where the applicant could have their Medicare
    card sent

A Production Control address is also used when an unauthorised address
change has been made preventing a Medicare card from being produced and
sent to an incorrect address. Service officers are able to update this
address following the completion of a security check. See also:
Unauthorised Medicare activity.

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme

When a group address is changed in CDMS, the change is automatically
updated in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) records during overnight
processing.

Australian Immunisation Register

The Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) has records for people of all
ages living in Australia where the Medicare card number is:

-   known - Personal Identification Number (PIN) records
-   not known or the individual does not have a Medicare card number –
    Supplementary Identification Number (SIN) records

PIN records

When a customer residential or mailing address is changed in CDMS, there
is no effect on AIR records for PIN records.

When a group address is changed in CDMS, the change is automatically
updated in AIR records for PIN children during overnight processing.

Note: if advice is received over the phone that an AIR address is
incorrect, the AIR Service Officer updates the group address via CDMS.
This will then be reflected in AIR after overnight processing.

SIN records

Note: for SIN records, the reverse process more or less occurs where the
Consumer Directory (the back-end of the CDMS) is updated with AIR
records.

For a SIN record, where a registration:

-   does not exist in the Consumer Directory (CD), an automatic weekly
    process causes the CD to be updated with AIR details
-   exists in the CD, address updates are passed from AIR to the CD
    within five minutes of the AIR update

Australian Organ Donor Register

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) processing takes place in CDMS so
any address changes are immediately available.

Compensation Recovery

When an address is changed in CDMS, it does not cause the address to
change in the Compensation Case Management System.

Note: Compensation Recovery Service Officers follow manual procedures to
ensure the compensable person's address is up to date.

Address validating

Address validation software has been implemented to ensure accurate
recording of customer addresses. This is achieved by displaying a drop
down list of suggested addresses from the Australia Postal address files
(PAF) based on the characters entered by the Service Officer. Address
validation software only applies to Australian addresses.

When the address is validated, CDMS will assign a Delivery point
identifier (DPID). A DPID is a numeric address identifier which is
recognised with Australia Post. This number ensures correctly delivered
mail to customers.

Address resolution

Note: Service Officers should always attempt to match address data when
recording or amending an address in CDMS.

The following scenarios may occur where CDMS will allow the Service
Officer to override and enter the address details provided by the
customer:

-   The address may not validate due to an address located in a remote
    area or a newly listed suburb
-   A customer advising an address that differs slightly in CDMS
    resulting in a conflict in an adjoining suburb or locality may be
    given. Note: CDMS will not accept a location that is not in the same
    state
-   The customer strongly objects to their address details being varied
    to match the validated address in CDMS
-   A customer might be concerned to a change to their address. Service
    Officers should advise that addresses are automatically validated
    quarterly to meet Australia Post standards. The address can be
    changed if the customer strongly objects to the change

The Resources page contains contact details for Medicare Public
Eligibility helpdesk and Provider Directory System (PDS) and CDMS
helpdesk and tables outlining the effect on updating addresses, the
Production Control address, and abbreviations and their expanded terms
used by Australia Post for CDMS. It also contains a link to the
Australia Post website.

Related links

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Change of address for Medicare enrolments

Rapid Addressing for Medicare

Unauthorised Medicare activity

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
