
Australian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program 011-21032510

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about the Australian Thalidomide
Survivors Support Program (ATSSP) which provides financial support to
Australian thalidomide survivors. This includes the eligibility criteria
and document evidence requirements for the Extraordinary Assistance Fund
(EAF) and Health Care Assistance Fund (HCAF).

Australian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (ATSSP)

The Australian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (ATSSP) is an
Australian Government program aimed at providing financial support to
Australian thalidomide survivors. The Department of Health and Aged Care
has overall program and policy responsibility for the Australian
Thalidomide Survivors Support Program, while Services Australia (the
agency) is responsible for the administration of the Extraordinary
Assistance Fund and the Health Care Assistance Fund.

Under the Extraordinary Assistance Fund (EAF) and the Health Care
Assistance Fund (HCAF), Services Australia will help with out of pocket
health care costs, daily living costs and home and vehicle
modifications.

The out of pocket costs are costs the thalidomide survivors have after
they have already claimed from the following:

-   Medicare benefits
-   Other state or territory government funded programs
-   Private health insurance fund
-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), and
-   National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

Special circumstances for eligibility

All recognised Australian thalidomide survivors will be eligible to
access the EAF and HCAF and must have the following:

-   be a recognised Australian thalidomide survivor and be registered
    with the Program
-   have current Medicare entitlement
-   provide evidence from a registered health care practitioner that the
    goods and/or services are required as a consequence of their
    thalidomide related injuries, and
-   have already claimed from National Disability Insurance Scheme
    (NDIS), Medicare, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and/or other
    relevant Australian, state and territory government schemes, or
    private insurance, where appropriate

Where a claimant does not meet the eligibility criteria or has not been
identified by Department of Health and Aged Care as a recognised
Australian thalidomide survivor the claimant will need to contact the
Department of Health and Aged Care. The Resources page has a link to
Department of Health and Aged Care website.

Extraordinary Assistance Fund

The Extraordinary Assistance Fund (EAF) helps cover the costs of goods
and/or services to assist with activities of daily living, impacted as a
direct result of their thalidomide-related injuries.

The Resources page has a link to more information on the Department of
Health and Aged Care program guidelines, and a link to the EAF claim
form.

Health Care Assistance Fund

The Health Care Assistance Fund (HCAF) helps cover out of pocket health
care costs that are directly associated with thalidomide-related
injuries.

The Resources page has a link to more information on the Department of
Health and Aged Care program guidelines, and a link to the HCAF claim
form.

Note: the EAF and HCAF forms will be available for claiming from the 29
March 2021. However, the survivors can backdate claims from 1 July 2020.

Health care practitioner evidence

Recognised thalidomide survivors are required to provide written
evidence from a registered health care practitioner with their claim or
quote.

This evidence should document information such as:

-   the registered health care practitioner’s details, including name,
    address and provider number
-   the date the recognised thalidomide survivor was assessed by the
    registered health care practitioner
-   the type of goods and/or services required, including, if
    applicable, the frequency and duration of the service, and
-   the goods and/or services recommended are required as a direct
    result of thalidomide-related injuries

Making a claim

Recognised thalidomide survivors will need to complete the relevant EAF
and/or HCAF claim form and provide copy of receipts, accounts, invoices
and/or itemised quotes to support the claim. This includes:

-   itemised receipts or tax invoices for the items claimed
-   itemised quotes outlining the provider/supplier details - the
    business name, address, ABN and the details of the goods and/or
    services, the price and the breakdown of costs
-   statements or letters to show they have already claimed from the
    following, Medicare, private health fund, state or territory
    government programs and/or the National Disability Insurance Scheme
    (NDIS), as appropriate
-   evidence from a registered health care practitioner outlining that
    the goods and/or services being claimed as required as a direct
    result of thalidomide-related injuries

More information about claiming through the EAF and HCAF, including fund
guidelines and copies of the claim forms are available on the Department
of Health and Aged Care website.

Submitting a claim

Recognised thalidomide survivors can submit their claim by:

-   Medicare online account via myGov or Express Plus Medicare mobile
    app
-   Scan and email the completed claim form and supporting documents to
    the Australian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
-   Post

Approval of claims

Approval of claims is dependent on the type and the value of the claim.
In some circumstances, pre-approval of claims is required. Where the
recognised thalidomide survivors are seeking pre-approval of a quote for
required goods and/or services that have not yet been received or paid
for, they can be referred to the EAF and HCAF program guidelines or
instances of when pre-approval of a quote is mandatory and how many
quotes they will need to provide.

Refer the recognised thalidomide survivors to the program guidelines for
the claiming process requirements on the Department of Health and Aged
Care website. The Resources page has a link to the Department of Health
and Aged Care.

How payments are made

All reimbursements are made by Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) to the
survivor's nominated bank account. The nominated bank account details
recorded with Medicare will be used for approved claims under the EAF
and the HCAF. Survivors will need to ensure that their bank account
information is up to date with Medicare. Bank details can be updated
online using myGov or contacting Medicare.

How survivors can register

All recognised Australian thalidomide survivors will be eligible to
access the program. The Department of Health and Aged Care will send an
invitation pack, with an application form to register for the program.

Only living, recognised Australian thalidomide survivors can receive
support from the program. See the Resources page for more information on
How to apply for the Australian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
via the Department of Health and Aged Care website.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Thalidomide
Survivors Support Program (ATSSP) program guidelines and claim forms,
the ATSSP page on the Services Australia website and contact details
ATSSP.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
