
Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility 011-44015000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to escalate a Medicare enrolment enquiry. It
also details how to escalate a Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS)
enquiry.

An outline

A Service Officer must try to resolve a customer enquiry at first point
of contact by using all resources available.

If they are unable to help the customer, they can seek help from:

-   Health Service Delivery Division (HSDD) Eligibility team

This team provides help with:

-   processing work received in PaNDA
-   complex Medicare enrolment processing issues and enquiries
-   complex phone enquiries from F2F Service Officers
-   CDBS enquiries

If HSDD staff are not able to resolve the query they can escalate to
Medicare Eligibility and Enrolments (MEE) Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

The PSO will give a:

-   verbal answer to verbal enquiries or
-   request they escalate the enquiry through PaNDA

Service Officers and HSDD Service Officers are not to escalate any
enquiries to the Medicare Public Eligibility helpdesk directly. Only an
Eligibility PSO can do this.

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in the Document
Verification System (DVS) prior to processing enrolment applications.
The Process page contains details on how Face to Face (F2F) Service
Officers verify information.

Role of Medicare Public Eligibility Helpdesk

The helpdesk is in place to help with exceptional or out of the ordinary
enrolment requests and enquiries. This can include giving an accurate
interpretation of eligibility policies to help work out a customer's
eligibility.

The advice they give will take into account all of the legislative and
policy needs and provide help to decide:

-   what the best policy is, and
-   how to use the policy in the right way

The advice they give may include details about areas of policy that:

-   must be obeyed, or
-   are subject to staff discretion

The helpdesk will review these. They look at the intended outcome of the
policy and then make a decision that matches the policy intent

Policy teams do not have contact with the customer. They will contact
them only when they need to.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the Document
Verification System (DVS) request form.

Related links

Medicare - Eligibility - Your Health

Eligibility and enrolments in Medicare

Access VEVO (Visa Entitlement Verification Online) program

Manage Medicare scanning

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
