
Liaison between AIR and Centrelink staff for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10030010

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines processes for the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR) and Centrelink Liaison teams. The purpose of these teams
is to handle escalated issues that impact mutual customers. Contact
between AIR and Centrelink should only occur between the AIR and
Centrelink Liaison Officers.

Liaison process for AIR staff

AIR Service Officers who require a family assistance or child care
payment issue to be investigated should first refer the matter to an AIR
Programme Support Officer (PSO). If the AIR PSO determines that the
issue cannot be resolved internally, they will advise the Service
Officer to refer the matter to the AIR Centrelink Liaison Officer.

Issues should only be referred to the AIR Centrelink Liaison Officer
where:

-   the individual is up to date on the AIR system, and
-   the parent/guardian of a child under 14 years of age or the
    individual 14 years and over has already contacted Centrelink more
    than once to discuss their issue, and
-   there is a 'reason for urgency'

Note: for AIR enquiries, individuals 14 years and over must obtain their
own immunisation information. See Authentication and release of
information for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Issues around data mismatches from the linking process can also be
referred to the AIR Liaison Officer. However, this should only occur
where the customer has contacted Centrelink previously regarding the
matching process and it still cannot be resolved.

The AIR Centrelink Liaison Officer will contact the Centrelink AIR
Liaison Officers to investigate the issue.

The AIR Centrelink Liaison Officer will then contact the customer to
either:

-   explain the issue
-   get more information, or
-   provide advice that the issue has been resolved

Centrelink AIR Liaisons

Centrelink AIR Liaisons are the single point of contact between
Centrelink and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Centrelink AIR Liaisons assist the network with enquiries regarding
immunisation requirements, linking and overrides for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

If the Centrelink AIR Liaisons are unable to resolve an enquiry, they
can refer to AIR Centrelink liaisons for assistance. In some cases
further referrals may be required to Business Processing and Change as
appropriate.

Requests Centrelink AIR Liaisons do not action:

-   Centrelink AIR Liaisons are not Technical Support Officers for
    immunisation enquiries
-   Centrelink AIR Liaison will resolve the immunisation enquiry however
    will not complete any additional coding requirements i.e. Assisted
    Customer Claims (ACC) or claim processing. Once the enquiry has been
    resolved, it will be referred back to staff to complete any
    additional coding.
-   Centrelink AIR Liaisons do not follow up any non-immunisation
    related issues with Medicare

Information required for escalation

AIR Service Officers need to obtain information from customers before
escalating the issue to an AIR PSO.

The Resources page contains contact details and the escalation template.

Call transfers between AIR and Centrelink

AIR and Centrelink Service Officers can transfer customer calls between
the two areas, as required. See the Resources page for call transfer
scenarios.

Centrelink Service Officers should not transfer a call to the AIR when
the link has not yet been established or if an individual is a 'Yes/has
met requirements' in Customer First. If this has occurred the AIR
Service Officer should ask the customer for their CRN and using the
webform Escalation to AIR Centrelink Liaison Officer, refer the
information to the AIR Liaison Team. Centrelink can use this information
to identify the Service Officer who transferred the call and provide
additional training if required.

Note: customers who have been transferred several times between AIR and
Centrelink to resolve a problem should undergo the AIR Liaison process.

The Resources page contains the call transfer process for Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR) Service Officers, scenarios and questions
and answers for call transfers between AIR and Centrelink.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
