
Statement of benefit for Simplified Billing in Medicare 011-43060050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the statement of benefit for
Simplified Billing in Medicare.

Manual Simplified Billing claims

Prior to 12 June 2017 all Simplified Billing statement of benefits for
manual claims were system generated, printed and posted to the nominated
address for the private health insurer or billing agent.

As of the 12 June 2017 the agency introduced a new process for the
issuing of manual Simplified Billing statement of benefits (SOB) for
Simplified Billing claims. From this date the SOB is delivered to a
private health insurer or billing agent by secure email messaging to
their nominated secure email address.

The following applies for manual SOB from 12 June 2017:

-   System generated and sent to private health insurers and billing
    agents as a CSV file (Excel) attached via secure automated email.
    They are sent 5 days per week except the day prior to a national
    public holiday when the statement is sent on the following week day
-   They are sent to the nominated email address of the private health
    insurer or billing agent, this is stored within a mainframe dataset
-   There is 1 statement of benefit in a CSV file sent per email to each
    private health insurer or billing agent which will include all
    manual claims processed since the previous Simplified Billing
    statement run
-   ‘Subject’ heading of the secure email example; ‘PHI/BA Minor ID or
    Registration number Manual Claim Statement of Benefit Run No <NNN>’

Latter day adjustments to Simplified Billing claims

Prior to 12 June 2017 all Simplified Billing statement of benefit (SOB)
for latter day adjustments (LDA) were system generated, printed and
posted to the nominated address for the private health insurer or
billing agent.

As of the 12 June 2017 the SOB for LDAs will be delivered to a private
health insurer or billing agent by secure email messaging to their
nominated secure email address.

The following process applies for LDA Simplified Billing claims SOB from
12 June 2017:

-   System generated and sent to private health insurers and billing
    agents as a CSV file (Excel) attached via secure automated email.
    They are sent 5 days per week, however, will not be sent the day
    prior to a national public holiday
-   They are sent to the nominated email address of the private health
    insurer or billing agent, this is stored within a mainframe dataset
-   There is 1 SOB in a CSV file sent per email to each private health
    insurer or billing agent, which will include all LDA processed since
    the previous Simplified Billing statement run
-   ‘Subject’ heading of the email example; ‘PHI/BA Minor ID or
    Registration number LDA Statement of Benefit Run No <NNN>’

View duplicate statement

Service Officers can view the data contained in any Simplified Billing
statement by using the FSPI transaction. All services are displayed
excluding those where the patient or provider could not be recognised.
For example, services rejected with RSN 429 or 475.

Note: this facility can also be used to create a duplicate statement for
private health insurers or billing agents.

To return the Simplified Billing statement of benefit (SOB), key the
control line below:

FPSI, Minor ID or Registration number, Claim ID, DOL=DDMMYY

Note:

-   [PF7] - moves back to the previous SOB page
-   [PF8] or [Enter] - moves forward to the next SOB page
-   [PF12] - cancels the transaction

The Resources page provides a link to Simplified Billing contact
information.

Requesting a Duplicate Simplified Billing Statement of Benefit (SOB) or Latter Day Adjustment (LDA) for a Manual Claim

There may be instances where a private health insurer or billing agent
requires a duplicate Simplified Billing SOB for a LDA or a manual claim.
Requests are to be sent to DCM Support who manage the secure email
process.

Prior to 12 June 2017 all Simplified Billing SOBs for manual claims were
system generated, printed and posted to the private health insurer or
billing agent. Requests for duplicates of these statements are now
unavailable as they are over 2 years old and cannot be accessed by
Medicare Mainframe.

Simplified Billing EDI claims

For claims lodged via electronic data interchange (EDI), the statements
are generated back to the site via the EDI gateway the day after a claim
is finalised (has reached PAID status).

Reports are transmitted Mondays to Saturdays.

See also:

-   for ECLIPSE refer to Eclipse claims for Simplified Billing in
    Medicare
-   for EDI refer to Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for
    Simplified Billing in Medicare

Simplified Billing ECLIPSE claims

For claims lodged via Electronic Claims Lodgement and Information
Processing Service Environment (ECLIPSE) an In-Patient Medical Claim
(IMC) Processing Report is available when the claim has been completed,
the claim being either successful or rejected.

Reports can be accessed only when the ECLIPSE HUB is available, and may
be requested more than once within the 6 month period that they are
available after generation.

Simplified Billing missing statement of benefit for manual claims and Latter Day Adjustments

If a private health insurer or billing agent is missing a statement of
benefit for a manual claim or Latter Day Adjustment on or after 12 June
2017 refer to Payments for Simplified Billing in Medicare.

The Resources page contains contact details for Simplified Billing
(ECLIPSE).

Related links

Eclipse claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in
Medicare

Payments for Simplified Billing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
