
Delete duplicate organ donor registration 011-11090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to delete a duplicate organ
donor registration record and duplicate consumer IDs with AODR
entitlement in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR).

Duplicate organ donor registration

A duplicate registration occurs when the same organ donor is registered
more than once on the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Before creating a new registration, determine if a registration already
exists or if there are any possible duplicates. The search results
display either:

-   matched consumers with an AODR entitlement
-   matched Donor only entitlements
-   both of the above

Note: information message 00461-No records found is returned if the
search cannot find any matching data.

Service Officers must view any possible matches to determine if the
registrations are the same person. Registrations may exist for previous
names and exist with discrepancies.

Where multiple donor records present in CDMS, confirm if the records
match the same customer. If the records match, update and link the
record with the most recent donation decision date, or the already
linked record. Delete the duplicate donor entitlement record.

Service Officers must always conduct detailed searches and confirm the
record belongs to the customer whose form is being actioned when
processing AODR. New AODR entitlements are to be registered if the
records do not match.

Duplicate registrations may continue to occur via SA Road authority
(Transport registration) as the data and information process is not
directly linked to the Donor Register.

Note: the deletion of a Donor Only entitlement cannot be reversed.

Duplicate Consumer ID with AODR Entitlement

A duplicate consumer ID with AODR entitlement is different from a
duplicate registration.

Note: this AODR scenario is not an Intertwined or duplicate Medicare PIN
requiring linking.

Duplicate Consumer IDs occur when a form or a call is received with no
Medicare number or no authorisation to link to Medicare is given. If
there are no existing records that can be correctly matched or updated,
a new registration is created. This scenario creates a new consumer ID
with AODR entitlement only.

Duplicate registrations occur when more than one organ donor
registration is created for the same person on CDMS.

If the AODR receives a new form with authorisation/Medicare number in
the future, the system will not allow a link to the previously created
registration, as they are two separate consumer IDs.

See Delete duplicate consumer ID with AODR entitlement.

The Resources page contains AODR contact details information.

Related links

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Register a new organ donor in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Link Donor Only entitlement to consumer record

Search for and verify existing organ donor registration in Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Action Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) rework transaction

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
