
New Zealand citizens eligibility for Medicare 011-44050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Medicare eligibility for New Zealand citizens in
Australia.

New Zealand citizens

New Zealand citizens who live in Australia are covered under the
definition of 'Australian resident' included in the Health Insurance Act
1973. New Zealand citizens visiting, that is, who do not live in
Australia, are covered by the Reciprocal Health Care Agreement between
Australia and New Zealand.

New Zealand citizens can enter Australia either:

-   on a Special Category visa (subclass 444). A SCV is a temporary visa
    that allows New Zealand citizens to stay and work in Australia as
    long as they remain a New Zealand citizen. SCV are recorded
    electronically in a person’s passport, therefore it is not necessary
    to see the visa for Medicare purposes, or
-   as an applicant for permanent residency visa which allows them to
    live in Australia indefinitely

See Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare
and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Eligibility for Medicare

New Zealand citizens who reside in Australia are eligible for Medicare
if any of the following apply:

-   they intend to reside in Australia
-   they have been or will be in Australia for 6 or more months

Note: customers need to reside, or intend to reside in Australia either
continuously or intermittently for a period of at least 6 months in a 12
month period.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

Customers must provide the following documents for each person on the
enrolment form:

-   current passport, and
-   2 residency documents

Record all documents in CDMS when registering customers Medicare
entitlement.

Insufficient residency documents

Where a customer cannot provide 2 residency documents after being in
Australia for 6 months or more, they can complete a Commonwealth
Statutory Declaration together with any documents they have. The
Commonwealth Statutory Declaration must be comprehensive and state why
the customer could not provide sufficient residency documents. For
example, they are living with friends or relatives and have no
employment, or they are on a fly-in-fly-out (FIFO) contract with an
Australian employer, in which case, the customer must provide the name
of their Australian employer.

Documents for families

Only 2 residency documents need to be provided for the family unit where
all family members:

-   are New Zealand citizens, and
-   have arrived in Australia on the same day

See Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment for more
information.

Dependant Student (under 25 years of age in full time study)

Where a dependant student remains in New Zealand to complete their
studies before joining their family in Australia, they may not be able
to provide 2 residency documents to confirm their residency in
Australia. A document from New Zealand stating when they completed their
studies is acceptable instead of 2 residency documents.

The dependant student can be added to the existing family card or
enrolled on a card of their own (if 15 years of age or over).

Immigration data link

The Medicare record must not be attached to the immigration data link
when registering the consumer in CDMS, even when the New Zealand citizen
has applied for permanent residency. This is because New Zealand
citizens are eligible for Medicare simply by residing in Australia. The
status of their permanent residency application does not affect their
eligibility. Attaching the data link may result in the New Zealand
citizen's eligibility ceasing or changing, when they remain entitled.

Recording entitlement details in CDMS

The following entitlement details should be recorded for all New Zealand
citizens residing in Australia:

-   Entitlement type: New Zealand Citizen
-   Country of relevance: New Zealand
-   Entitlement start date: date of arrival in Australia
-   Entitlement end date: not applicable (open Medicare card)

Renewing a New Zealand Citizens Medicare card

Where a New Zealand citizen has been enrolled in Medicare and their
Medicare card has expired, Service Officers must update their Medicare
entitlement to reflect their New Zealand citizen eligibility, as per
this policy before issuing a new card.

Permanent residency refused by Department of Home Affairs

New Zealand citizens who reside in Australia are eligible for Medicare,
regardless of whether or not they are an applicant for permanent
residency which was subsequently refused by the Department of Home
Affairs.

If there is any doubt as to whether or not they are eligible, escalate
the application. The customer must not be refused a Medicare card due to
their application for permanent residency refusal. To update an
entitlement type on an existing record, see the Process page - Adding a
New Zealand entitlement type to an existing Medicare record in CDMS
table.

New Zealand citizen residing outside of Australia

A New Zealand citizen who permanently resides in Australia may lose
their Medicare eligibility when they are absent from Australia for 12
months or more.

The department accepts advice confirming that a person is residing
overseas from the following sources:

-   over the phone or
-   in person or
-   in writing (letter or email)

Where advice is received that the New Zealand citizen intends to or is
residing overseas, enter the departure date (if known), in the Comments
field in Personal.

Where it is confirmed that a New Zealand citizen has been absent from
Australia for 12 months or more but the exact date they left the country
is unknown, eligibility can be end dated with the date advised or date
the written advice was received. See the Amend or delete entitlement
details table.

Note: an end date should not be applied to a customer’s record until
they have been residing outside Australia for 12 months or more.

New Zealand citizen returning to reside in Australia

If a New Zealand citizen has been absent from Australia for 12 months or
more as indicated in CDMS, they can be reinstated in Medicare when they
provide evidence that they have returned to Australia to reside.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

The following documents must be provided with a completed Medicare
Enrolment Application form:

-   passports of all people on the application and
-   2 residency documents, or
-   Commonwealth Statutory Declaration

Note: a Statutory Declaration is only required where a permanent
resident is unable to provide any supporting residency evidence to
reinstate their Medicare entitlements after six months.

Child born in Australia to New Zealand citizens

See Child enrolments - both parents are New Zealand citizens.

Child born overseas to New Zealand citizens

Eligibility

A child born overseas is eligible for Medicare when:

-   1 or both parents are New Zealand citizens, and
-   living in New Zealand before arriving in Australia, and
-   intends to reside in Australia

Documents required

-   Child's current passport, and
-   Child's birth certificate, and
-   Two residency documents for the applicant

Record all documents in CDMS when registering customers Medicare
entitlement.

Insufficient residency documents

Where the customer cannot provide 2 residency documents, they can
complete a Commonwealth Statutory Declaration together with any
documents they have. The Commonwealth Statutory Declaration must be
comprehensive and state why the customer could not provide sufficient
residency documents.

Unaccompanied child

Eligibility to Medicare

Where a child arrives on their own to reside with a relative or friend
in Australia, they are eligible to enrol on the primary carer's Medicare
card.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

The following documents are required with a completed Medicare enrolment
application form:

child's passport

a letter from their school confirming the child is enrolled and
attending school in Australia (only required when the child is of school
age)

a Commonwealth Statutory Declaration completed by parents stating:

-   they (parents) are not residing in Australia
-   the date the child entered Australia, and
-   the name of the person whom the child is residing with in Australia

Where a Commonwealth Statutory Declaration cannot be completed by the
parents escalate the application.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare enrolment application
form and the Commonwealth Statutory Declaration.

Family relationship visa (subclass 461)

Under Ministerial order, visa subclass 461 is a temporary visa which
allows non-New Zealand citizens to travel and live in Australia with a
parent, spouse or child of a New Zealand citizen residing in Australia.

This visa allows them to only:

-   work and study in Australia
-   travel to, enter and remain in Australia for 5 years from the date
    the visa is granted

Note: holders of a Visa subclass 461 are not eligible for enrolment in
Medicare unless they have lodged an application for permanent residency.

See Spouse, parent or child of a New Zealand citizen on the Background
page of Ministerial Orders and Medicare eligibility.

Eligibility for Medicare

A person who holds a visa subclass 461 is eligible to enrol in Medicare
when they:

-   reside in Australia
-   hold a valid temporary visa, and
-   have applied for permanent residency

Note: if the holder of visa 461 has not applied for permanent residency
they are not eligible for Medicare unless they were previously residing
in a Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) country. The applicant
must meet the eligibility criteria as set out under the specific
agreement.

See Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare
and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Visa details have been received electronically

Where the applicant's visa details have been received via the
Immigration Data link, one of the following identification documents
must be provided for all people listed on the Medicare Enrolment
Application form:

-   current passport
-   travel document
-   Immicard

Visa details have not been received electronically

Where the applicant's visa details have not been received via the
Immigration Data link, one of the following identification documents
along with valid visa documentation must be provided for all people
listed on the Medicare Enrolment Application form:

identification document:

-   current passport
-   travel document
-   Immicard

valid visa documentation:

-   in the passport, or
-   in the form of a travel document, and
-   correspondence (email or letter) from the Department of Home Affairs
    confirming an application for permanent residency has been lodged,
    or
-   a Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) screen print (no more
    than 1 week old), or
-   a VEVO check conducted by the Service Officer

Record entitlement details in CDMS

Entitlement type: conditional migrant

Entitlement start date:

-   application for permanent residency was lodged onshore, the date
    that the application was lodged with the Department of Home Affairs
-   where the application for permanent residency was lodged offshore,
    the date of entry into Australia

Entitlement end date: 12 months from entitlement start date

Entitlement end reason: entitlement ceased

Document types: add all documents provided

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in (Document Verification
System (DVS) before processing application. The Process page contains
details on how to verify and record this information.

The Resources page contains links to results codes, data tables, country
codes and forms to assist with enrolment.

Related links

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

Manage Medicare scanning

Ministerial Orders and Medicare eligibility

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Child born in Australia enrolling in Medicare

Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
