
Create Verified Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 011-03010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to create a Verified IHI in CDMS.

Verified IHI

See IHI in the HI Service for more information about IHIs.

Processing and enquiries about IHI

Individuals who are not eligible for Medicare or a Department of
Veterans’ Affairs benefit or payment may apply for an IHI online through
the IHI Service in myGov.

Alternatively, the Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier (MS003)
form may be completed.

Once an individual has an IHI, they can link the IHI Service in myGov
for electronic evidence of their vaccination history. They may also
register for a My Health Record if required, via the Australian Digital
Health Agency website.

See IHI in the HI Service for FAQs about IHIs.

Escalate complex cases and enquiries to Tier 3 Digital Health
Operations. See HI Service for contact details.

The Resources page includes a link to the MS003 form.

Eligibility for a Verified IHI

Anyone who has received, is receiving or will receive healthcare
services in Australia is eligible for a Verified IHI. People who are
eligible for Medicare or a Department of Veterans’ Affairs payment or
benefit already have a Verified IHI and do not need to apply for one.

Individuals who are not eligible for Medicare, for example visitors to
Australia, can:

-   apply for an IHI online through the IHI Service in myGov, or
-   complete the Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier (MS003)
    form on the Services Australia website

Once a person has their IHI they may link to the IHI Service in myGov to
view their vaccination history online.

IHI allocation

When an applicant's information is successfully validated, the HI
Service:

-   creates a Verified IHI, and
-   notifies the applicant of their newly created IHI

After successful processing the online application displays the IHI on
the confirmation screen. The online process and the manual process both
send a letter to the applicant advising of their IHI.

The Resources page contains:

-   a link to the Services Australia Website for how to get copies of
    evidence of identity documentation
-   a link to the Australian Digital Health Agency for My Health Record
    information
-   contact details for Tier 3
-   information about who can apply for a Verified IHI, how they apply
    and their entitlements

Related links

Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in the Healthcare Identifier (HI)
Service

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity - Individuals apply for an IHI

Verify an Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Amend Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
