
Amend Medicare providers for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) in Provider Directory System (PDS) 011-10050010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to amend AIR details for Medicare Providers
in the PDS.

Medical practitioner, nurse practitioner and midwife

Medical practitioners, nurse practitioners and midwives enrolled in the
PDS are automatically registered with Medicare as AIR vaccination
providers.

Nurses who are not nurse practitioners (those not registered with
Medicare) but employed by an organisation, can register as an AIR
ancillary provider.

Ancillary provider

AIR ancillary providers are vaccination providers who do not have a
Medicare provider number. For example, councils, community health
centres, pharmacies and Aboriginal health workers.

Medical practices can also register as ancillary providers. This lets
practices with several medical practitioners submit claims under one
provider number instead of sending separate claims for each
practitioner. See Register, amend or cancel ancillary providers for AIR
in PDS.

Provider bank account details

The AIR makes payments to eligible vaccination providers when they
notify AIR of a vaccination that completes an early childhood
immunisation schedule. All payments are made to the provider's bank
account through Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT). Not all provider types
are eligible for payment.

Note: the AIR only makes payments when valid bank account details are
recorded for an eligible vaccination provider.

Eligible vaccination providers can notify the AIR of their bank details
online via Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) or by using the
following forms:

-   Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) - Bank account details for
    vaccination providers (IM005)
-   Online Claiming Provider Agreement (HW027)
-   Provider registration for Electronic Funds Transfer payments (HW029)
-   Bank account details Online Claiming (HW052)

The Resources page contains a link to the forms.

The IM005 form does not let multiple vaccination providers sign the
form. In this case, vaccination providers can:

-   attach a separate sheet with all the provider signatures
-   include all the signatures on the back of the form, or
-   send the request and signatures on their practice letterhead

Note: the above forms cannot have a digital signature.

Release of bank account details

Do not release bank account details over the telephone. An AIR Service
Officer (SO) can check and confirm the information given by the provider
on PDS.

A copy of a previously completed bank account details form can be sent
to the provider in the mail, if requested.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Immunisation
Register - Bank account details for vaccination providers (IM005) form.

Processing or notification errors

Advice from vaccination providers over the telephone that their bank
details are incorrect can only be accepted if a keying error has
occurred.

The authorised contact person must notify in writing for any other
changes to bank account details.

If bank account details are updated incorrectly and the processing error
is identified on the same day, the error can be corrected and the start
date amended to the date the error was corrected (if necessary).

Processing a Location ID/Minor ID/Software ID

The Software ID on an AIR registration represents the Location ID (also
known as a Minor ID) which is an identifier issued to a provider who is
using software to transmit to the AIR. The Software ID is critical to
ensuring providers are able to submit claims via software using web
services technology. It is expected by March 2022, all providers will be
transmitting claims via software using web services.

Services Australia is advised of the Location ID/Minor ID via the
following forms:

-   Online Claiming Provider Agreement (HW027)
-   Provider registration for Electronic Funds Transfer payments (HW029)
-   Bank account details Online Claiming (HW052)

See Table 7 on the Process page for more about processing a Minor ID.

The Resources page has a link to the forms.

The Resources page contains links to forms and contact details and
information to help process forms

Related links

Register, amend or cancel ancillary providers for Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR) in Provider Directory System (PDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
