
Surgical operations assessing rules in Medicare 011-42060050

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessing rules for surgical operations in
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

MBS Taskforce Review

As part of the Government’s response to the MBS Review Taskforce (the
Taskforce) changes were made to:

-   general
-   orthopaedic, and
-   cardiac surgical services listed on the MBS on 1 July 2021

These changes:

-   reflect contemporary practice
-   encourage best clinical practice
-   combine like procedures
-   improve the quality of care provided, and
-   simplify the arrangements for doctors and patients where they are
    unclear

For more information on each surgical category, see the link to the
factsheets on the Resources page.

Surgical operations

Surgical operations are in Category 3, Group T8 of the MBS.

Surgery means a procedure performed for structurally altering the human
body by incision or destruction of tissues. It is part of the practice
of medicine for the diagnostic or therapeutic treatment of conditions or
disease.

Benefits for surgical operations

Unless otherwise stated, the benefit payable for an operation includes:

-   performance of the procedure
-   repair or suturing of the wound
-   aftercare provided to the patient

Surgical procedures determine the benefits for both the:

-   associated anaesthesia
-   assistant surgeon services

For processes in different claiming channels see:

-   Medicare online claiming
-   ECLIPSE claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare
-   Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in
    Medicare
-   Patient claims processing in Medicare
-   Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Medicare benefits not payable

Medicare benefits are not payable for fees allocated to equipment costs
or the cost of materials associated with operations, for example:

-   staples
-   orthopaedic plates or wires
-   other consumables or tools

Multiple operations on same occasion

When more than one operative procedure is performed on the same patient
on the same occasion by the same health professional, it is regarded as
a 'multiple operation' and is treated as one service for payment
purposes.

Multiple operations are also known as 'multiple procedures'.

Multiple surgeons

Where 2 or more surgeons operate, and:

each performs one or more operations, but

-   one assists the other, or
-   they assist each other, the surgeons are not considered to be
    operating independently

The multiple operation rule is applied to all the operations combined.
The assessment of the assistant's fee is based on the fee for the
combined operations.

The Resources page has examples of the Multiple Operation rule when 2 or
more surgeons operate. This includes:

-   example of one surgeon assists the other
-   example of 2 surgeons assist the other

Multiple operation rule

Payment of Medicare benefits for multiple operations is based on a total
fee for the operations involved.

Where 2 or more operations (other than amputations), are performed on a
patient on the one occasion, the fees are calculated according to the
multiple operation rule (MOR), as follows:

-   100% of the fee for the item with the highest schedule fee
-   50% of the fee for the item with the next highest schedule fee, plus
-   25% of the schedule fee for all other surgical items

When the results of these calculations are added together, the total
becomes the schedule fee for the multiple operation. This fee is used to
calculate the Medicare benefit payable (75% or 85% depending on where
the services are performed).

See Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

Spinal surgery

Spinal surgery items are in Category 3 Therapeutic Procedures, Group T8
Surgical Operations, Subgroup 17 Spinal Surgery.

Restrictions for spinal surgery:

-   Spinal surgery items 51011 to 51171 cannot be performed with any
    other item in the surgical operations group outside of Subgroup 17
    (items 30001 to 50952), when that surgical item is related to spinal
    surgery
-   Spinal surgery items 51011 to 51171 can be performed with other
    spinal surgery items
-   Spinal surgery for scoliosis and kyphosis in paediatric patients
    (Items 50600 to 50644) can be claimed in conjunction with items
    51113 and 51114
-   Combined anterior and posterior spinal surgery items 51061 to 51066
    cannot be claimed with any item between 51020 and 51045
-   Lumbar spinal fusion can only be claimed for chronic low back pain
    after diagnosis
-   Other restrictions are located in the table on the Resources page

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online for more information about
the procedures and billing of spinal surgery services (TN.8.141 and
TN.8.142) and a table of the spinal items and restrictions.

Breast surgery

Items 31530 and 31548 are 2 distinct medical procedures and restricted
on the system:

-   These items cannot be claimed for the same breast lesion/site
-   Items 31530 and 31548 can be claimed together if performed on
    different sites

Where a claim is received for both or multiples of these items, the
claim must state that the procedures are for different sites or
different times.

Health professionals use the times on a clock face to indicate the sites
of breast lesions. If the claim includes text with the wording like '9
o’clock' or '3 o’clock', this refers to the site of the lesion.

The Resources page has examples of text notations for items 31530 and
31548.

Surgeons operating independently

Where different health professionals perform 2 or more operations under
the one anaesthetic, the surgeons are considered to be operating
independently when neither:

-   assists at or performs the other operations, or
-   administers the anaesthetic

Where 2 health professionals operate independently and either performs
more than one operation, the multiple operation rule applies to their
own services.

Conjoint surgery

This type of surgery involves 2 surgeons working concurrently (sometimes
from different specialities) to perform certain types of procedures:

-   a principal surgeon leading the procedure, and
-   a co-surgeon working in their speciality

There are specific MBS items for conjoint surgery. The Resources page
contains a table with examples.

Two surgeons - One assists the other

Where 2 or more health professionals operate and each performs one or
more operations plus one assists the other:

-   the multiple operation rule applies to all operations
-   the assistant fee is based on all procedures at which the assistance
    was rendered and that have the word '(Assist)' in the item
    descriptor

The Resources page has examples of this rule and how to calculate
benefits.

Two surgeons - Assist each other

Where 2 or more health professionals operate and each performs one or
more operations plus each assists the other:

-   the multiple operation rule applies to all the operations (as though
    they had been performed by one surgeon)
-   the assistant fee is based on all the procedures (if they attract an
    assistant fee) after being reduced by the multiple operation rule

The division of the surgeon and assistant fees is a matter for the
health professionals involved.

The Resources page has examples of this rule and how to calculate
benefits.

Operations performed in stages

A staged procedure is any operation undertaken in 2 or more separate
parts, with a break between the stages to facilitate tissue healing or
clearance of infection.

The Resources page contains tables with examples of different stage
operations.

Re-operations of vascular procedures

When a re-operation is required for vascular surgery, item 35202 would
be used in combination with vascular items and the multiple operation
rule would apply.

This item is payable more than once on the same day if a number of
incisions were performed in different parts of the body as per the item
description.

Amputations

Amputation items are located in Subgroup 12 of Group T8 Surgical
Operations in the MBS.

The multiple operation rules does not apply to amputations. Where more
than one amputation is performed each service attracts 100% of the
schedule fee.

Where an amputation is performed in association with one or more
operative procedures, the amputation will be paid at 100% schedule fee
and all other services will be subject to the multiple operation rule.

See Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

The Resources page contains a table with an example showing the
calculation for an amputation performed with other procedures subject to
the multiple operation rule.

Cosmetic and plastic surgery

Services performed for cosmetic reasons such as face lifts, eyelid
reductions, and hair transplants (except in certain circumstances) do
not attract Medicare benefits.

Where a claim for surgery does not attract a benefit, then benefit is
not payable for the following:

-   assistance rendered at the operation
-   administration of the anaesthetic (including pre-operative
    examination)

See Cosmetic and plastic surgery assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

Fractures treatment

Orthopaedic items for fracture treatment are in Category 3, Group T8
Surgical Operations, Subgroup 15 Orthopaedic of the MBS.

Where the treatment of a fracture:

-   is not specifically covered by an item, health professionals can
    claim an appropriate attendance item from Category 1. For example,
    the treatment of a fractured metacarpal that requires no reduction,
    could be billed as an attendance item
-   requires reduction on multiple occasions to achieve adequate
    alignment, benefits are payable for each separate occasion at which
    reduction is performed under the relevant item covering the fracture
    treatment

Closed reduction means treatment of a dislocation or fracture by
non-operative reduction, and includes the use of percutaneous fixation
or external splintage by cast or splints.

Open reduction means treatment of a dislocation or fracture by either:

-   operative exposure including the use of any internal or external
    fixation
-   non-operative (closed reduction) where intra-medullary or external
    fixation is used. This includes the use of surgical hardware to
    stabilise a fracture from the outside of the skin

Obstetric services associated with operations

The multiple operation rule does not apply to obstetric items (Group
T4).

See Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

Assistant fees

Assistant surgeon fees are calculated based on the total fees for the
surgery performed by the principal surgeon.

Benefits for assistant surgeons will only be paid if the procedural
items have the word '(Assist)' in the descriptor.

See Assistance at operations assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

Sterilisation of minors

The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commissioner has provided
guidelines on sterilisation procedure conducted on minors.

The Resources page has a link to:

-   legal requirements for items 35637, 35688, 35691 and 37623 (MBS Note
    TN.8.46)
-   the AskMBS email advice service

Gender confirmation surgery

Benefits are payable for gender confirmation surgery both male to female
and female to male if:

-   the service rendered is covered by an existing item in the MBS, and
-   the service is clinically relevant

See General assessing information for Medicare for more information
about clinically relevant services.

The Resources page contains a link to the health direct website for more
information on gender confirmation surgery.

Neonate surgical definition

There are a number of items within the MBS that relate specifically to
neonates (newborn infants), for example items 43801-43882.

These items are located in Category 3, Group T8, Surgical Operations
Subgroup 11, Paediatric.

The Resources page contains links to MBS Online and Department of Health
and Aged Care websites, spinal surgery items grouped according to the
item descriptors, and examples of various item benefits for surgical
operations in Medicare.

Related links

Assessing complex Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) claims with clinical
details

Assessing MBS item restrictions

Assistance at operations assessing rules in Medicare

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Claims processing in Medicare

Cosmetic and plastic surgery assessing rules in Medicare

Discontinued and abandoned surgery assessing rules in Medicare

ECLIPSE claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Education resources for health professionals

Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in
Medicare

General assessing information for Medicare

Medicare online claiming

Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare

Skin services in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
