
Closing the Gap (CTG) Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Co-payment Program 011-60050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the CTG PBS Co-payment which commenced on 1 July
2010 to improve access to affordable PBS medicines for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people living with, or at risk of, chronic
disease. From 1 July 2021, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
can be registered for the program by any PBS prescriber or Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioner no matter where they live
within Australia, and regardless of their chronic disease status.

CTG - PBS Co-payment Program

The CTG PBS Co-payment reduces the cost of PBS General Schedule
medicines for eligible patients. The CTG PBS Co-payment was introduced
to:

-   help improve the quality use of medicine
-   enhance access to co-payment relief for PBS medicines, allowing
    Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander patients to access PBS
    medicine cheaper or free of charge if they have a concession
    entitlement card

Patient eligibility and registration for the CTG Co-payment Program

From 1 July 2021, patients not already registered for the program can be
registered at any medical practice. All PBS prescribers, Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) Aboriginal Health
Practitioners (registered as a Medicare provider), and their HPOS
nominated delegates can check a patient’s CTG status, and register them.

Patients who are already registered do not need to be registered again.

Eligibility assessment for CTG PBS Co-payment only needs to be
undertaken once. As soon as the patient is registered for the program,
they can access the benefits of the program, regardless of which
prescriber they see, or which pharmacy they attend to fill
prescriptions.

A patient is eligible if they:

-   self-identify as an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Australian
-   will have setbacks in preventing or managing their condition if they
    do not take the medicine, and
-   are unlikely to keep up their treatment without help with the cost

A patient’s registration for the CTG PBS Co-payment program will be
stored on their Medicare record in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS). Services Australia staff have access to view a patient’s
status, and register a patient for the program, on behalf of a PBS
prescriber or Aboriginal Health Practitioner where they cannot access
HPOS. Services Australia staff cannot register patients for their HPOS
nominated delegates.

Note: a patient can withdraw from the program at any time.

CTG status and registering patients on behalf of the PBS prescriber

When staff should check a patient’s CTG status, and register them on
behalf of the PBS prescriber or Ahpra registered Aboriginal Health
Practitioner (registered as a Medicare provider).

There are some scenarios where staff will need to check a patient’s CTG
status, or register them for CTG on behalf of the prescriber. These
scenarios include:

Where a prescriber or Ahpra registered Aboriginal Health Practitioner
registered with Medicare as a provider needs to issue a prescription to
a patient who is in consultation with them, and they do not have
internet access

Where a prescriber or Ahpra registered Aboriginal Health Practitioner
registered with Medicare as a provider:

-   needs to issue a prescription to a patient who is in consultation
    with them
-   does not have their Provider Digital Access (PRODA) and HPOS
    accounts fully enabled, and
-   there is no HPOS delegate who can action this for them

Where a prescriber or Ahpra registered Aboriginal Health Practitioner
registered with Medicare as a provider needs to issue a prescription to
a patient who is in consultation with them, but is having system issues
and cannot see the CTG tile in HPOS

Where a prescriber or Ahpra registered Aboriginal Health Practitioner
registered with Medicare as a provider needs to issue a prescription to
a patient who is in consultation with them and Services Australia is
experiencing a system outage preventing external access to PRODA or HPOS

All other scenarios where there is no immediate urgency to issue a
prescription to a patient, including checking a patient’s CTG
registration status, should be escalated according to the table on the

Resources page.

See ‘Handle calls relating to the CTG PBS Co-payment Program’ on the
Resources page for information on call scenarios and scripting.

Prescriber requirements under the CTG PBS Co-payment Program

Prescribers wishing to register patients for the program will need to:

-   Ensure that their PRODA and HPOS accounts are active in order to
    search and view their patient’s CTG status and register them if
    necessary
-   Create a PRODA and HPOS account if they do not already have one, so
    that they can manage their patients CTG registrations online
-   Create and link their authorised delegates in HPOS that they want to
    have view and register access to the patient CTG tile
-   Endorse eligible prescriptions (only PBS General Schedule items are
    included) with the CTG annotation to assist pharmacists with
    dispensing. See Prescriber annotation of CTG prescriptions below

Note: prescribers do not need to retain written evidence of a patient’s
consent to register for the program. Patient consent is captured when
the prescriber completes the digital declaration when reviewing or
registering the patient through the CTG PBS Co-payment Register tile
within HPOS. Staff registering someone over the phone can obtain verbal
confirmation of a patient’s consent and eligibility for the program,
from the prescriber. The Process page outlines the registration steps.

See contact details on the Resources page for assistance with PRODA and
HPOS accounts.

Prescriber annotation of CTG prescriptions

From 1 July 2021, PBS prescribers will no longer be legally required to
write or electronically print ‘CTG’ on eligible PBS prescriptions for
registered Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. However,
annotation of a PBS prescription will help community pharmacists, when
dispensing medicines, to know that the patient is registered for the
program.

Annotated prescription

A handwritten CTG prescription can be annotated CTG with the medical
practitioner's initials or signature. It can also be annotated with a
special CTG alpha-numeric code at the top right of the prescription
writing software.

Note: from 1 July 2021, a patient must be registered for CTG in HPOS to
receive the CTG benefit.

Searching for and registering patients in HPOS

The following parties have authorisation to access and view a patient’s
CTG status in HPOS:

-   Any PBS prescriber or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health
    Practitioner registered with Medicare as a provider
-   HPOS- linked delegates of a PBS prescriber or Aboriginal and Torres
    Strait Islander Health Practitioner registered with Medicare as a
    provider
-   A delegate of a PRODA – registered pharmacy organisation, with HPOS
    added as a Service Provider using an authorised pharmacy approval
    number
-   Delegates of a practice registered under the Practice Incentives
    Program (PIP), with HPOS added as a Service Provider. Note: this
    cannot be accessed through the existing PIP tile in HPOS

Registering patients

PBS prescribers and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health
Practitioners registered with Medicare as a provider will automatically
have the registration function within HPOS, based on their prescriber /
provider credentials.

HPOS- linked delegates must register patients within HPOS by acting on
behalf of the PBS prescriber and/or Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Health Practitioners they are delegated to. Delegates will only
have the search function within HPOS, and must enter HPOS in an ‘acting
for’ capacity for the registration function to be enabled.

See Delegate and Pharmacy Organisation Steps to Access HPOS for Closing
the Gap on the Resources page.

Pharmacies

Pharmacy delegates have a view-only option within HPOS, and can access
the search function to verify their patient/ customer’s CTG registration
status. This includes public hospital pharmacies.

The Process page lists the steps a pharmacy must complete to enable the
CTG patient search in HPOS.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia web site
where there is information on registering individuals and organisations
in PRODA, linking HPOS as a service provider and managing delegations.

PBS Safety Net

The program does not change the operation of the PBS Safety Net for
patients participating in the program, or their families. The amount
that can be added towards a family's Safety Net tally for each CTG
prescription is the same amount that would have been added in the
absence of the program.

Eligible Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander patients participating in
the program will need to maintain records of their PBS Safety Net tally
via a prescription record form (PRF), a pharmacy computer generated PRF
or hospital PRF card. They will need to advise their pharmacist to
electronically 'link' eligible family members in their demographic
screens to facilitate automatic tallying for a family within the
dispensing software.

The Resources page contains PBS Safety Net scenarios for patients
participating in the program.

Issuing PBS Safety Net cards

Customers receive a PBS Safety Net card when they reach the PBS Safety
Net threshold. There are 2 types of card depending on the customer’s
circumstances.

PBS Safety Net concession card

A PBS Safety Net concession card is issued when general CTG patients
have reached the PBS Safety Net threshold. Their PBS medicines will be
less expensive for the rest of the calendar year.

PBS Safety Net entitlement card

A PBS Safety Net entitlement card is issued when a concession card
holder has reached the PBS Safety Net threshold. For CTG patients, their
PBS medicines will continue to be free.

For more information

For more information on PBS Safety Net and issuing PBS Safety Net cards
see Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Safety Net processing and enquiries.

The Resources page contains a table on CTG PBS Co-payment Program
patient contribution.

CTG Co-payment relief

Patients need to pay some or all of the cost of PBS medicines and this
is called a co-payment. The CTG-PBS Co-payment Program reduces this
co-payment for registered eligible Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. When obtaining PBS medicines at a community pharmacy, eligible
patients who would pay the:

-   full PBS Co-payment, pay the concessional rate, or
-   the concessional Co-payment, receives PBS medicines without being
    required to pay a PBS Co-payment

Note: premiums for a small number of medicines are still paid by the
patient.

Discounting CTG Co-payment

Discounting of the co-payment will be allowed for Closing the Gap (CTG)
prescriptions. There will be no other change to agreed CTG policies and
procedures if a general CTG patient pays a discounted co-payment, the
full general co-payment amount will be recorded on the patient’s PRF.

CTG claims and payments

A CTG prescription claim must be submitted with a 6 character value in
the CTG eligibility field, usually the letters ‘CTG’ followed by 2
numbers and an alpha. The pharmacist enters the prescription details in
their pharmacy dispensing system and transmit the information via PBS
Online. They will receive a response in real time as to whether the
patient is registered for CTG PBS Co-payment at the date of dispensing.
Although the CTG annotation is no longer required form 1 July 2021,
prescribers are encouraged to continue to endorse prescriptions. This
will assist the pharmacist to identify those patients that may be
registered for the program. See ‘Handle calls relating to the CTG PBS
Co-payment Program’ on the Resources page.

If the claim is submitted successfully, the pharmacist is reimbursed the
cost of the medicine supplied, inclusive of the Co-payment relief amount
applicable.

If the prescription is a CTG under co-payment prescription (those
prescriptions where a PBS subsidy is not applicable), the pharmacist is
reimbursed both for the standard PBS medicine and for the proportion of
the normal PBS Co-payment that has not been paid by the patient.

Services Australia make the payments to pharmacies as per the normal
payment process (not retrospectively). Services Australia calculate
these amounts automatically.

Community pharmacists will be reimbursed for the proportion of the
normal PBS Co-payment that has not been paid by the patient.

The following groups can dispense CTG PBS prescriptions:

-   All approved community pharmacies
-   Suppliers approved under section 92 of the National Health Act 1953
-   Private Hospitals approved under section 94 of the National Health
    Act 1953

Note: if Services Australia receive an enquiry from a hospital pharmacy
(including section 94 approved public hospitals) about whether they can
dispense a CTG annotated PBS script, they should be advised they are not
able to dispense PBS scripts as CTG. The patient will have to pay their
usual non-CTG patient co-payment amount. Alternately, the hospital
pharmacy can advise the patient to take their CTG annotated PBS script
to a community pharmacy who are able to dispense as CTG.

CTG in reconciliation statements

Services Australia provides additional information in the PBS
reconciliation statements. CTG prescriptions:

-   are clearly identified by the CTG annotation which is included in
    the reconciliation statement information
-   must be included in claim as per current requirements

U serial number

Pharmacy software prints U for some CTG prescriptions as part of the
serial number. This occurs when prescriptions that would normally have
been an under co-payment supply (priced below the general Co-payment) is
now priced at the concessional co-payment for CTG patients. This results
in serial numbers like UG (number) such as UG1.

The Resources contains call scenarios, frequently asked questions,
contact details, CTG Reason Codes, patient contributions and CTG patient
scenarios.

Contents

Continuing Medication Program (CMP)

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and enquiries

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression –
Medicare

Amend customer entitlement details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS) for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
