
Eye surgery (Ophthalmology) services in Medicare 011-20062640

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eye surgery (Ophthalmology) services in Medicare

On this Page:

Eye surgery (Ophthalmology)

Ophthalmology is the branch of medicine concerned with the study and
treatment of disorders and diseases of the eye. Ophthalmologists are
specialists or consultant physicians for Medicare purposes.

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) lists Medicare items for
ophthalmology services. This document provides general information about
assessing claims for ophthalmology services in Medicare.

See Optometrical services assessing rules in Medicare for information
about glasses, lenses and other allied health services for eyes and
vision.

Eye procedures (ophthalmology) Medicare Benefits Schedule MBS items

MBS items for eye services are in:

-   Category 2, Group D1, Miscellaneous diagnostic procedures and
    investigations, items 11200 – 11244
-   Category 3, Group T8, Subgroup 9, Ophthalmology, items 42503 - 43023

Service Officers need to check all relevant explanatory notes including
QITI before providing advice. If additional clarification of the item
description or explanatory notes are required, refer to a Programme
Support Officer (PSO) or Team Leader.

The Resources page has information about frequently claimed MBS items.

Text notations for eye surgery items

The text or notation for eye surgery is very important as it allows a
Service Officer to record which eye the surgery was performed on. Once
the operator adds LSE or RSE to the claiming screen, this information is
stored on the patient’s history and will make it easy for operators who
are processing future claims.

The Resources page has more information about appropriate text notations
and how to key which eye was treated in different processing systems.

Bilateral and unilateral items

Eye surgery items in the MBS include whether they are for 1 or both eyes
in the item description.

-   Unilateral means occurring on, performed on, or affecting 1 side (1
    eye)
-   Bilateral refers to both sides of the body, or affecting the right
    and left sides (both eyes)

Note: health professionals must submit text with their claims for
unilateral items indicating which eye was treated (for example, left or
right).

The Resources page has information about frequently claimed items and
whether the items are for 1 or both eyes.

Health professional eligibility

The Health professionals must be registered with Medicare as an
Ophthalmology specialist to claim Medicare benefits.

More information about speciality codes can be located in Provider
specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS).

The Resources page has a link to the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (Ahpra) website about recognition for an
ophthalmologist.

Diagnostic procedures and investigations for ophthalmology

A standard ophthalmic exam is a comprehensive series of tests done by an
ophthalmologist. These tests check both the vision and health of the
patient’s eyes with:

-   Angiography
-   Electroretinography
-   Ultrasonography
-   Pachymetry
-   Optical Coherence Tomography
-   Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)

The Resources page has a link to the specific items in Category 2, Group
D1, and Subgroup 2 – Ophthalmology on MBS Online.

The Resources page also has a table of frequently claimed items and the
text that must be submitted with claims.

Eye surgery items

Eye surgery, also known as ocular surgery, is surgery performed on the
eye, typically by an ophthalmologist.

The list below shows the more common eye surgeries:

-   Laser eye surgery
-   Cataract surgery
-   Glaucoma surgery
-   Refractive surgery
-   Corneal surgery
-   Vitreoretinal surgery
-   Eye muscle surgery

Medical terminology for ophthalmology is complicated. The Resources page
has a list of medical terminology used by eye surgeons to assist when
assessing claims.

The Resources page has a link to the specific items in Category 3, Group
T8, and Subgroup 9 – Ophthalmology on MBS Online.

The Resources page has links to external numbers, medical terms for eye
procedures, a list of diagnostic procedures and investigations,
frequently claimed items and a list of abbreviations required for
processing eye procedures.

Related links

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
