-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a Medicare Compensation Recovery claim
should be closed or terminated, and how to reopen a closed or terminated
claim.

Closed versus terminated claims

-   A 'closed claim' is not the same as a 'terminated claim'
-   MCRS automatically closes a claim after a notice of charge has been
    issued
-   Terminated claims are terminated by a Service Officer, with no
    notice of charge issued
-   Closed claims can be reopened, whereas terminated claims cannot

The Resources page contains a list of other actions available on a
closed claim, versus a terminated claim.

Closed claims

Reopening a claim

Closed claims can be reopened in MCRS if action, such as the notice of
charge needs to be amended, is required. This may occur if a claimant
submits an amended statement by claimant or where processing errors are
detected.

When a claim is reopened, MCRS automatically navigates to the Update
screen. The Service Officer must complete mandatory checks to make sure
the claim details and information are current.

The Process page contains information about how to reopen a claim.

The Resources page has a list of other actions available on a closed
claim versus a terminated claim.

Actions on a closed claim without reopening

Action may be taken on a closed claim without reopening, when an
amendment to a charge or changes to the Notice of judgment or settlement
(NOJS) details are not required. Scenarios for not reopening include:

-   Issue a refusal letter
-   Attach a document which requires no action for example; duplicate or
    incomplete documents
-   Update customer details
-   Record a case note
-   Resend correspondence
-   Unlink documents
-   Send stale cheque correspondence

See:

-   The Process page for a refusal letter, how to attach a document and
    update details
-   Escalations and case notes for case notes
-   Medicare Compensation Recovery for resend correspondence
-   Process correspondence for unlinking documents
-   Notice of reimbursement arrangement or Notice of judgment or
    settlement for how to close a claim

Terminated claims

Service Officers must terminate a claim in MCRS if:

an incorrect person was selected, as a privacy incident may have
occurred, see Privacy incidents

the claim:

-   settled in favour of the defendant
-   settled on an amount under $5,000
-   was never lodged with the compensation payer
-   was withdrawn (discontinued) by the claimant
-   was dismissed by a court
-   was part of another claim which settled
-   is not notifiable
-   has incorrect document linked to the claim
-   is inactive (this is a Programme Management decision)

a reimbursement arrangement was made less than 6 months after the claim
was made

Note: denial of liability by the compensation payer is not a reason to
terminate the claim.

Multiple claims against the same compensation payer about the same
injury/illness are treated as a combined claim, and closed under a
single Work Identification Number (WIN). The oldest WIN will be amended
to reflect any changes to date of injury (DOI) or the injury
description, and subsequent WINs must be terminated.

Multiple claims against the same compensation payer about the same
injury/illness but for different types of compensation will be treated
as separate claims, and closed under different WINs. For example, a
workers compensation claim and a common law claim with the same
compensation payer for the same date of injury/illness.

A claim may be terminated at any stage in MCRS. Depending on the claim
termination reason, staff may issue a ‘You do not need to tell us’
notice letter (Z2797) when a claim is terminated.

The Process page contains information about how to terminate a claim

Actions able to be taken on a terminated claim include:

-   Attach a document which requires no action for example; duplicate or
    incomplete documents
-   Update customer details
-   Record a case note
-   Resend correspondence
-   Unlink documents
-   Send stale cheque correspondence

See:

-   Process for how to attach a document and update details
-   Escalations and case notes for case notes
-   Medicare Compensation Recovery for resend correspondence
-   Process correspondence for unlinking documents

Related links

Process correspondence – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of reimbursement arrangement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of judgment or settlement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim –
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Escalations and case notes – Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
