-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines types of compensation claims that are notifiable
and not notifiable for the purposes of Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Definition of compensation

For Medicare Compensation Recovery purposes, compensation is:

-   a payment of damages
-   a payment under an insurance scheme, or compensation under law
-   a payment (with or without admission of liability) resulting from
    judgment or settlement of a claim for damages or a claim under an
    insurance scheme
-   any other compensation or damages payment, other than a payment
    under a scheme to where the recipient has contributed. For example,
    life insurance or superannuation

Note: a claim against a life insurance policy, or superannuation scheme
where the injured person contributed is not notifiable under the HOSC
Act.

Compensation does not include:

-   a payment by an individual who is not insured, is indemnified
    against any liability for the injury, and who is not required by law
    to be insured or indemnified
-   a criminal injuries compensation payment, see Ex-gratia payments
-   a voluntary payment which (whether on its own or in conjunction with
    other such payments) has the effect of extinguishing by agreement a
    claim for compensation
-   a payment of a kind, or in circumstances prescribed by the
    regulations

Note: an individual is taken to be insured or otherwise indemnified from
liability if:

-   the individual is a member of a representative organisation, and
-   the representative organisation bears liability for paying on behalf
    of the individual member

The References page contains a link to legislation, section 4 of the
HOSC Act.

Requirement to notify

A notifiable person must tell Services Australia (the agency) in writing
if a compensation claim for an injury or illness to a person results in
a:

judgment or settlement, if compensation was fixed for more than $5,000

-   for settlements (includes legal costs) – see Claims with settlement
    amount for legal costs only below
-   for judgments, (does not include legal costs)

reimbursement arrangement, agreed more than 6 months after the date the
compensation claim was lodged with the notifiable person

Examples:

-   A settlement made for $4,600 plus legal costs of $500 = notifiable
    ($5,100 compensation)
-   A judgment made for $5,000 plus legal costs of $500 = not notifiable
    ($5,000 compensation)
-   A compensation claim made on 1 February 2022 and reimbursement
    arrangement made on 1 October 2022 = notifiable (8 months)

Claims with a settlement amount for legal costs only

The claim is not notifiable under the Health and Other Services
(Compensation) Act 1995 (HOSC Act), if a settlement amount is:

-   only the legal costs associated with pursuing the compensation
    claim, and
-   does not include payment for the injury/illness

Evidence must be provided to the agency to confirm this, such as the:

-   Terms of settlement
-   Deed of release, or
-   legal costs invoice

Note: court documents may be required to determine the amount of damages
excluding costs for some judgments.

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management for a decision. See Escalations
and case notes.

If a claim is determined to be not notifiable, create a provisional
record and issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797). See Search for or update
an existing claim or register a new claim.

If a claim is determined to be not notifiable and has previously been
registered, see Close, terminate or reopen a claim to terminate the
claim and send a You do not need to tell us about a compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

Insurance details not provided

Company name or medical practitioner

If a company name or medical practitioner’s name is given as the
notifiable person this can be accepted to register the claim if the
request is signed by the notifiable person or their solicitor. Some
large companies are self-insured.

If signed by any other party, contact the person submitting the request
to ask for insurer or agent details. If there is

-   no insurer or agent, register the claim as per the details provided,
    see Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim
    for information about claim registration
-   an insurer or agent, request these in writing and issue a z2298 ‘We
    need more information to register ‘ letter

Individual(s)

If the notifiable person is listed as an individual(s) contact the
person submitting the request to ask for insurer details and/or
requirement to be insured. Where advised that the claim has:

-   insurance but these details are not disclosed by the defendants
-   no insurance, but the defendant is required to be insured, or
-   unknown insurance details and also unknown if required to be insured
-   register the claim as per the details provided as notifiable person
    (e.g. the address might be provided as c/- a notifiable person’s
    solicitor), see Search for or update an existing claim or register a
    new claim for information about claim registration

As the claim progresses to settlement, the notification requirements
should become clearer.

Notifiable claims

Even if the notifiable person is an individual, group or company, a
claim is notifiable, where they are:

-   insured even if not required to be, or
-   not insured but are required to be

If there is more than one notifiable person, see Payments, refunds and
debts.

Not notifiable claims

Section 4 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995
defines that a claim would not be notifiable if compensation was payment
by a person not insured and not required by law to be insured.

After settlement, if in doubt about claims where there is no insurer
involved, refer to Programme Management to determine if the claim is
notifiable. If Programme Management confirm the claim is not notifiable
issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

The References page contains a link to legislation - section 4 of the
Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

Loss of dependency and loss of consortium

Loss of dependency and / or loss of consortium claims are made by a
dependant or spouse of an injured or deceased person for the loss of a
reasonable expectation of a benefit. For example:

-   financial support
-   companionship
-   love
-   affection
-   comfort
-   mutual services, or
-   sexual relations

If the judgment or settlement payment is only for loss of dependency or
loss of consortium, the claim is not considered to be a payment of
compensation as the payment is not being made for personal injury.

Any compensation payment arising for loss of dependency or loss of
consortium must be considered on its individual merits.

Notifiable claims

A loss of dependency or loss of consortium claim is notifiable:

-   any part of the settlement or judgment (separate or in conjunction
    with the claim for dependency or consortium) includes an amount paid
    that relates to compensation for injury or illness sustained by the
    dependants or spouse. For example, depression
-   the dependants or spouse pursue a claim or a continuation of a claim
    for the deceased person's injury or illness under the estate of the
    deceased

Claims that are not notifiable

A loss of dependency or loss of consortium claim is not notifiable if
the payment is:

for past and future loss of benefits, services and finances including:

-   companionship
-   love
-   affection
-   comfort
-   mutual services, or
-   sexual relations

in relation to a death benefit of the deceased spouse, including a
payment to a spouse or injured person under a superannuation or life
insurance policy the recipient has contributed to

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management for a decision.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the claim is not
notifiable issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

Deceased estates

A compensation claim for a deceased person is notifiable to the agency
in the same manner as any other compensation claim. The injured person
may be deceased prior to notification or become deceased whilst the
claim is in progress.

See:

-   Authority to access a claim.
-   Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim

School accidents

School accidents can include injuries sustained:

-   on any school premises
-   during a school excursions, or
-   during approved work experience

Schools are not legally required to carry insurance for accidents.
Therefore, any compensation payment arising from a school accident must
be considered on its individual merits.

Injuries sustained by a teacher during the course of their employment
would be considered to be workers compensation and not a school
accident.

Notifiable claims

A school accident is notifiable if:

-   the school is insured against the accident which gave rise to the
    claim
-   the school has an insurance policy that covers payment for medical
    expenses incurred by the injured person
-   the matter is a common law or public liability claim, or
-   an amount of compensation has been fixed for greater than $5,000 by
    a judgment (excluding costs) or settlement (including costs)

Claims that are not notifiable

A school accident is not notifiable if the school:

-   holds an insurance policy that does not provide for any payment of
    medical expenses, or only covers payment of medical expenses which
    are not eligible Medicare or nursing home benefits or residential
    and home care subsidies
-   is not insured or indemnified in respect of the injury or illness,
    and is not required by law to be so insured or indemnified

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management for a decision.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management confirm the claim is not a
notifiable, issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

Criminal injuries

Criminal injury compensation is paid by a State or Territory of
Australia to victims of crime for injuries sustained as a result of
criminal activity committed directly against them.

If a State or Territory Act specifically excludes medical costs, the
claim would not be captured and is not notifiable. This is even if an
amount of compensation has been fixed for greater than $5,000 by a
judgment (excluding costs) or settlement (including costs).

If it is not clear, get confirmation regarding the particular State or
Territory Act and refer all documents to Programme Management to
determine if the case is notifiable.

If Programme Management confirm the claim is not notifiable, issue a You
do not need to tell us about the compensation claim/reimbursement
arrangement letter (Z2797).

The References page contains a link to legislation - section 4, Health
and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

Sporting injuries

If it is identified that a compensation matter relates to a sporting
injury, the claim is to be referred to Programme Management for further
consideration.

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management for a decision.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management confirm the claim is not
notifiable, issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

Wrongful deaths

Wrongful deaths are usually the result of an accident caused by the
misconduct of another person or company. For example, wrongful death
claims are lodged for:

-   malpractice (for example, professional negligence by a doctor or
    health care worker)
-   unsafe premises
-   unsafe working practices
-   unsafe machinery, operations or faulty equipment

Australian State and Territory legislation make provisions for wrongful
deaths, for example, worker's compensation. Claims lodged under State or
Territory legislation may also be pursued by the estate of the deceased
or family members under other legislation, for example common law.

Note: do not confuse claims lodged for wrongful deaths with fatal
injuries, or claims lodged under the legislation specific to criminal
injuries.

Notifiable claims

Claims are notifiable if they include claims for medical services for
the:

-   deceased injured person
-   family member making the claim

A claim may be lodged under both workers' compensation and common law
for personal injuries sustained by either the deceased or family members
and these claims are notifiable.

Claims that are not notifiable

Wrongful death claims are not notifiable when the claim is not for
personal injury. For example, the family or estate of a deceased:

-   worker, who dies as a result of a car accident while driving a
    company vehicle, the estate may lodge a claim for wrongful death
    against the employer because the employer failed to maintain the
    vehicle in proper mechanical repair
-   person, who was attacked in the car park of a shopping centre may
    sue the shopping centre management or owners for failing to provide
    adequate security in the car park

Note: a claim may also be pursued under Criminal Injury Compensation as
well as wrongful death.

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the claim is not
notifiable, issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

Ex-gratia payments

An ex-gratia payment is made voluntarily, out of kindness or grace and
there is no obligation or legal liability for the giver to pay
compensation. Examples include disaster assistance payments from
government organisations or Australians affected by past terrorism acts
overseas.

A true ex-gratia payment does not extinguish the injured person’s legal
right to claim compensation from the person who makes the payment. The
injured person is normally not required to sign a deed of release that
extinguishes their rights to future compensation.

A claim is notifiable under the HOSC Act and must be registered in MCRS
if any of the following legal documents were signed by the injured
person, which releases the compensation payer from liability to make
future payments as this is not an ex-gratia payment:

-   Deed of Release
-   Terms of settlement
-   Any other document

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the claim is not
notifiable, issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

Workers compensation – redemption and permanent impairment payments

Victorian legislation

A judgment or settlement for $5,000 or more is not compensation if the
payment was made on or before 30 June 2006 under Subdivision 1, 2 or 3
of Division 3A of Part IV of the Accident Compensation Act 1985 (Vic)
which includes the:

-   Transport Accident Act 1986
-   Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013, and
-   Accident Compensation Act 1985

If it is identified a compensation settlement relates to a payment of
this kind, refer the case to Programme Management for further
consideration. Claims made under these arrangements must now be
exhausted for the purposes of Medicare Compensation Recovery.

All other States and Territories

State and Territory workers compensation schemes can specifically
preclude the payment of any medical benefits in relation to an injury or
illness under claims made for incapacity.

If it is identified a compensation settlement relates to a workers
compensation incapacity payment and there is a dispute in relation to
whether the claim is notifiable, refer the claim to Programme Management
for further consideration.

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the claim is not
notifiable, issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

Redemption of entitlements by periodic payments

A claim is notifiable under the HOSC Act if all or part of the amount of
compensation is part of a redemption of an entitlement to compensation
by periodic payments. A worker can agree to give up their ongoing
entitlement to weekly payments and medical expenses in exchange for a
lump sum payment (compensation). This is different to a lump sum payment
for permanent impairment.

However, the claim is not notifiable if the law prohibits:

-   redemption of future medical and care expenses
-   inclusion of past medical and care expenses

For example, a settlement that is a redemption of an entitlement to
periodic payments made under sections 30 of the Safety, Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1988 (Cth) (SRC Act) would not be notifiable under
the HOSC Act.

See Resources for examples of when payments under the SRC Act are
notifiable or not notifiable.

Persons not entitled to claim Medicare benefits

Medicare record not found

If a Medicare record cannot be found, this may mean that the injured
person:

was enrolled in Medicare under a different name and/or date of birth

-   make sure the name and date of birth details are re-confirmed with
    the customer that submitted the information, and check MCRS again.
    See Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim

is not enrolled in Medicare, for example:

-   their birth in Australia may not have been registered and they have
    never attempted to access Medicare entitlements, or
-   they may be a non-resident from overseas who is not eligible for
    Medicare enrolment

Create a provisional record and send a You do not need to tell us letter
(Z2797). This letter asks them to send the agency details if the injured
person has received any care costs related to the compensable
injury/illness. If a claim has already been registered, terminate and
issue the Z2797 letter.

See:

-   Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim
-   Close, terminate, update or reopen a claim

Medicare record not found for claim when compensation has been fixed

If an amount of compensation has been fixed for greater than $5,000 by:

a judgment (excluding costs), or

settlement (including costs) it is not notifiable if the injured person
is not eligible to receive:

-   Medicare benefits, as the injured person does not hold a Medicare
    card, unless there are recoverable care costs

If residential or home care services were provided to treat the
injury/illness where there were no Medicare services, register a claim
in MCRS to issue the care services statement.

See Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim.

Note: Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) exist between Australia
and other countries to provide immediate necessary medical treatment
during a temporary visit. To access Medicare services provided
out-of-hospital, visitors need to enrol in Medicare and may become
entitled to receive benefits. The same applies to Australian residents
overseas, they must enrol in that country’s health care program to
become entitled and receive eligible benefits there.

Overseas accidents and compensation payers located within Australia or overseas

Compensation recipient is liable to repay regardless of location

A person who has received a notifiable compensation payment must repay
the Australian Government amounts paid for Medicare benefits and care
costs that were related to the compensated injury or illness.

If a judgment, settlement or reimbursement arrangement was made,
Medicare benefits and care costs must be recovered even if the:

-   compensation is payable by a compensation payer located overseas
-   judgment or settlement or reimbursement arrangement is made overseas
-   compensable injury or illness occurred overseas

Australian jurisdiction

The Australian Government is limited in its legal ability to exercise
authority beyond its normal borders in other countries. Australian
jurisdiction covers all States and Territories including:

-   the Australian Antarctic Territory
-   the Jervis Bay Territory
-   Christmas Island
-   Cocos (Keeling) Islands
-   Heard and McDonald Islands
-   Norfolk Island
-   Coral Sea Islands
-   Ashmore and Cartier Islands

When the agency gets the judgment, settlement or reimbursement
arrangement documents, it will decide if the compensation claim is
notifiable under Australian law and the HOSC Act. Only Australian courts
or compensation authorities for the purposes of the HOSC Act (or
overseas equivalents of courts) can make a judgment. For example,
Comcare is not a ‘compensation authority’ for the purposes of the Act.

Shortfalls payable by the injured person or claimant

The agency cannot enforce the recovery of any amounts owed if a
compensation payer is located outside of Australian jurisdiction if the
injury or illness occurred overseas. They are not subject to Australian
law and are not required to notify the agency of a compensation claim.

However, if the overseas compensation payer pays any amount toward a
notice of charge, or if an advance payment is made, any shortfall in the
amount owed may be pursued by the agency from the injured person.

Each compensation claim must be assessed on a case by case basis. If a
Service Officer is unsure whether a compensation claim should be
registered, seek advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS) and escalate the
claim to Programme Management. See Escalations and case notes.

The References page contains a link to legislation, section 7 and 8 of
the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

Medical negligence claims

Medical negligence claims are generally due to a:

-   delay in diagnosis of an injury or illness
-   failed or negligent medical procedure

Recoverable services under a medical negligence claim should:

-   not include the failed or negligent medical procedure
-   not include the service that eventually diagnosed the injury or
    illness, in the case of a delayed diagnosis
-   include subsequent corrective services resulting from the failed or
    negligent procedure or the delay in diagnosis

Transport Accident Commission

The Transport Accident Commission (TAC) is a Victorian Government owned
organisation that will pay all reasonable medical treatment costs, above
a certain threshold, for personal injuries sustained in a transport
accident in Victoria.

It is a no-fault scheme and medical benefits will be paid to an injured
person regardless of who caused the accident.

A claim against the TAC can also be made if a Victorian resident or
person is injured in an interstate accident that involves a Victorian
registered vehicle.

If the injured person lives in Victoria and the accident happened in
Victoria, the claim is likely to be Medical Excess only and the agency
does not process or register these claims. If the injured person lives
in any other Australian State or Territory, the claim is likely to be
proceeding under common law. Common law claims must be registered as
they are governed under different legislation to Victoria for motor
vehicle accident claims.

Notifiable claims

A claim against the TAC is notifiable if:

-   an amount of compensation has been fixed for more than $5,000 by a
    judgment (excluding costs) or settlement (including costs)
-   the injured person lives outside Victoria and it’s an interstate
    claim involving the TAC

Claims that are not notifiable

A claim against the TAC is not notifiable if:

-   The injured person lives in Victoria and the accident happened in
    Victoria. These are mainly Medical Excess claims that do not proceed
    to judgment or settlement
-   The claim is subject to a reimbursement arrangement made within 6
    months from the date the injured person lodged the claim

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation claim should be
registered, get advice from a Local Peer Support (LPS), and the claim
can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the claim is not
notifiable, issue a You do not need to tell us about the compensation
claim/reimbursement arrangement letter (Z2797).

The Resources page contains links to the TAC website and information, to
help Service Officers in determining if a TAC case is required to be
registered.

Managing TAC telephone enquiries

If a TAC claim is registered on the Medicare National Compensation
Recovery Information (NCRI) mainframe screen, any patient claims
presented for payment are flagged with a return message and are unable
to be processed until the Service Officer (whether in a branch office or
on-line claims) contacts Medicare Compensation Recovery.

See Enquiries and authenticating a customer for all TAC related
telephone enquiries. Medicare staff handling TAC enquiries call Medicare
Compensation Recovery > General for help.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to useful contact information and Transport Accident
    Commission (TAC) website, and
-   a list of examples of when payments are notifiable or not notifiable

Related links

Authority to access a claim – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Escalations and case notes – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of Judgment or Settlement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of reimbursement arrangement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Process correspondence – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim –
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant and care costs – Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
