
90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme 012-41010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Under Medicare, when a patient's unpaid or partially paid medical
account is lodged for payment, Medicare sends the patient a Pay Doctor
Via Claimant (PDVC) Cheque made payable to the medical practitioner. The
claimant is responsible for forwarding this cheque to the medical
practitioner, together with any outstanding account balance.

Automatic cheque cancellation

The 90 Day PDC Scheme allows Medicare to automatically cancel cheques
made payable to eligible medical practitioners through the claimant when
the cheque has not been banked after 90 days. The amount is then paid
directly into the medical practitioner's nominated bank account.

Eligible health professionals

The following groups of medical practitioners are eligible to
participate in the 90 Day PDC scheme:

-   general practitioners (GPs)
-   medical practitioners who have access to Group A1 or A2 items at the
    requested location under a 3GA placement
-   specialists (including radiologists) - must submit claims
    electronically
-   consultant physicians (including pathologists) - must submit claims
    electronically

Ineligible health professionals

The following are not eligible to participate in the scheme:

-   Allied health professionals
-   optometrists
-   nurse practitioners
-   midwives
-   dentists

The Resources page contains a link for health professionals to locate
more information.

Medical practitioner registration enquiries

Medicare Provider Registration Tier 2 is responsible for the management
of GP registrations in the 90 Day PDC Scheme. Escalate enquiries from
GPs about their registration in the 90 Day PDC Scheme to this team.

Note: all other enquiries must be answered by the Provider line. The
Provider Registration team does not answer enquiries about cheque and
benefit amounts and do not have the function to issue statements.
Service Officers issues statements at the first point of contact.

The Resources page contains information on accessing enquiry screens for
the 90 Day PDC Scheme.

Applying to participate

General practitioners (GPs) who manually submit unpaid or partially paid
patient claims register to participate in the scheme by completing a
General practitioner 90 Day pay doctor cheque scheme application form
(HW074) and returning to the address details on the form.

Medical practitioners currently using online claiming have previously
provided their payment details and are not required to provide further
information unless these details have changed. See the Registration
details when automatically eligible or need to manually register for
scheme table for a quick reference.

How payments are made

Electronic Funds Transfer

Payments for unpaid or partially paid patient claims lodged via an
electronic channel are automatically made by Electronic Funds Transfer
(EFT) into the bank account nominated for the payment of bulk bill
claims against the provider number in the Provider Directory System.

There are no provisions to have different bank account details recorded
for 90 day and bulk bill payments.

Manual cancellations and/or unpresented cheques

Manual cheque cancellations

Where a PDVC cheque for a medical practitioner participating in the 90
Day PDC Scheme is manually cancelled, the original cheque is
automatically removed from the scheme.

Where the cheque is cancelled and a new cheque issued, and the medical
practitioner is a GP, the reissued cheque is flagged as 'eligible' and
monitored for another possible 90 days. The cheque issue date is not
backdated and the 90 days commence from the new cheque issue date. This
does not apply to specialists or consultant physicians. See Professional
registration manual or auto on the Resources page for more information.

Note: where the cheque is lost or missing, and there are no changes to
the original processing, the cheque should not be cancelled or reissued.
Under the 90 Day PDC Scheme the benefit is paid once the 90 day period
has passed and the cheque has not been presented.

Electronically submitted claims

Cheques for electronically submitted claims from GPs not registered for
the scheme, or from specialists or consultant physicians (including
pathologists) must not be manually cancelled. When these cheques are
manually cancelled, the reissued cheque is not eligible for the 90 Day
PDC Scheme.

For more information see: Cheque processing in Medicare.

Mixture of electronic claims and manual claims in one PDVC cheque

As long as one claim has been transmitted electronically for a PDVC
cheque, the whole cheque is regarded as eligible under the 90 Day PDC
Scheme.

Unpresented cheques

Where 90 day cheques remain unpresented on the 91st day after the date
of issue, the cheques are automatically cancelled and the payment made
by Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT).

Cheque status

In some circumstances, a practice may ask if a cheque can be banked, for
example if cheque is 89 days old. Advise the caller that:

-   it generally takes 5 working days to clear a cheque
-   most banks charge a dishonour fee if a cheque is cancelled after it
    is banked

Bank fees and charges

Eligible cheques are automatically cancelled 90 days after the date of
issue.

Services Australia is not liable for any bank fees or charges incurred
where a medical practitioner banks a cancelled cheque.

Changes to specialty codes

Where the eligible medical practitioner changes specialty codes between
the issue of a PDVC cheque and the 90 days, the cheque remains eligible
for the 90 Day PDC Scheme.

Note: if the medical practitioner is no longer eligible due to the
specialty code change, future PDVC cheques will not be eligible for the
90 Day PDC Scheme. When these details are updated in PDS, an end date is
automatically added to the registration.

Where a medical practitioner was not eligible for the 90 Day PDC Scheme,
changes specialty codes and becomes eligible between the issue of a PDVC
cheque plus 90 days, that cheque is not eligible for the scheme.

Returned mail

Do not cancel a PDVC cheque for a medical practitioner participating in
the 90 Day PDC Scheme that has been returned.

Note: under no circumstances is a manual EFT payment to be made directly
to a medical practitioner as this would be in breach of section 20 of
the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Release of payment information

Only Service Officers within the Provider Registration team have the
function to register a medical practitioner in the 90 Day PDC Scheme in
PDS. Access includes update, add and enquiry. Only Provider Registration
Service Officers answer enquiries regarding 90 Day PDC Scheme
registrations.

Service Centre and telephony staff can provide information on the
progress or status of a claim to the medical practitioner who lodged the
claim, or a member of their staff. Statements regarding 90 day payments
may also be issued.

As per release of information policies, duplicate statements do not
require a release of information (ROI) to be submitted. See Locating and
issuing a statement within the 90 Day PDC Scheme about handling
duplicate statement requests.

See also:

-   Release of information for Medicare
-   Release of claims information in Medicare

Opting out of the scheme

GPs who manually submit claims and are registered for the scheme may
terminate the agreement by giving 14 days written notice to Medicare.

As there is no registration for GPs, specialists and consultant
physicians (including pathologists) who transmit unpaid or partially
paid claims electronically, there is no facility for them to opt out of
the scheme.

EFT payment failure

An EFT payment cannot be paid into a nominated bank account in either of
the following situations:

-   incorrect bank account details
-   account is closed
-   technical failure
-   a keying error made by the Service Officer

When an EFT payment fails, a Government Direct Entry Services (GDES)
report is produced by the Reserve Bank of Australia, and transmitted to
Services Australia with eBusiness actioning the report. When an enquiry
is received from the medical practitioner about their EFT payment, refer
to eBusiness.

Report Management and Distribution System (RMDS) reports

Specialty code change report (MPFGP2)

If a change is made to a medical practitioner's specialty code within
the Provider's PDS file, an end date is automatically entered within the
medical practitioner's registration.

The Specialty code change report (MPFGP2) is generated daily showing the
specialty code entered and the P number of the Service Officer who
entered the information for follow up purposes. For example, incorrect
medical practitioner's details changed.

Active registered GPMoU participants (MPFGP3)

The Active registered GPMoU participants (MPFGP3) is produced on a
monthly basis listing the total number of medical practitioners who are
actively registered within the GP Registration System.

The report is sorted by state with a ‘State Total’ and an ‘Australian
Total’ for all registrations.

Inactive registered GPMoU participants (MPFGP4)

The Inactive registered GPMoU participants (MPFGP4) is produced on a
monthly basis for the:

-   total number of medical practitioners previously registered
-   registration has ceased, and
-   record has a status of inactive within the GP Registration System

Failed EFT payment report (MPFGP1)

The system produces a daily ‘Failed EFT payment report’ (MPFGP1) listing
the details of failed Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) payments. An EFT
payment is specified as 'failed' when the status of the EFT fail flag
for the registration is changed to Y.

This report lists the details of each payment where it was not possible
for the benefit amount to be deposited into the medical practitioner’s
nominated financial institution account.

Note: these reports are also available in the Fuji Xerox Document
Management System (formerly Hermes Precisa Pty Ltd (HPA) online system)
SALMAT report. See Resources for a link.

Cheque adjustments and the 90 Day PDC Scheme

If a PDVC cheque for a medical practitioner participating in the 90 day
PDC Scheme is returned requesting reissue or cancellation due to a
change in the original assessment, current cheque adjustment procedures
apply.

For a latter day adjustment that results in an underpayment, an
additional PDVC cheque for the underpayment amount is issued. This
additional cheque is also flagged for the purpose of the 90 Day PDC
Scheme.

Note: under no circumstances is a manual EFT payment to be made directly
to a medical practitioner. This is a breach of section 20 of the Health
Insurance Act 1973. The References page contains a link to legislation.

The Resources page contains information about:

-   medical practitioner registrations
-   enquiry screens

It includes links to:

-   90 Day PDC Scheme information page on the Services Australia website
-   letters and form
-   contact details for Medicare Provider Registration
-   Fuji Xerox Document Management System (formerly Hermes Precisa Pty
    Ltd (HPA) online system)

Related links

Provider registrations in PDS

Generate Report Management and Distribution System (RMDS) reports in
Mainframe

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
