
Identify and resolve replica Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03110080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the manual process policy on how to identify and
resolve a potential replica Healthcare Provider identifier -
Organisation (HPI-O) record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Replica organisations

The determination of a replica record may only be made where the HI
Service has genuinely allocated the same identifier to two or more
individuals (due to a system malfunction).

This does not cover the inappropriate assignment of identifiers within
the health sector. Follow-up action may need to occur to rectify the
external health sector issues.

Refer all potential replicas to Tier 3 HI Service Provider support team
for follow-up action and resolution.

The Resources page has a link to contact details.

Identify potential replica organisation

Notification generally comes from the Organisation Maintenance Officer
(OMO) of an affected organisation.

The current record status must be 'Active' or 'Deactivated'.

Flagged potential replica records can be amended if required.

A record can be found to not be a replica and have the potential replica
flag removed.

Resolve replica organisation

Where a record is found to be a replica, the record is resolved and two
or more new identifiers are allocated.

Where a replica record has been resolved:

-   All Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
    and Healthcare Provider links must be manually end dated. Service
    Officers must manually re-link these records to the new parent
    organisations as required
-   Service Officers are required to move any linked child organisations
    (if they exist) to a new parent organisation
-   Details are removed from the Healthcare Provider Directory (HPD)
-   The resolved replica can no longer be used, although Service
    Officers can still view the record details

Related links

Identify and resolve duplicate Healthcare Provider Identifier -
Organisation (HPI-O) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Restructure Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Link or unlink Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) to organisation in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
