
Psoriasis Program in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-18051130

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details of PBS-subsidised biological agents for
patients with psoriasis (PSOR).

Psoriasis and listing dates

Psoriasis (PSOR) is an autoimmune disease characterised by abnormally
red, itchy and/or scaly patches of skin.

Listing dates are:

-   etanercept - 1 August 2006
-   infliximab - 1 December 2007
-   adalimumab - 1 June 2009
-   ustekinumab - 1 March 2010
-   etanercept (<18 years) - 1 August 2012
-   secukinumab - 1 September 2015
-   ixekizumab - 1 February 2017
-   guselkumab - 1 February 2019
-   tildrakizumab - 1 February 2019
-   risankizumab - 1 December 2019
-   ustekinumab (<18 years) - 1 October 2021

An adult patient who received PBS-subsidised adalimumab, etanercept,
guselkumab, infliximab, ixekizumab, risankizumab, secukinumab,
tildrakizumab and ustekinumab treatment prior to 1 February 2019 is
considered to have started their first cycle as of 1 February 2019.

For more information, see Written Authority Required Drugs .

Treatment specifics

Patient baselines

When a patient qualifies for treatment, they will already have a defined
level of disease activity. This level is measured and becomes the
patient’s baseline. Future applications are measured against the
baselines to determine response or failure to current treatment. A
patient who fails treatment with one agent may wish to use this flare of
disease to set a new baseline for future treatment to be measured
against.

The baseline measurement for psoriasis is the Psoriasis Area and
Severity Index (PASI).

Note: if a patient is experiencing a flare, this does not always mean a
change of baselines.

PASI

The PASI is a quantitative rating scale that measures the severity of
psoriatic lesions based on the area coverage (as a percentage) and
plaque appearance. The face/hand/foot assessment is still referred to as
a PASI (many only refer to the whole body diagram as a PASI). Patients
can be assessed on either the percentage coverage of the body as a
whole, or the percentage coverage of the affected areas.

Application forms include the relevant PASI for both groups of patients
to be completed by prescribers.

The majority of patients listed on the program are assessed for response
on their whole body PASI. Some however have small patches just affecting
the face or hand or foot. There are separate restrictions in place for
each group of patients.

Enquiries

Transfer enquiries about prescription arrangements to the PBS Complex
Drugs Programs team and choose the option relevant to the condition
treated.

The Resources page contains links to application forms, calculation
sheets, contact details, item and restriction codes, the PBS schedule
and the Services Australia websites.

Related links

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Manage work items in PaNDA

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process telephone Authority approval application

Process written authority approval requests

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Processing Written Authority Required Listings

Written Authority Required Drugs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
