
Occupational Therapist - provider eligibility and registration 012-18061955

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for occupational therapists.

On this Page:

Occupational Therapists

Occupational Therapists are allied health professionals who work with
individuals of any age to promote and enable effective participation in
the occupations of everyday life (work, social participation, education,
activities of daily living etc.).

They work with people who have trouble in these areas for any reason,
and are present in both physical disability and mental health services.

Focussed Psychological Strategies (FPS)

Occupational Therapists can do additional training and get an FPS
accreditation with Occupational Therapy Australia (OTA).

This qualifies them to provide a range of focussed psychological
strategies services under Medicare including:

-   Cognitive behavioural therapy and behavioural interventions
-   Cognitive interventions and relaxation strategies
-   Skills training, parenting skills, problem solving skills
-   Anger management, stress management and social skills

They have this qualification for a certain period of time. The OT must
complete ongoing training to maintain it.

Disputes about removing a registration

An Occupational Therapist can dispute the decision to remove their FPS
accreditation. Direct any enquiry to OTA. The Resources page contains a
link to OTA contact details.

Medicare eligibility and registration

To be registered with Medicare, an Occupational Therapist must meet the
eligibility criteria.

An applicant must have evidence of current registration to practise
occupational therapy from the Occupational Therapy Board of Australia.
This is a board supported by the Australian Health Practitioners
Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Evidence of current registration may be:

-   a copy of the Ahpra registration certificate with an initial
    application for a provider number, and/or
-   where there is an existing ‘shell’ record in Provider Directory
    System (PDS), registration details are pre-populated within the
    ‘shell’ record, and/or
-   Ahpra Information window (if available), or
-   Ahpra website search result

Further confirmation of registration (such as a certificate) is not
required if PDS shows a current Australian (AUS) registration in the
Registration section of the provider’s record.

Registration is renewed annually on 30 November.

To be recognised to provide Focussed Psychological Strategies (FPS),
Services Australia receives an email notification of endorsement
directly from Occupational Therapy Australia (OTA). See Focussed
psychological strategies (FPS) - Allied Health.

Medicare benefits cannot be paid for services provided or requested when
the OT is not registered with Ahpra.

The Resources page has a link to the Ahpra website.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers escalate
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) for assistance. Where required, the enquiry is escalated to a
Programme Officer (PO), who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility
team in National Office for assistance.

The Resources page contains useful contacts, links to external websites,
a quick reference guide and link to letter templates.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Occupational Therapy services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Health Professional Online Services

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Ahpra Information window

Focussed psychological strategies (FPS) - Allied Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
