
Continued Dispensing of Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Medicines in Defined Circumstances 012-65010030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the continued dispensing initiative.

Ongoing Continued Dispensing arrangements were expanded from 1 July
2022. The previous Continued Dispensing Emergency measures ceased 30
June 2022.

Continued Dispensing of PBS Medicines in Defined Circumstances

Continued Dispensing is an initiative that enables the provision of an
eligible medicine to a person by an approved pharmacist, under specific
circumstances. The patient must previously have been prescribed this
medicine and the pharmacist must be satisfied that it is urgently needed
and it is not practicable to obtain a new prescription. A link to access
more information is on the References page.

Expansion of the Continued Dispensing initiative

From 1 July 2022 ongoing Continued Dispensing arrangements were
expanded. This expansion replaced the previous Continued Dispensing
Emergency measures to support those affected by the Coronavirus
(COVID-19) pandemic.

Continued Dispensing does not replace existing arrangements for
emergency supply but will complement them. See Pharmacies affected by
emergency or disaster events.

Eligibility

PBS/RPBS Schedule 1

Medicines that can be supplied under these arrangements can be located
in The National Health (Continued Dispensing) Determination 2022,
National Health Act 1953. A link is available on the References page.

Authority Required (Streamlined) and Authority Required

Are included in these expanded arrangements.

Section 100 Special Arrangements

As part of the Continued Dispensing expansion, HIV medications listed
under S100 Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) program are now eligible for
Continued Dispensing. Note: other non-HIV medicines under section 100
arrangements are not available under these expanded arrangements.

Schedule 8

Schedule 8 medicines can be supplied under Continued Dispensing
arrangements but the pharmacist must be compliant with state and
territory legislation and accord with professional standards. Note: some
states and territories do not allow supply of Schedule 8 medicines
without a valid prescription.

Maximum and Increased quantity

As part of the expansion arrangements for Continued Dispensing, the
supply quantity is now restricted to the maximum PBS/RPBS listed
quantity, regardless if a patient was previously prescribed an increased
quantity.

Prescriber Bag

Items supplied under prescriber bag provisions are not available under
these expanded arrangements.

Closing the Gap (CTG) Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Co-payment Program

As part of the Continued Dispensing expansion from 1 July 2022, CTG
reduced co-payment is eligible for Continued Dispensing items.

There are no changes to the medicines available under the CTG co-payment
program.

Items available for Continued Dispensing under the s100 Highly
Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program remain not eligible for supply under the
reduced CTG program.

Continuing Medication Program (CMP)

The Continuing Medication Program is not available for Continued
Dispensing.

Circumstances where pharmacists can supply eligible items

Pharmacists can supply medicine under the expanded arrangements when:

-   the medicine requested is listed in the relevant legislation as
    eligible for supply under Continued Dispensing
-   there is an immediate need for the medicine and it is not
    practicable for the patient to obtain a valid prescription from
    their PBS prescriber
-   the usual prescriber must be unable to be contacted and/or is unable
    to provide an e-prescription or owing prescription
-   the medicine has been prescribed before by a PBS prescriber
-   the pharmacist must ensure the person has previously been supplied
    the medicine within the last 3 months
-   the pharmacist is satisfied that the patient's therapy is stable
-   there has been prior clinical review by the PBS prescriber that
    supports continuation of the medicine
-   there is an ongoing need for the medicine
-   the medicine is safe and appropriate for the patient
-   pharmacists must comply with the requirements of their
    state/territory law

Receipting the supply of eligible items

The pharmacies dispensing software will generate a Modified Repeat
Authorisation Form (declaration) which will contain details of the
Continued Dispensing supply. It is a legislative requirement that the
patient or agent of the patient signs the declaration to acknowledge the
receipt of a PBS/RPBS medicine under these arrangements.

The dispensing software will also generate a Consumer Declaration and
Prescriber Notification Form which the pharmacist can use to:

-   show that the patient understands they were supplied without
    consultation from their prescriber, and
-   notify the patient’s most recent PBS prescriber, or clinical
    practice, that a Continued Dispensing supply was provided

If the pharmacist is unsure whether their software has been update to
accommodate Continued Dispensing, they should contact their software
vendor.

These records must be kept by the pharmacist for 2 years and comply with
state or territory and Commonwealth legislation.

Discounting Continued Dispensing Supply

An allowable discount can be applied to each individual co-payment for a
prescription supplied.

Submitting a claim

Pharmacists must complete and sign the Modified Repeat Authorisation
form and keep a copy for 2 years. This is required by law. The patient
or agent of the patient must also sign the form.

When claiming for a Continued Dispensing supply of an Authority Required
(streamlined) or Authority Required item through PBS Online, the
pharmacy dispensing system (PDS) may require:

input of an authority prescription number

-   when this happens, advise entering '123' in the Authority
    Prescription Number field

input of a prescriber number

-   when this happens, advise entering 0000000 (7 zeros)

input a streamlined authority code for an Authority Required
(Streamlined) item

-   when this happens, advise not to enter any number. Entry of an
    incorrect number will lead to an outright rejection

For Continued Dispensing claims, PBS Online will not return any
authority-related reason codes such as W150 or W151. PBS Online reason
codes may be returned where the pharmacist is not following the correct
PDS prompts for Continued Dispensing.

PBS online may return the following Continued Dispensing reason codes:

-   R661 - The item code is not valid for Continued Dispensing supply
-   R662 - The patient has already been supplied this Continued
    Dispensing item within the last months. Note: from 1 May 2020, PBS
    Online reason code 662 for under co-payment prescriptions of
    continued dispensing items has been amended from a ‘warning’ to a
    ‘reject’. There is no change required to the pharmacist and Service
    Officer fix instructions as they are still valid
-   W663 - This item has not been supplied in the previous <> months
-   R314- The item code provided is not allowed for the patient category
    provided
-   R669- CMP is invalid for Continued Dispensing
-   R664- The quantity supplied for this item exceeds the PBS schedule
    listing
-   R814- Section 100 items are not eligible for Closing The Gap ( CTG)

The pharmacist must determine whether a patient meets the requirements
for the Continued Dispensing arrangements. A pharmacist must not rely
solely on the PBS Online messages to determine if a Continued Dispensing
supply is appropriate.

If the pharmacist is unsure their software has been update to
accommodate Continued Dispensing, they should contact their software
vendor.

Not practicable to obtain prescription

The 'not practicable to obtain prescription' condition requires that in
determining whether to undertake a Continued Dispensing supply of a
pharmaceutical benefit, the pharmacist must be satisfied that the person
receiving the benefit has demonstrated that it is not practicable for
them to obtain a prescription from their prescriber prior to the supply
needing to occur. The usual prescriber must be unable to be contacted
and/or is unable to provide an e-prescription or owing prescription.

For example, the patient may be unable to obtain an appointment (either
face to face or by telehealth) to arrange a new prescription before
their current supply runs out.

In addition, the pharmacist must also determine that other types of
emergency supply options, such as an owing prescription, are not
suitable for the circumstances.

Previous supply of pharmaceutical benefit

The 'previous supply of pharmaceutical benefit' condition requires that,
in undertaking a supply in accordance with the legislation, the
pharmacist must be satisfied that the patient requesting the supply has
previously been supplied that same pharmaceutical benefit on the basis
of a prescription provided by a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
prescriber. Under the Continued Dispensing expansion arrangements, the
medicine must have been supplied to a patient within the last 3 months.

If the previous supply was via a PBS prescription, this would indicate
to the pharmacist that the PBS prescriber had determined that the PBS
prescribing restrictions (if any) had been satisfied.

Stability of therapy

The 'stability of therapy' condition requires the approved pharmacist to
be satisfied that the person's therapy is stable. To establish stability
of therapy, the pharmacist should consider:

-   evidence of adherence to the prescribed therapy
-   persistence with the prescribed therapy, both in relation to the
    requested medicine and other medicines being taken by the patient

In establishing stability of therapy the pharmacist should also consider
such things as the length of time that the patient has been taking the
medicine being sought, and the absence of a hospital admission since
last having the medicine prescribed.

A further prescription for the medicine following initial prescribing
can also be of assistance in demonstrating stability of therapy. The
Pharmaceutical Society of Australia (PSA) Guidelines will assist
pharmacists in establishing the patient's stability of therapy.

Prior clinical review by PBS prescriber

The 'prior clinical review by Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
prescriber' condition requires that when establishing a patient's
clinical history and their suitability for a Continued Dispensing
supply, the pharmacist must determine that the patient has been taking
the requested PBS medicine consistently for an uninterrupted period of
time up to, and preceding, the request for a supply without a
prescription.

The pharmacist must also be satisfied that since the patient began
taking the medicine that they have received at least one clinical review
by a PBS Prescriber that indicated an ongoing need for that medicine.
For example, this could be demonstrated in the patient's dispensing
history by consideration of the number of original prescriptions
received.

Further detail on how a pharmacist can satisfy these requirements is
outlined in the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia (PSA) Guidelines.

Prescription for last supply of pharmaceutical benefit

The 'prescription for last supply of pharmaceutical benefit' condition
requires that the pharmacist must be satisfied that the patient's last
supply of that medicine was via a prescription issued in accordance with
the legislation. Without evidence that the previous supply was made via
a PBS prescription, the pharmacist should not undertake a continued
dispensing supply.

If the previous supply was a continued dispensing supply the pharmacist
must not provide a subsequent consecutive Continued Dispensing supply.
The pharmacist should instead consider other available emergency supply
options.

In determining if this condition is met, the pharmacist must not rely
solely on PBS Online information to determine if a Continued Dispensing
supply is appropriate.

The Pharmaceutical Society of Australia (PSA) Guidelines provide further
guidance for pharmacists on how to establish this information.

No continued dispensing in previous 12 months

The 'no continued dispensing in previous 12 months' condition means that
a person may only receive 1 continued dispensing supply per eligible
medicine within a 12 month period. Where the pharmacist identifies that
the person has received a supply of the eligible pharmaceutical benefit
as a continued dispensing supply within the previous 12 months they must
not undertake a continued dispensing supply.

Declaration by patient supplied with pharmaceutical benefit

The 'declaration by patient supplied with pharmaceutical benefit'
condition requires the patient receiving the Continued Dispensing
supply, or their agent, to sign a declaration acknowledging that they
have been supplied a pharmaceutical benefit without a Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) prescription.

This declaration will be made via the Consumer Declaration and
Prescriber Notification Form.

The acknowledgement demonstrates that the patient, or their agent,
understands that the supply has been undertaken without consultation
from the patient's prescriber. Where a continued dispense supply occurs,
the agent signing on behalf of the patient cannot be the pharmacist who
undertook the continued dispensing supply. This acknowledgement forms
part of the documentation required to be prepared and recorded.

The Consumer Declaration and Prescriber Notification Form are available
in the pharmacy dispensing software.

Maximum quantity of supply

The 'maximum quantity of supply' condition restricts a continued
dispensing supply to a single PBS listed maximum quantity or number of
units of the eligible pharmaceutical benefit. Pharmacists will not be
able to provide repeat supplies under a continued dispensing supply.
Under the expansion arrangements for Continued Dispensing, the supply
quantity is restricted to the quantity listed on the PBS/RPBS schedule,
regardless if a patient was previously prescribed an increased quantity.

Preparing and recording information

The 'preparing and recording information' condition requires the
pharmacist to record any information gathered during the interaction
with the patient that the pharmacist uses to substantiate their decision
to undertake a Continued Dispensing supply.

For example, this could include:

-   a record of the patient's history that captures information relating
    to stability of therapy
-   when the patient's last clinical review by a prescriber was
    undertaken
-   reasons why the patient's is unable to obtain a prescription, and
-   that their previous supply was via usual Pharmaceutical Benefits
    Scheme (PBS) supply mechanisms

This condition also requires the pharmacist to prepare a record of the
Continued Dispensing supply to be provided to the patient's regular PBS
prescriber (or practice where specific prescriber cannot be
ascertained).

The Pharmaceutical Society of Australia (PSA) Guidelines will require
that this communication (via the Consumer Declaration and Prescriber
Notification form) occur within a 24 hour period of the continued
dispensing supply occurring and:

-   should include the person's name and address
-   date the medicine was supplied without a prescription
-   details of the medicine provided (including strength, form and
    instructions for use)
-   reason for the Continued Dispensing supply, and
-   a declaration by the person that they understood the supply was
    undertaken without consultation from their prescriber

The Resources page contains a sample modified Repeat Authorisation, as
well as links to Guidelines for Continued Dispensing.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
