
Audiologist - provider eligibility and registration 012-18062108

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for audiologists.

On this Page:

Audiologists

Audiologists are allied health professionals who perform diagnostic
tests and assess:

-   hearing and auditory function
-   vestibular (balance) function
-   tinnitus
-   auditory processing function
-   neural function

Medicare eligibility and registration

To be recognised for Medicare purposes, an applicant must have current
certification from either of the following bodies:

Audiology Australia (AA) (formerly Audiological Society of Australia
ASAud) stating:

-   Accredited Audiologist, and
-   AudA ID

Australian College of Audiology (ACAud) with a certificate of:

-   membership as a Full/Ordinary Member or Fellow, and
-   competency showing both Hearing Rehabilitation Specialist and
    Diagnostic Rehabilitation Specialist

Peak processing periods for applications are December to April.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to either:

-   the Audiological Society of Australia (trades as ‘Audiology
    Australia’), or
-   the Australian College of Audiology

The Resources page has the contact details.

The Office of Hearing (OHS) Services – Hearing Services Program

Eligible Audiologists (170) and Audiometrists (171) may have been issued
a Services Australia Medicare provider number (also known as a Qualified
Practitioner (QP) number) to participate in the Office of Hearing
Services (OHS), Hearing Services Program.

Services Australia ceased issuing QP numbers to eligible Audiologists
and Audiometrists from 23 November 2019. The Hearing Services Program is
now managed by the Department of Health and Aged Care (Health) and
enquiries relating to the OHS program must be directed to OHS.

Where an eligible Audiologist is applying for an initial or additional
provider number and is working in private practice, a new stem in PDS
must be created.

Note: Audiology and Audiometry stems created for the Hearing Services
Program should not be amended or have additional provider number
locations issued. Stems issued for OHS purposes will have ‘AHS –
Accredited’ in the place obtained field and the note ‘OHS purposes only
do not use this stem for allied health’.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers can
escalate complex enquiries to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) who will
liaise with assistance Programme Officer (PO) if required.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, links to useful
contacts and external websites,.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
