
Quality Improvement (QI) Incentive for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) 012-19082734

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the PIP QI Incentive.

Aims of the Incentive

The PIP QI Incentive is a payment to general practices that take part in
quality improvement.

It aims to:

-   improve patient outcomes, and
-   deliver best practice care

Payment amount

Eligible practices can receive $5.00 per Standardised Whole Patient
Equivalent per year. The payment cap is $12,500 per quarter.

To get a payment:

a general practice must electronically submit their quarterly data to
their local Primary Health Network (PHN)

-   They need to do this at least once during the data submission period
    for that quarter

Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services (ACCHS) and other
organisations funded under the Indigenous Australians’ Health Program
(IAHP) provide national Key Performance Indicator (nKPI) data

-   They do this as part of their current arrangement with the
    Department of Health and Aged Care

How to apply

Participating practices apply through Health Professional Online
Services (HPOS) using their Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account.

If a practice is unable to apply online they must:

-   submit a written request for an exemption to the online process, and
-   include their reasons why

Forward these requests to Program Management via the Incentives
Escalation Database.

Payments

Payments are made based on a series of different transaction files that
are exchanged between Services Australia and the Department of Health
and Aged Care (Health). These are:

-   The Practice Payment file, PRACPY
-   The Verification Payment file, VERIPY
-   The Confirmation Payment file, CONFPY
-   The Adjustment Payment file, ADJTPY.

All files are sent through automated channel to PIP Online.

Health send the PRACPY file to Services Australia at least once a
quarter. This file advises Services Australia which PIP practices are to
calculate a quarterly QI payment

-   If no PRACPY file is received from Health by the point in time for
    the quarterly calculation, Services Australia send a VERIPY file to
    Health

Services Australia send the VERIPY file to Health if a PRACPY file has
not been received for a payment quarter. This file consists of practices
that are registered for the PIP QI at the point in time

Health send the CONFPY file to Services Australia in response to a
VERIPY file. Like a PRACPY, the CONFPY file advises which PIP practices
are to calculate a quarterly QI payment

Health send the ADJTPY file to Services Australia. The ADJTPY is sent
where the details of a practice eligible for a QI payment were not
included in the PRACPY or CONFPY for a particular quarter. It is also
used to correct errors in previous PRACPY and CONFPY files and to
trigger automated fortnightly adjustment payments

-   Positive adjustments will be released in line with the current
    fortnightly payment release schedules

The Resources page contains details about payment reference periods and
data submission dates. There are Frequently Asked Questions for the PIP
QI Incentive. It also contains links to the websites.

Related links

Incentive Programs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
