
Osteopathic services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020130

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) osteopathic services programme for Veterans’ Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Government intent

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers osteopathic services provided to entitled
persons by registered osteopaths. Osteopathic service is treatment of
the musculo-skeletal system by hands-on techniques such as deep tactile
pressure, stretching and manipulation.

Osteopathic services must be claimed in accordance with the patient’s
assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

On this Page:

Eligibility to receive osteopathic services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
osteopathic services based on the type of DVA health care card they
hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most osteopathic services necessary to meet a clinical need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds osteopathic services related to the card holder's accepted
disabilities only, and treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is commenced.

Patient Eligibility for VAP contains the steps to verify a DVA health
card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting dietitian services
when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their dietitian service
provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting
treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA osteopathic services

Only an osteopath contracted with DVA as a participating DVA provider
that is registered with Services Australia (they have a Medicare
provider number) at the time of the service is eligible to provide
services to eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement, which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to ‘Notes for Allied Health Providers
– Osteopaths’ on the DVA website. This contains detailed eligibility
requirements and also information for osteopathic services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for osteopathic services

The DVA Osteopaths Schedule of Fees contains a range of consultation
items available to eligible DVA health card holders for both
professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care facility or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range OM10-OM99.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Osteopathic service providers may be required to seek prior financial
authorisation from DVA before providing certain osteopathic services.
The fee schedules contain information on which items require prior
financial authorisation.

To request financial approval, osteopathic service providers must
contact DVA before administering services to be able to claim payment by
completing a Chiropractic/Osteopathy/Physiotherapy Prior Financial
Approval Request form. The Resources page has a link to the form on the
DVA website.

DVA osteopathic services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims.

-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient
-   Subsequent consultations are to be claimed for ongoing treatment of
    a musculoskeletal condition
-   Two subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day
-   Treatment by residential aged care services and public hospitals
    which have a greater level of care require prior approval. The
    Resources page contains a link to the DVA Osteopaths Schedule of
    Fees. See also Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for
    VAP.

Concurrent physiotherapy and osteopathic services for the same condition
for any entitled patient is not permitted. The system does not support
these DVA business rules, however health care providers are required to
deliver treatment and meet the accountability requirements as set out in
Notes for Allied Health Providers. The Resources page contains a link to
the Notes for Allied Health Providers.

Treatment for white card holders must be related to an accepted
disability.

Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
‘Notes for Osteopaths’ available on the DVA website.

Claim lodgement information

DVA osteopathic services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources
page contains a link to claim choices for health professionals on the
Services Australia website.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder. Osteopathic service providers should be sure
that they can, from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request
from Services Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of
treatment.

Online claiming

Osteopathic service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA Osteopathic providers are required to lodge ‘Health Practitioner
Service Voucher’ and ‘Claim for Treatment Services Voucher’ forms. These
fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website. Service providers
can use their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can
provide the same level of information as required by the DVA forms.
After completion, service providers should post the forms to Services
Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Claim enquiries

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions from osteopathic
service providers.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP osteopathic services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers
will help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Manual data entry for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS) for Veterans’ Affairs Processing
(VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
