
Release of prescription record information in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-60100050

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details on the release of prescription record
information in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

On this Page:

Seeking prescription record information

Policy 55

Whilst legislation stipulates that an individual or family is
responsible for maintaining their own prescription records on a
Prescription Record Form (PRF) (but in practice, the pharmacy may keep
this record for them), there can be situations where a pharmacy cannot
provide prescription record information to the patient or family.

This policy provides advice to staff answering queries from individuals
or families seeking prescription record information from Services
Australia, or where they are unable to obtain this information from
their pharmacy.

Reasons can include, for example:

-   Safety Net records have been destroyed or stolen, for example, a
    pharmacy has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster, pharmacy
    records have been destroyed by hardware failure, or a theft has
    occurred
-   a Safety Net concession card has been issued, and PRF details have
    been sent to Services Australia to support a pharmacist's claim, and
    the patient now requires the documentation to apply for a Safety Net
    entitlement card (crossover arrangement or over the threshold
    patient refunds)

Requesting prescription record information

Where an individual's Safety Net records have been destroyed or stolen,
the individual can write to Services Australia requesting their
prescription record information.

To obtain this information, an individual or family must make the
request in writing and include the following information:

-   applicant's name
-   applicant's address
-   applicant's date of birth
-   applicant's Medicare or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) card
    number or Safety Net card number (if applicable)
-   names of other eligible family members
-   period of time they would like the request to cover (from and to
    date)

The individual must also sign the request.

When a request is received from a family, each family member aged 14
years or over must sign the request, or each provide a separate request,
including spouses.

A pharmacist or pharmacy staff cannot apply for this information on
behalf of an individual or family.

Note: the history held by Services Australia does not include items
below the patient contribution, and only what prescription information
is held by Services Australia at the date of the request.

Request address

Requests for address should be sent to Information Release.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for release of
information.

Related links

Release of information in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
