
MT items for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17070030

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information on the Department of
Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) MT item numbers (items that do not appear in the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) or any Allied Health Fees Schedules)
and how to process them for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

DVA funding

DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the veteran
community) that, in addition to current MBS and DVA Allied Health Fee
Schedule items, also covers the payment of:

-   non-Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) and non-DVA Allied Health Fee
    Schedule listed items that DVA have deemed payable, or
-   MBS or Allied Health services to be paid above the current scheduled
    fee rate

MT items

These item numbers are not contained in the MBS or DVA Allied Health fee
schedules and are identified by the pre-fix MT.

Some MT item numbers contain a maximum fee payable – DVA does not
publish the Maximum fee payable for the items. These amounts are for
internal use only and Service Officers should ensure that they do not
disclose this information to providers.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Many of the DVA MT items require prior financial authorisation (also
known as Prior Approval) by DVA before they can be paid by Services
Australia. The Resources page contains a table outlining those MT items
that require approval, fee types, business rules and specific
instructions associated with processing these items.

Operational Blueprint document ‘Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS
Approval) for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP)’ contains further
information on the prior financial authorisation process.

Claim lodgement information

DVA MT item claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources page contains
a link to claim choices for health professionals on the Services
Australia Website.

Online claiming

Providers can submit electronic claims for processing without the need
to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online.
However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health card
holder. Service providers should be sure that they can, from other means
of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services Australia or DVA
for evidence of service and details of treatment.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA service providers are required to lodge ‘Health Practitioner Service
Voucher’ and ‘Claim for Treatment Services Voucher’ forms. These
fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website. Service providers
can use their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can
provide the same level of information as required by the DVA forms.
After completion, service providers should post the forms to Services
Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers will help with
the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Resources page contains links to external websites for information
related to Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) optical services,
information about resolving pend return messages, a link to the Services
Australia Website, and links to contact details and the eligibility
query form.

Related Links

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans’ Affairs
Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Manual data entry for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
