
Deactivate Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03070070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how to deactivate a Contracted
Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in the Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service. When a CSP organisation record is deactivated, access to
the HI Service is removed. Deactivating the CSP organisation stops any
further access by the organisation to the HI Service. This function must
be performed by a Tier 3 Service Officer.

On this Page:

Manual deactivation of a CSP organisation via a Service Officer

A Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Organisation can withdraw their
participation in the HI Service. They must have a current status of
‘Active’ to be deactivated.

A completed ‘Application to deactivate or retire a Contracted Service
Provider Organisation record’ form must be provided to a Service
Officer.

A CSP Officer, authorised to act on behalf of the CSP organisation, can
request a Service Officer deactivate the organisation.

When deactivation is complete:

-   the CSP organisation is end-dated with the CSP organisation record
    status set to ‘Deactivated’
-   all links to Healthcare Provider Identifier-Organisation (HPI-O)
    records are end-dated
-   CSP Officer records are not end-dated

A Service Officer can search and view deactivated CSP organisations.

When a record is deactivated:

-   access to the HI Service is removed
-   the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate remains unchanged,
    however, deactivating the CSP organisation stops any further access
    to the HI Service by the organisation

Automatic deactivation of a CSP organisation record

A CSP organisation record status will automatically be set to
‘Deactivated’ when the last link to a Healthcare Provider
Identifier-Organisation (HPI-O) record has been end-dated. Once this
occurs:

-   the CSP organisation is end-dated with the current date and time
    stamp
-   the CSP organisation record status is set to 'Deactivated'
-   CSP Officer records links are not end-dated

A Service Officer can search and view deactivated CSP organisations.

When a record is deactivated:

-   access to the HI Service is removed
-   the PKI certificate remains unchanged, however, deactivating the CSP
    organisation stops any further access to the HI Service by the
    organisation

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officer ID details, the details of
the requestor are also recorded.

Mandatory requirements

Before a Service Officer can complete this procedure, a completed
‘Application to deactivate or retire a Contracted Service Provider
organisation record’ form must be provided.

When a CSP organisation is deactivated:

-   any links to any other Healthcare Provider Identifier-Organisation
    (HPI-O) records are end-dated
-   the CSP organisation record status is set to ‘Deactivated’

CSP Officer records are not end-dated.

Related links

Handle 'Act for' call in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifiers Service using the
eHealth Program (EHP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
