
Recognition as a specialist or consultant physician for Medicare 012-42020100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about recognition as a specialist or
consultant physician for Medicare. Specialist recognition allows
recognised medical practitioners to access specialist or consultant
physician attendance items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS). It
also allows access to other relevant items in the MBS for recognised
specialists or consultant physicians registered for Medicare purposes in
a particular specialty.

On this Page:

Specialist recognition

There are 3 sections under the Health Insurance Act 1973 to be
considered for specialist recognition, these are:

-   Section 3D – applies to permanent residents and Australian citizens.
    This applies for recognition as a specialist only and not consultant
    physicians. The relevant college will advise Services Australia that
    the medical practitioner is now a fellow having successfully
    completed their course of study
-   Section 3DB – applies to a permanent resident or Australian citizen
    who has fellowship with an Australasian college or is recognised as
    a specialist with the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
    Agency (Ahpra). The medical practitioner may be subject to section
    19AB if they are an overseas trained doctor (OTD) or foreign
    graduate of an accredited medical school (FGAMS). For medical
    practitioners who do not hold fellowship and are recognised as a
    specialist with Ahpra, recognition can only be granted for a period
    of 2 years
-   Section 3E – applies to temporary residents who have fellowship with
    an Australasian college or are recognised as a specialist with
    Ahpra. For medical practitioners who do not hold fellowship with an
    Australasian college and are recognised as a specialist with Ahpra,
    recognition can only be granted for a period of 2 years. Medical
    practitioners previously granted specialist recognition under
    section 3E are required to reapply for specialist recognition every
    2 years or if they become a permanent resident or Australian citizen

Definitions

Consultant physician

-   Has successfully completed training in their specialty and holds
    Fellowship of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians, Royal
    Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists or the
    Australasian Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine, or
-   Registered as a specialist with the Medical Board of Australia in
    Psychiatry, Rehabilitation Medicine or 1 or more of the specialties
    listed against the Royal Australasian College of Physicians in
    Schedule 1 of the Health Insurance Regulations 2018

Medicare recognition:

-   A Determination is made by the delegate of the Chief Executive
    Medicare and the Minister for Health recognising the medical
    practitioner under section 3DB or 3E of the Health Insurance Act
    1973.

Specialist

-   Has successfully completed training in their specialty and holds
    Fellowship with the relevant Australasian specialist medical college
    in Schedule 4 of the Health Insurance Regulations, or
-   Is registered as a specialist with the Medical Board of Australia in
    1 or more of the specialties listed against an Australian specialist
    medical college in Schedule 1 of the Health Insurance Regulations
    2018

Medicare recognition:

-   A Determination is made by the delegate of the Chief Executive
    Medicare and the Minister for Health recognising the medical
    practitioner under section 3DB or 3E of the Health Insurance Act
    1973, or
-   Is recognised by the delegate of the Chief Executive Medicare under
    section 3D of the Health Insurance Act 1973 on advice from an
    Australasian specialist medical college that the medical
    practitioner satisfies the criteria for recognition

See Specialty List for Medicare purposes in Resources for a list of the
relevant Australasian specialist medical colleges.

Applications for specialist recognition under 3D - college notification

These applications are referred to as 3D applications.

Under section 3D of the Health Insurance Act 1973:

-   the medical practitioner does not have to apply directly to Services
    Australia for recognition
-   an Australasian specialist medical college will advise the Chief
    Executive Medicare that a medical practitioner has obtained
    fellowship for their specialty and satisfies the criteria for
    recognition as a specialist
-   the delegate advises the medical practitioner in writing of their
    recognition and the date of effect

The criteria for recognition is set out in section 3D of the Act and
only applies to specialists who are permanent residents or Australian
citizens (excludes consultant physicians).

3D notifications are received directly from a specialist college via
email. Note: this section is reserved for specialists accessing Group A3
items.

Notifications from the following colleges cannot be recognised under 3D:

-   Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP)
-   Royal Australasian College of Physicians, Australasian Faculty of
    Occupational and Environmental Medicine
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP)

Colleges currently sending 3D notices, which can be recognised under
section 3D are:

-   Australasian College for Emergency Medicine (ACEM)
-   Australasian College of Sport and Exercise Physicians (ACSEP)
-   Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists (ANZCA)
-   Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists, Faculty of Pain
    Medicine
-   Australasian College of Dermatologists (ACD)
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists (RANZCR)
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and
    Gynaecologists (RANZCOG)
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists
    (RANZCO)
-   Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA)
-   College of Intensive Care Medicine of Australia and New Zealand
    (CICM)

If a college not listed above provides a 3D notification, do not return
it. Escalate to a PSO to review and update the above list.

Applications for specialist recognition under 3DB or 3E

Applications for specialist recognition are considered by the delegate
of the Chief Executive Medicare and the Minister for Health under
section 3DB (permanent residents or Australian citizens) or 3E
(temporary residents) of the Health Insurance Act 1973. The delegate
makes a determination and advises the applicant in writing of the
outcome.

The date of recognition may be a date in the past but cannot be earlier
than the date the medical practitioner satisfied the criteria for
recognition as a specialist or consultant physician.

The date Medicare billing can commence may not always be the date of
recognition as other factors must be taken into account. For example, if
a medical practitioner is an overseas trained doctor (OTD), they must
hold a valid section 19AB exemption to access Medicare benefits. Access
to Medicare benefits will be determined by the dates and locations
specified in the section 19AB exemption.

If a determination was made under section 3E, the medical practitioner
must advise Services Australia when they become a permanent resident or
Australian citizen. They need to re-apply for specialist recognition
under section 3DB.

Revoking recognition

A specialist or consultant physician may have their recognition revoked
for a variety of reasons. For example, where:

-   a written request is received from the person
-   the specialist or consultant physician ceases to be a medical
    practitioner as defined in the Health Insurance Act 1973
-   advice is received from the Australasian specialist medical college
-   the specialist or consultant physician was incorrectly assessed as
    being eligible for recognition or the determination was approved
    with the wrong specialty

Revoking recognition by written request

A recognised specialist or consultant physician may submit a written
request to have their recognition revoked. The revocation will take
effect from the date the request is received by Services Australia.
Recognition cannot be revoked from an earlier date.

Revoking specialist recognition means Services Australia no longer
recognises the medical practitioner as a specialist or consultant
physician for Medicare purposes.

Ceasing 3D recognition via an Australasian specialist medical college

An Australasian specialist medical college may advise the Chief
Executive Medicare in writing that a medical practitioner no longer
satisfies the criteria for recognition or has ceased to practise
medicine. Access to Medicare benefits will cease from the date Services
Australia receives the notification.

Appealing non-recognition under section 3D

Services Australia has no role in the decision making processes of the
Australasian specialist medical colleges and there are no appeal rights
with Services Australia. If a medical practitioner is not satisfied with
a decision made by the college they must contact the relevant college.

Appealing non-recognition under section 3DB or 3E

The Health Insurance Act 1973 makes no provision for the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal or any other tribunal to review determinations for
specialist recognition.

A medical practitioner who is dissatisfied with the outcome of their
recognition can make an application to the Federal Court under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977. However, a court
can only consider alleged legal errors in the decision making process
and does not have the power to change a Determination.

Backdating specialist recognition

Medical practitioners can request to have their specialist recognition
backdated. As specialist recognition is for the purpose of accessing
Medicare benefits. The medical practitioner will need to provide reasons
why they are seeking specialist recognition (for example, they have been
unable to claim Medicare) and provide evidence to support their request
(for example, evidence of Medicare claims being rejected).

The Resources page contains a list of medical specialist fellowships in
Australia, a link to contact details and the Application for recognition
as a Specialist or Consultant Physician form on the Services Australia
website.

Related links

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Section 19AB and health professionals in Medicare

Provider numbers issued via Health Professional Online Services

Dual recognition of health practitioners for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
