
Non-Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Miscellaneous Enquiries 012-18060501

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to do when a Service Officer receives an
enquiry unrelated to the PBS or for PBS information outside the Services
Australia authority approval process.

On this Page:

Types of non-PBS and miscellaneous enquiries

Prescribers and suppliers may call Services Australia enquiring about
medicines or policies not relating to the PBS, or for PBS information
outside Services Australia's authority approval process. For information
on Services Australia's approval process, see Authority approval
processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Repatriation PBS (RPBS) items

These items are approved by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA).

Special Access Scheme (SAS) items

These items are not registered for use in Australia by the Therapeutic
Goods Administration (TGA). These items are not PBS listed items. See
the Resources page for more information on SAS items.

State/Territory Health Departments

State/territory health departments have their own legislation and
policies for prescribing and supplying a medicine. Note: some
states/territories also require an authority from their health
department prior to prescribing certain medicines. As they are both
called an ‘authority’, it is sometimes confused with a PBS authority.

-   The PBS authority provides subsidy for the medicine
-   A state/territory authority refers to the legislation for
    prescribing certain medicines

Prescribers and suppliers must follow state/territory laws. Services
Australia only administer legislation in relation to the PBS, and do not
enforce state/territory laws. For example, state/territory health
departments administer the S100 Opiate Dependence program. They may also
have additional services such as free vaccinations and S100 co-payment
policies.

PBS Statistics

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) statistics and Repatriation
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme RPBS statistics can be located on the
Services Australia website.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website.

PBAC Outcomes

Information regarding the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee
(PBAC) outcomes and brief summaries of these outcomes can be located on
the PBS website.

The Resources page contains a link to the PBS website.

Compliance Issues

The Department of Health handles compliance issues in relation to the
PBS.

The Resources page contains a link to state and territory departments of
health.

The Resources page contains a link to the PBS website and contact
details for the various categories of Non-PBS and miscellaneous
enquiries.

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Health Professionals

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
