
Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03040010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about conducting searches for IHIs.

Calls about requesting an IHI

If a caller asks about getting an IHI, ask them if they are eligible for
Medicare or DVA.

If they are:

enrolled, perform public security check for Medicare – Medicare or DVA
eligible individuals and follow the ‘basic search’ to search for the
IHI. Once the consumer record is found and the caller has passed the
security check, their IHI may be given to them over the phone

not eligible for Medicare or DVA and haven’t applied for an IHI in the
past, direct the caller to:

-   myGov to apply for an IHI online, or
-   complete the Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier form
    (MS003)

not eligible for Medicare or DVA and have applied for an IHI, but
haven’t been advised what that IHI is, conduct a security check for
non-Medicare or DVA eligible individuals and follow the ‘detailed
search’ to search for the IHI. Once the consumer record is found and the
caller has passed the security check, their IHI may be given to them
over the phone

If a caller asks about getting a pseudonym IHI, tell them to complete
the Application to request a pseudonym Individual Healthcare Identifier
record form (MS005). They must already have an IHI to get a pseudonym
IHI.

For other questions about IHIs and the Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service, warm transfer to Tier 2 – HI Services team.

The Resources page has links to the forms.

IHI search results

Always search using Healthcare Identifiers in the Program field. When
the search returns:

-   an exact match to an existing consumer record, the IHI number,
    record status and address details display on the Personal Details
    screen
-   no match, a message stating no record was found is returned
-   50 or less possible matches, they all display for selection
-   more than 50 possible matches are found, a message displays to
    refine the search criteria

Basic search via CDMS for an IHI

When either of the below common ID numbers are known, a basic search in
CDMS is used to identify the individual's IHI:

-   Medicare card number
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) file number
-   Donor ID

If the caller doesn’t know their Medicare card number or their DVA file
number, or if they not eligible for Medicare or DVA, a detailed search
or address search must be conducted to find the individual’s IHI.

See also:

Security check and release of IHI – Medicare or DVA eligibility
individuals

Security check and release of IHI – non-Medicare or DVA eligible
individuals

Handle call from provider or authorised employee about Individual
Healthcare Identifier (IHI)

Detailed search in CDMS for an IHI

When an ID number is unavailable or unknown, conduct a detailed search
using demographic details.

Search should be conducted using family name, date of birth and ‘All’ in
the gender field.

If no matched consumers are found, or too many possible matches, add
first initial in the first name field and search again.

A broader search gives Service Officers the best possible chance of
finding a matched consumer. Formatting of a previously entered name may
make it more difficult to find a match.

See also:

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Handle call from provider or authorised employee about Individual
Healthcare Identifier (IHI)

Address search for an IHI

The address search is used when an exact match for an individual record
via any other means cannot be found.

The address search must not be used:

-   on a routine basis
-   in response to a telephone enquiry from a healthcare provider or
    authorised employee

See also: Handle call from provider or authorised employee about
Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI)

Search to register a new consumer

A Register Search is conducted if an IHI application form is being
processed, for a person who is not eligible for Medicare or a DVA
payment or benefit.

See also: Create Verified Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

The Resources page contains contact details and links to forms on the
Services Australia website.

Related links

Handle call from provider or authorised employee about Individual
Healthcare Identifier (IHI)

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Security checks and release of Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI)
information

Create Verified Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
