
Nuclear medicine credentialling for Medicare 012-42020050

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the credentialling of nuclear
medicine specialists and consultant physicians for Medicare purposes.

On this Page:

Nuclear medicine credentialling

Recognition as a consultant physician or specialist in nuclear medicine
does not automatically render the medical practitioner eligible to bill
Medicare for nuclear medicine items in the Medical Benefits Schedule.

The specialist or consultant physician must be recognised as a
credentialled nuclear medicine physician by the Joint Nuclear Medicine
Credentialling Accreditation Committee (JNMCAC).

Nuclear medicine credentialling application

Medical practitioners who are recognised specialists or consultant
physicians in nuclear medicine (for Medicare purposes) must apply for
credentialling through the Joint Nuclear Medicine Credentialling
Accreditation Committee (JNMCAC).

The JNMCAC advises Services Australia when credentialling is approved.
The Medicare Provider Eligibility and Accreditation section in Services
Australia:

-   updates the Provider Directory
-   writes to the specialist or consultant physician advising the
    effective start date of Medicare benefit eligibility to access the
    nuclear medicine items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule

The start date used is the date as advised by the JNMCAC. This can be a
date in the past, but cannot be a date prior to the date that specialist
recognition in nuclear medicine was granted.

Appeals of credentialling decision are managed by the JNMCAC. Services
Australia is not involved in the appeal process.

Application forms are available from the Australasian Association of
Nuclear Medicine Specialists (AANMS) website. See the Resources page for
a link to the website.

Medicare access and re-credentialling

The re-credentialling process occurs biannually. The Joint Nuclear
Medicine Credentialling Accreditation Committee (JNMCAC) provides an
updated list of credentialed nuclear medicine physicians to Services
Australia.

Failure to meet re-credentialling requirements results in the cessation
of the specialist or consultant physician's eligibility to access the
nuclear medicine items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule.

The Medicare Provider Eligibility and Accreditation section in Services
Australia notifies the specialist or consultant physician (in writing)
of the effective end date.

Enquiries

Further enquiries about nuclear medicine credentialling or appeal rights
should be directed to the Joint Nuclear Medicine Credentialling
Accreditation Committee (JNMCAC) Secretariat. See the Resources page for
a link to the Australasian Association of Nuclear Medicine Specialists
(AANMS) website, which contains the contact details.

Further enquiries about recording credentialling on the Provider
Directory should be directed to the Provider Eligibility and
Accreditation Section helpdesk in Services Australia.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration and the Australasian Association of Nuclear
Medicine Specialists (AANMS) website.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
