
Advanced breast biopsy instrumentation recognition for Medicare 012-42020020

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on advanced breast biopsy
instrumentation recognition for Medicare.

On this Page:

Eligibility for surgeons

A surgeon performing this procedure must have evidence of appropriate
training in a course approved by the Breast Section of the Royal
Australasian College of Surgeons, and have experience in the procedure.

A surgeon wanting to provide Medicare services under Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) items 31539 or 31545 should contact the Royal
Australasian College of Surgeons to request that the College advise
their eligibility in writing (via post, fax or email) to the Specialist
Recognition helpdesk.

The advice must be given by an authorised representative of the College
and state:

-   the full name of the surgeon
-   the surgeon's Medicare provider number
-   confirmation that the surgeon meets the skill requirements to
    perform the relevant items (31539 and 31545)
-   the date eligibility commences

Note:

-   access to the items is granted in accordance with the College advice
-   the commencement date of eligibility is the date advised by the
    College

Services Australia notifies the surgeon when the College advice is
received and their provider number details are updated to record
eligibility and the effective date.

Eligibility for radiologists

A radiologist who is eligible to provide this service must be identified
by the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists as
having sufficient training and experience in this procedure.

A radiologist wanting to provide Medicare services under Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) item 31542 should contact the Royal Australian
and New Zealand College of Radiologist to request that the College
advise their eligibility in writing (via post, fax or email) to the
Specialist Recognition helpdesk.

The advice must be given by an authorised representative of the College
and state:

-   the full name of the radiologist
-   the provider number of the radiologist
-   confirmation that the radiologist meets the skilled requirements to
    perform the relevant item (31542)
-   the date eligibility commences

Note:

-   access to the items is granted in accordance with the College advice
-   the commencement date of eligibility is the date advised by the
    College

Services Australia notifies the surgeon when the College advice is
received and their provider number details are updated to record
eligibility and the effective date.

Access to Medicare benefits

Eligibility enables payment of Medicare benefits for the relevant
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items. Further information about the
items and rules can be found in MBS Online.

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online.

Payment of Medicare benefits for these services is subject to the
medical practitioner being registered with the Medical Board of
Australia and satisfying any other legislative provisions that may apply
at the date of service.

See also: Provider registrations in PDS

Enquiries for assessing eligibility for Advanced Breast Biopsy Instrumentation

Enquiries about assessing eligibility for Advanced Breast Biopsy
Instrumentation should be directed to either:

-   The Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
-   The Royal Australasian College of Physicians

The Resources page contains links to these websites.

Recording eligibility for Advanced Breast Biopsy Instrumentation

Enquiries about recording eligibility for Advanced Breast Biopsy
Instrumentation should be directed to the Specialist Recognition
helpdesk.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration and external websites.

Related links

Provider registrations in PDS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
