
Diabetes educator services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) diabetes educator services programme for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

Diabetes educator services

DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the veteran
community) that covers diabetes education services provided to entitled
persons by registered diabetes educators. Diabetes educators are health
care providers who educate people with diabetes, their families and
appropriate support network about self-care management and related
issues. Diabetes educator services must be claimed in accordance with
the patient’s assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

Eligibility to receive Diabetes Educator services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
diabetes educator services based on the type of DVA health care card
they hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most diabetes educator services necessary to meet a clinical
need

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds diabetes educator services related to the card holder's
accepted disabilities only. Treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is started.

Patient Eligibility for VAP contains the steps to follow to verify a DVA
health card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting diabetes
educator services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their diabetes educator
service provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before
starting treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA diabetes educator services

Only a diabetes educator contracted with DVA as a participating DVA
provider and registered with Services Australia (they have a Medicare
provider number) at the time of the service is eligible to provide
services to eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to ‘Notes for Allied Health Providers
– Diabetes Educator’ on the DVA Website. This contains detailed
eligibility requirements and also information for diabetes educator
services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for diabetes educator services

The DVA diabetes educators Schedule of Fees contains a range of
consultation items available to eligible DVA health card holders for
both professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care facility or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range CD01-CD99.

The Resources page contains a link to the diabetes educators Schedule of
Fees.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Diabetes educator service providers may be required to seek prior
financial authorisation from DVA before providing certain diabetes
educator services. The fee schedules contain information on which items
require prior financial authorisation.

To request financial approval diabetes educator service providers must
contact DVA before administering services to be able to claim payment by
completing a Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form. The
Resources page has a link to the form on the DVA Website.

DVA diabetes educator services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims:

-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient. Subsequent consultations
    are to be claimed for ongoing treatment of a condition
-   Services that are rendered away from the provider’s rooms attract a
    loading in addition to the normal time-based fee. Only 1 loading per
    visit is permitted and it is expected that the provider will perform
    the evaluation of assessments in their rooms. The Resources page
    contains a link to the DVA diabetes educator services Fee Schedule
-   Treatment in residential aged care facilities (RACF) which requires
    a greater level of care and treatment in public hospitals requires
    prior approval. The Resources page contains a link to the DVA
    diabetes educator services Fee Schedule. See Prior Financial
    Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)
-   Treatment for White Card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    ‘Notes for diabetes educators’ available on the DVA Website

Claim lodgement information

DVA diabetes educator services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The
Resources page contains a link to claim choices for health professionals
on the Services Australia website.

Online claiming

Diabetes educator service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online. A
copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health card holder.
Diabetes educator service providers should be sure that they can, from
other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services
Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of treatment.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming via DVA
Webclaim. A copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health
card holder. Service providers should be sure they can, from other means
of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services Australia or DVA
for evidence of service and details of treatment.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA diabetic educator providers are required to lodge ‘Health
Practitioner Service Voucher’ and ‘Claim for Treatment Services Voucher’
forms. These fillable forms can be printed from the DVA Website. Service
providers can use their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if
they can provide the same level of information as required by the DVA
forms. After completion, service providers should post the forms to
Services Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the front door for all
VAP diabetes educator services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers
will help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Veterans’ Affairs
Website and question and answers for common enquiries relating to the
diabetes educator service.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Manual data entry for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP)

Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
