
Serious Scarcity Substitution Instruments (SSSIs) 012-21102849

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document describes Serious Scarcity Substitution Instruments
(SSSIs). It explains when they can be enacted and the circumstances
where a community pharmacy can supply substitution.

What is a serious scarcity of a medicine?

The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) can declare a serious
scarcity of a medicine when either or both of the following apply:

-   the supply of the medicine in Australia is not meeting demand
-   there is an imminent risk that supply of the medicine in Australia
    will not or will not be likely to meet demand

Supply disruptions do not need to affect the whole of Australia for a
serious scarcity to be declared.

What is a SSSI?

When the Therapeutical Goods Administration (TGA) declares a ‘serious
scarcity’ of a medicine, an SSSI is made. It specifies the medicine(s)
that pharmacists can dispense in substitution for the scarce medicine.

SSSIs allow approved community pharmacies to substitute specific
medicines without prior approval from the prescriber. Pharmacists need
to notify the prescriber in writing within 72 hours after the
substitution. Note: SSSIs do not include approved hospital pharmacies.

SSSIs are enacted when there is a:

-   significant risk for Australian patients if they are unable to
    access the scarce medicine, and
-   there is a suitable substitute medicine available

An SSSI specifies when the substitution is permitted. SSSIs are for a
set time period though they may be revoked sooner.

Details of the substitution are drafted into a legislative instrument,
the SSSI, and published on the Federal Register of Legislation. Each
SSSI is published as a separate legislative instrument. For more
information see the References page.

What type of substitutions can be approved in an SSSI?

Substitute medicines for a scarce medicine will usually be:

-   a lower or higher strength of the same medicine
-   other forms of the medicine containing the same active ingredient
    (for example, a capsule instead of a tablet, or a syrup or
    suspension)
-   where a fixed-dose combination may not be available but the
    medicines that make up the combination can be dispensed individually
-   dispensing an immediate-release form instead of a
    sustained/extended-release, and vice versa
-   the same active ingredient but with a different salt

Note: Only Schedule 4 substances can be considered as a substitute for a
scarce medicine

See the Resources page for a link to the substitutable PBS item codes
listed on the PBS Schedule website

SSSI conditions and requirements

A pharmacist may only offer a substitutable medicine that is specified
in the SSSI. They must ensure all specified circumstances and general
circumstances in the SSSI are met before dispensing the substitute
medicine.

Some of the general permitted circumstances in the SSSI may include, but
are not limited to:

-   the patient or carer has evidence of a valid prescription for the
    scarce medicine, unless otherwise permitted by law
-   the pharmacist does not have access to the scarce medicine
-   the prescriber has not indicated on the prescription for the scarce
    medicine that substitution is not permitted
-   the pharmacist has exercised professional judgement and determined
    that the patient is suitable to receive the substitutable medicine
-   the patient or carer has consented to receiving the substitutable
    medicine
-   the total quantity of the substitutable medicine supplied by the
    pharmacist must be equivalent to the quantity that would have been
    dispensed for the scarce medicine for the prescribed duration and
    dose regimen
-   the pharmacist makes a record of dispensing the substitutable
    medicine in substitution of the scarce medicine at the time of
    dispensing
-   the pharmacist has an established procedure to notify the prescriber
    of the substitution after dispensing the substitutable medicine

More information about SSSIs

-   the patient or carer must consent to the substitution. The
    pharmacist must inform them of any higher charges that may apply for
    the substituted medicine
-   only Schedule 4 substances can be considered for substitution.
    Controlled medicines such as narcotics, opioids and stimulants are
    Schedule 8 substances and cannot be considered for substitution
-   if the pharmacist has the scarce medicine in stock they are not
    permitted to dispense the substitutable medicine
-   SSSIs are valid in all state and territory jurisdictions. The SSSI
    allows pharmacists to dispense the substitutable medicine under the
    conditions described in the SSSI. This is even if the state or
    territory legislation would normally prevent this from occurring
-   no substitutions are permitted if the prescriber has indicated on
    the prescription ‘brand substitution not permitted’. Patients must
    be referred back to the prescriber
-   substitutions are not available when dispensing from medication
    charts in residential aged care facilities (RACF)
-   the pharmacist must retain the information used to support the
    decision to supply the substitute benefit. The specifics of the
    record keeping requirements are specified in the FAQ on the PBS
    Schedule website
-   the pharmacist must have a process in place to inform the prescriber
    of the substitution as soon as possible after dispensing the
    substitutable medicine. Note: the PBS Schedule website states the
    prescriber must be notified in writing with 72 hours of the
    substitution
-   the quantity of the substituted medicine may need be altered, as
    appropriate. This is to ensure the patient receives the same amount
    of medicine as originally prescribed

Pharmacists, and any other interested parties, can keep informed of new
SSSIs as they are published by subscribing to:

-   PBS News on the PBS Schedule website
-   TGA Medicine shortages alert service

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) are also available on both the TGA and
PBS Schedule websites. See the Resources page for links

Electronic prescriptions and substitutable medicines

Electronic prescriptions are not different from the paper prescriptions.
Pharmacists are able to annotate a prescription electronically as part
of a dispensing activity. Any dispensing pharmacist will be able to see
the original prescription. Annotations from other pharmacists and
details of the last prescription dispensed are also shown.

PBS Online claiming and substitutable medicines

When the SSSI substitutable medicine is listed on the PBS Schedule the
substitution can be supplied as a PBS benefit. If the substitutable
medicine is not listed on the PBS Schedule it must be supplied as a
private prescription.

Depending on the restriction level in the PBS Schedule, PBS Online
claims may apply authority reason codes to the prescription in the
pharmacy online claim.

See the Resources page for possible Online claiming scenarios

Related links

Drug stock availability

Online claiming for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
