
Teaching Payment Claims for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) 012-10110000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Teaching Payments Claims process.

Aims of the Payment

Practices may give teaching sessions to medical students.

A payment is made to a practice to:

-   encourage general practices to provide teaching sessions to
    undergraduate and graduate medical students preparing to enter the
    Australian medical profession
-   compensate for the lower number of consultations

Quality teaching will make sure practitioners have the training and work
experience needed when entering the Australian medical profession.

A practitioner should do normal consultations when a student is present.

Claiming

A practice does not need to apply to participate in this incentive but
must be approved for the Practice Incentives Program.

A practice can claim a Teaching Payment through one of the below:

-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) up to and on the relevant
    point-in-time date
-   the Practice Incentives Program Teaching Payment claim (IP006) form.
    This must be submitted at least 7 days before the relevant
    point-in-time date

A practice can only claim a maximum of 2 sessions per GP daily. The
number of sessions claimed per student is not limited.

Do not process incorrect or incomplete claim forms.

Do not complete missing details on behalf of the practice.

An old version of the IP006 form is acceptable if the teaching sessions
were before 1 February 2019. The teaching payment FAQs on the Resources
page has more information.

The Resources page contains FAQs and links to the form, guidelines and
letters.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
