
Provider Registration for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to provider registration for
Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

Statutory registration of providers

A majority of health professionals that register with Services Australia
as Medicare providers are automatically registered with Department of
Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) through a process known as ‘statutory
registration’.

The following providers must register directly with DVA:

-   Neuropsychologist
-   Social worker (general)
-   Optical dispenser
-   Lymphoedema provider

All other health professionals can apply to become a DVA service
provider by contacting Services Australia, see Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Note: Where the VPUI screen displays a Medicare qualification only, the
provider’s DVA specialty code will need to be updated in order for DVA
claims to be processed.

The Resources page contains links to the Veterans' Affairs Processing
(VAP) index for VAP codes.

Completing a provider specialty code update request

For most provider updates, complete a provider update request form and
follow the procedures for completing a provider specialty code update
request.

For Local Medical Officer (LMO) provider updates:

-   complete a Provider update request form. See Resources for a link to
    the form
-   send it to the Provider Services Communication email box, with 'VAP
    (site) LMO Provider update request - Prov No' in the Subject field.
    For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

When a provider has claimed using a provider number that does not have
the required specialty code check for the following:

-   another provider number, belonging to the same provider, has the
    required specialty code
-   the date of service is not prior to Effective From (EFF From) field
    on VPUI for the provider number being updated
-   the date of service is not prior to the earliest specialty codes
    applicable date
-   the provider location is in the same state as the provider number
    with the required specialty code

If all of the above conditions are met the provider details can be
updated.

The Process page includes instructions on updating provider details.

If any of the above conditions are not met and the error message is:

-   4-NOT SPEC or 4-NOT RECG, reject the service with RSN code S 141
-   4-NOT REG, reject the service with RSN code S 338

If the request is for a community nursing provider or an online claim,
refer the query to Provider Services Communication email with 'VAP
(site) CN Speciality Code Update Request' in the subject line, for
forwarding to the VAP Helpdesk.

When the provider update is complete, the Service Officer will be
notified via email and the claim can then be processed.

PRO must be removed from the VCEI enquiry screen prior to processing the
claim.

The Resources page contains a link to the Provider update request form
and additional information relating to specialty codes or claim types.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
