-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for provider eligibility for R-type
diagnostic imaging services for Medicare, including assessing and
processing a Remote Area Exemption (RAE) request from a medical
practitioner.

On this Page:

Remote area exemptions for medical practitioners

This exempts a medical practitioner from the referral requirements of
R-type diagnostic imaging services where the application of those
requirements would cause a patient:

-   physical, or
-   financial hardship and the location is in a remote area

These can only be approved for a medical practitioner. This include a
general practitioner (who holds specialist recognition in the specialty
of General Practice) but not a specialist or consultant physician.

Remote area exemptions for medical practitioners relate only to R-type
diagnostic imaging services. Note: R-type services generally require a
referral.

Definition of a remote area

A remote area is:

more than 30 kilometres (by road) from a:

-   hospital that provides radiology services under the direction of a
    specialist in the specialty of diagnostic radiology
-   free-standing radiology facility under the direction of a specialist
    in the specialty of diagnostic radiology

where the facilities for rendering R-Type diagnostic imaging services in
the area in which the practice is situated are such that patients in the
area would suffer physical or financial hardship

Note: this includes facilities provided by practitioners visiting the
area regularly.

Application for a remote area exemption

A medical practitioner may apply for a remote area exemption by
completing the Application for Remote Area Exemption for 'R Type'
Diagnostic Imaging Services for Medical Practitioner form available from
the Services Australia website. The Resources page contains a link to
this form.

A remote area exemption is practice specific and recorded at the
practice location in the mainframe system and does not appear on the
Provider Directory.

Date of effect of a remote area exemption

A remote area exemption cannot be granted from a date earlier than the
date the application is received by Services Australia and is valid for
either:

-   the period the medical practitioner is practising at the practice
    location
-   a maximum period of 3 years, unless revoked by the Minister for
    Health or their authorised delegate in Services Australia

Refusal of exemption application

The remote area exemption application is considered to have been refused
by the Minister for Health when a period of 60 days has elapsed since
the lodgement of the application, where any of the following have
occurred:

-   no request for further information made
-   a decision has not been made
-   a decision made not to grant an exemption and the medical
    practitioner has not been advised

The applicant may appeal the decision to refuse the application to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

Exemption Renewals

A medical practitioner can apply for renewal of their remote area
exemption any time within the 6 months before its expiry.

Access to Medicare benefits

A Medicare benefit is not payable for an R-type diagnostic imaging
service under a remote area exemption unless the practitioner
participates in an approved radiology program run by the Royal
Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) or the Australian
College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM). These programs are known
as Quality Assurance and Continuing Medical Education (QA & CME).

The RACGP or ACRRM notify Services Australia when a medical practitioner
has either:

-   not met the QA & CME requirements
-   chooses not to participate in an approved radiology program

Note: the RACGP or ACRRM advice means that the medical practitioner will
not be able to access Medicare benefits under the remote area exemption.

When the RACGP or ACRRM advise Services Australia that the medical
practitioner is no longer participating in their radiology program,
Services Australia writes to the medical practitioner (giving at least
14 days' notice) to advise that their Medicare eligibility under the
remote area exemption will cease.

See also:

Provider registrations in PDS

Enquiries

Radiology QA & CME program

Direct enquiries about the radiology Quality Assurance & Continuing
Medical Education (QA & CME) program to either:

-   The Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM)
-   The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP)

The Resources page contains links to these websites with relevant
contact details.

Applying for Remote Area Exemptions and registering QA & CME
participation

Enquiries about applying for Remote Area Exemptions and registering QA &
CME participation should be directed to the Medicare Provider
Registration Tier 2 support.

Professional supervision for ultrasound services

Certain ultrasound services, specifically R-type eligible services, are
not eligible for a Medicare rebate unless the diagnostic imaging
procedure is performed:

-   under the professional supervision of a specialist (in a specialty
    other than general practice) or consultant physician, or
-   a medical practitioner who attended at least 50 diagnostic imaging
    services between 1 September 1997 and 31 August 1999

The purpose of professional supervision is to ensure ultrasound services
rendered are of acceptable quality.

Medical practitioners who attended at least 50 diagnostic imaging
services between 1 September 1997 and 31 August 1999 are identified on
the Provider Directory.

See also: Provider registrations in PDS

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration, external websites and the Application for Remote
Area Exemption for 'R Type' Diagnostic Imaging Services for Medical
Practitioner form.

Related links

Provider registrations in PDS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
