
Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA System) 012-20040925

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers processing,
amending and taking enquiries for Authority approval requests in the
Online PBS Authorities system (OPA system).

Telephone Authority approval requests

These requests are processed in the OPA system for all PBS listed items.

See also: Process telephone Authority approval application.

Written authority approval requests

These requests are processed in the OPA system for all PBS listed items.

Approved prescribers can choose the following options:

-   by mail, and
-   via Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) Secure Form Upload

Common reasons include:

-   for some items it is mandatory to apply in writing
-   the request is not urgent because the patient has enough medication
-   it is easy to mail or use HPOS

See also: Processing written Authority approval requests.

Amending an Authority request

Service Officers must not amend Authority requests for:

-   Complex Authority Required (CAR) items for programs staff have not
    received training in – contact the CAR team for assistance
-   Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) items – these should not be
    processed in the OPA system. Contact Repatriation Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (RPBS) Authorities. See VAPAC Authority approvals –
    RPBS Schedule

Acceptable situations where an Authority request can be amended in the
OPA system are:

-   completing saved applications
-   correcting errors made during processing written applications
-   amending a written Authority request that was previously rejected
    and then resubmitting for approval
-   adding or amending information in the Authority and/or Patient
    Comments field
-   issues with the prescription (e.g. did not print) and a new approval
    has been granted
-   assisting a prescriber who has called about a rejection when using
    the OPA system

The Process page has information on amending Authority approvals.

Enquiries from Approved prescribers about the OPA System

Approved prescribers can contact the agency for help with:

-   accessing PRODA, HPOS and the OPA system
-   understanding and resolving Reason Codes on approved or rejected
    Authority requests
-   the items available to request through the OPA system

The Resources page has information to help Approved prescribers.

The Resources page contains links to the PBS Reason Code Maintenance
System, User Interface tips and hints, external websites and contact
details.

Related links

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Process telephone Authority approval application

Processing written Authority approval requests

Record comments for Authority approval application

Dosage calculators and charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Handle ‘too soon’ Authority prescription

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
