
Hospital Provider Numbers (HPN) 012-19041854

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about Hospital Provider Numbers.

On this Page:

Hospital Provider Numbers

Section 121-5(6) of the Private Health Insurance Act 2007 (the Act)
enables the Minister for Health to grant (or revoke) a declaration that
a facility is a public or private hospital for the purposes of the Act.

Facilities apply directly to the Department of Health and Aged Care who
are responsible for any assessment of information provided under their
own processes, policies and guidelines to ensure the facility meets
essential conditions.

Once a facility is declared a hospital, Health email Services Australia
requesting a Hospital Provider Number (HPN) is allocated. These requests
are processed in National Office and the provider number is provided to
Health.

HPNs are used by:

-   the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Repatriation
    Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS)
-   the Department of Veterans’ Affairs during claims processing
-   private health insurers/simplified billing system during claims
    processing
-   the ECLIPSE system (an extension of Medicare Online Claiming) for
    in-hospital claiming

More information about the process of becoming a declared hospital and
for a current listing of Commonwealth declared hospitals refer to
Health’s website Hospitals page on the Resources page.

All requests from Health (for new, changes to or revocations of existing
HPNs) are received, assessed and actioned by the Provider Eligibility
and Accreditation Section in the Medicare & Veterans’ Branch. The
Provider Eligibility team will liaise with other stakeholders in the
management of each individual request, as there may be impacts on other
areas (for example. PBS).

All enquiries regarding hospital provider numbers should be forwarded to
the National Office (Tier 3) Helpdesk. The Resources page provides
contact details.

HPN registrations

Requests for new HPNs, changes to HPNs or revocations of existing HPNs
are received directly from the Department of Health and Aged Care and
are only processed by the Provider Eligibility and Accreditation Section
in the Medicare and Veterans’ Health Branch. There is generally a 5 to
10 day turn around on processing of requests.

All enquiries regarding hospital provider numbers should be forwarded to
the National Office Helpdesk.

The Resources page contains contact details and a links to the
Department of Health and Aged Care website and National Office Helpdesk.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
