
Mechanical Thrombectomy - recognition and removal 012-18062151

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition and removal of
specialists or consultant physicians as eligible to provide Mechanical
Thrombectomy for Medicare purposes.

Recognition of Training in Mechanical Thrombectomy

Recognition of a specialist or consultant physician as trained in
Mechanical Thrombectomy acknowledges that training and ongoing education
are important elements of maintaining high quality standards within
Mechanical Thrombectomy services.

Access to Medicare

Recognition for Medicare purposes as a specialist or consultant
physician trained in Mechanical Thrombectomy allows the medical
practitioner to access relevant items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS).

Continued access to relevant MBS items requires the medical practitioner
to continue to meet the eligibility requirements as detailed in the
Health Insurance (General Medical Services Table) Regulations 2021.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online. The References
page contains links to the legislation and determination.

Eligibility for Recognition

In order to be recognised as trained in Mechanical Thrombectomy for
Medicare purposes, a specialist or consultant physician must be
recognised by the Conjoint Committee for Recognition of Training in
Interventional Neuroradiology (CCINR).

Application for Recognition

Specialists or consultant physicians recognised by the CCINR do not need
to complete an application for recognition for Medicare purposes.
Services Australia is advised directly regarding a medical
practitioner’s recognition of training in Mechanical Thrombectomy by the
CCINR.

Legislation Recognising Mechanical Thrombectomy

Recognition of a specialist or consultant physician as trained in
Mechanical Thrombectomy is made by the Chief Executive Medicare (or
their delegate) under the Health Insurance (General Medical Services
Table) Regulations 2021 made under the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Recognition is recorded on the medical practitioner’s stem in the
Provider Directory System (PDS).

The References page contains links to the legislation and determination.

Removal of Recognition

A medical practitioner may ask to no longer be recognised for Medicare
purposes as trained in Mechanical Thrombectomy by making a written
request to the agency. The agency will also remove a medical
practitioner’s recognition of training in Mechanical Thrombectomy if
notified by the CCINR that the practitioner no longer meets Medicare
eligibility requirements.

Disputes Regarding the Removal of Recognition

If a specialist or consultant physician wishes to dispute the removal of
their recognition as trained in Mechanical Thrombectomy, they should be
directed to contact the CCINR.

The Resources page contains contact information for the CCINR.

Application/Removal Enquiries

Direct enquiries about processing an application for recognition/removal
to the Provider Registration team.

Continuing Professional Development Enquiries

Direct enquiries about continuing professional development to the CCINR.

The Resources page contains contact information for the CCINR.

Disclosure of information/Privacy Incidents

The agency has the responsibility to maintain records relating to
personal and business information. People provide this information with
the understanding that the agency will protect this from unauthorised
access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to remain
confident that the agency will protect their information and comply with
the privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by the agency is
inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by the agency is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to the agency's Privacy and Secrecy
page.

The Resources page contains contact details, internal and external
website links and example documents.

Related links

Health Professional Online Services

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
