
Amend Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03110040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the amendment of a healthcare
organisation record, including change of ownership, replacing the
Responsible Officer (RO) for a seed organisation and adding or removing
an Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) for a seed or network
organisation in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Online application

An organisation can amend HPI-O organisational and personnel details
through Health Professional Online Services (HPOS).

For online processes, see Process organisation change of ownership in
the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Manual application

If an applicant is unable to amend organisation details online, they can
request the Application to amend a healthcare organisation record form
(HW037) and apply manually. Download the HW037 via the intranet and send
to the applicant.

If an applicant is unable to replace a RO or add or remove an OMO for an
organisation online, they can request the Application to replace a
Responsible Officer or add/remove an Organisation Maintenance Officer
for an organisation form (HW040). Download the HW040 via the intranet
and send to the applicant.

See Handle call for request for HI Service hard copy forms.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Business Register
(ABR) and the organisation type reference guide.

Amend HPI-O record

A RO or an OMO can request an amendment to the organisation details for
a seed or network HPI-O in their hierarchy. The seed or network HPI-O
must already be registered in the HI Service. The OMO is the registered
individual responsible for ensuring completeness of the organisation
record details in the HI Service. A RO can also amend or enquire about
the HPI-O record they are linked to.

The applicant can use Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) and
Business to Business (B2B) to make changes. While there are manual
application forms (HW037 and HW040) to amend HPI-O details, the
preferred option is digital. The online application and manual
application forms are processed via the eHealth Program (EHP) system.

For every transaction request in the EHP via a Service Officer, details
of the person making the request must be entered. In addition to the
Service Officer ID details, the details of the requestor are also
recorded.

Before a Service Officer can complete this process the below must be
provided:

-   relevant information from HPOS application form about the change, or
-   a completed Application to amend a healthcare organisation record
    (HW037) form
-   Security check for the RO or OMO requesting the amendment

If a HPI-O record has:

an activity status of 'Active', 'Deactivated' or 'Retired', the Service
Officer can update all details relating to the HPI-O record except for
the HPI-O

been:

-   resolved as part of duplicate or replica processing, the
    organisation details cannot be updated
-   recorded in the Healthcare Provider Directory (HPD), any changes to
    the HPI-O record are also reflected there

An organisation can request to amend their name and Australian Business
Number (ABN) without a new HPI-O being issued. The organisation name can
also be amended via HPOS or manual application form.

Note: if the organisation name that is changing has been previously
verified via the Evidence of Identity (EOI) and authority to act
documentation, updated business EOI and authority to act is required.

Process to amend a healthcare organisation record

Details may be updated for a seed or network organisation or as part of
a 'simple' change of ownership or ABN/ACN change. For a change of
ownership, the online application requires evidence of authority to
commit and change of ownership documents to be uploaded. Similarly,
manual application forms (HW037 and HW040) must be supported with
required documents from the applicant (EOI and/or authority to act) per
change of ownership policy.

Process to replace a RO or add/remove an OMO for a healthcare organisation

The online application or HW040 form may be used to:

-   replace a RO. Evidence of the RO's authority to act on behalf of the
    seed organisation must be supplied with the online application or
    HW040 form
-   add/remove an OMO

The Resources page contains information on how to check a submitted
Application to Amend a healthcare organisation record form (HW037) for
completeness before processing and a link for information about HPOS.

Related links

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
organisation

Handle 'Act for' call in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
