
Optometrist - provider eligibility and registration 012-19053131

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for optometrists.

Optometrists

An optometrist is an eye doctor who is able to examine, diagnose, treat,
and manage diseases and disorders of the eye and visual system and are
considered the primary eye care practitioner.

These eye doctors, referred to as doctors of optometry (OD), also
prescribe eyeglasses and contact lenses.

Note: An Optometrist differs from an Ophthalmologist who is a medical
doctor with fellowship of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College
of Ophthalmologists. An Ophthalmologist is recognised as a Specialist
for Medicare purposes.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to the Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra). The Resources page has the
contact details.

Medicare eligibility and registration

Applicants must:

-   have current registration to practise optometry with the Optometry
    Board of Australia. This is a board supported by the Australian
    Health Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra)
-   provide a copy of the Ahpra registration certificate with an initial
    application for a provider number

Registrations are renewed annually on 30 November.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line, managed by Medicare Provider
Services (MPS), is used as the front door for all enquiries relating to
the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer (SO). These
SOs escalate complex enquiries to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) who
will liaise with a Programme Officer (PO) if required. Enquiries
requiring further legislative or policy advice are escalated to the
Provider Eligibility and Accreditation team in National Office.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, useful contacts,
and links to external websites.

Related links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Optical services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prescriber number for health professionals in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
