
Mental Health Skills Training (MHST) for medical practitioners 012-18110916

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition of additional
mental health training in Mental Health Skills Training (MHST).

Mental Health Skills Training (MHST)

MHST helps health professionals to further develop and improve their
skills in diagnosing, treating and referring patients with mental health
issues to appropriate services. It provides the skills and knowledge to
assess, treat, plan and review issues commonly presented in general
practice.

Health professionals who complete this training are able to claim MBS
items for the preparation of General Practice Mental Health Treatment
Plans.

Recognition of a health professional’s additional training in MHST
acknowledges that specialised training is an important element of
maintaining high quality standards in the provision of mental health
treatment plans.

Eligibility for Recognition of Mental Health Skills Training

In order for a health professional to be recognised as trained in the
provision of MHST the health professional must have been accredited as
having successfully completed MHST by the General Practice Mental Health
Standards Collaboration (GPMHSC).

Health professionals practicing as specialists and consultant physicians
are not eligible for recognition.

Access to Medicare

Recognition as a medical health professional trained in MHST for
Medicare purposes allows the health professional to access relevant MHST
items in the MBS.

Continued access to relevant Medicare benefits as a medical health
professional trained in MHST will require the health professional to
continue to meet the eligibility requirements as detailed in the Health
Insurance (General Medical Services Table) Regulations 2018.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The References page contains a link to the regulation.

Application for Recognition

Health professionals who have been accredited as having successfully
completed MHST by the GPMHSC do not need to submit an individual
application. The GPMHSC will inform Services Australia that their
training has been completed.

The Resources page contains contact information for the GPMHSC.

Legislation Recognising Focussed Psychological Strategies

Recognition of a health professional as trained in MHST is made by the
Chief Executive Medicare (or their delegate) under the Health Insurance
(General Medical Services Table) Regulations 2018 and Health Insurance
(Section 3C General Medical Services – Other Medical Practitioner)
Determination 2018 made under the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Recognition is recorded on the medical health professional’s stem on the
Provider Directory System (PDS).

The References page contains a link to the regulation.

Removal of Recognition

A health professional may ask to no longer be recognised as trained in
MHST for Medicare purposes by making a written request to Services
Australia. Services Australia will also remove a health professional’s
recognition of training in MHST if notified by the GPMHSC that the
health professional no longer meets Medicare eligibility requirements.

Disputes Regarding the Removal of Recognition

If a health professional wishes to dispute the removal of their
recognition in MHST, they should be directed to contact the GPMHSC.

The Resources page contains contact information for the GPMHSC.

Application/Removal Enquiries

Direct enquiries about processing an application for recognition or
processing a removal request should be made to the Provider Registration
team.

Disclosure of Information/Privacy Incidents

Services Australia has the responsibility to maintain records relating
to personal and business information. People provide this information
with the understanding that Services Australia will protect this from
unauthorised access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to
remain confident that Services Australia will protect their information
and comply with the privacy provisions of the various legislation it
administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by Services Australia
is inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by Services Australia is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia's Privacy and
Secrecy page.

The Resources page contains links to the:

-   Useful Contact Information details for Medicare Provider
    Registration and National Office Helpdesk
-   Provider Registration letters, Privacy and Secrecy intranet page
-   Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Online
-   General Practice Mental Health Standards Collaboration (GPMHSC). and
-   Department of Health and Aged Care websites

Related links

Non-Directive Pregnancy Support Counselling (PSC) – medical
practitioners

Better Access Initiative under Medicare

Focussed psychological strategies for health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
