
Ulcerative colitis Program in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-18051140

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details of PBS-subsidised biological agents for
patients with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis (UC).

Ulcerative colitis and listing dates

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in which
the lining of the large intestine (colon or bowel) and the rectum become
inflamed.

Listing dates are:

-   infliximab - 1 December 2014
-   vedolizumab - 1 August 2015
-   adalimumab - 1 December 2016
-   golimumab - 1 June 2018
-   tofacitinib - 1 July 2021

For more information, see Written Authority Required Drugs.

Treatment specifics

Acute severe ulcerative colitis in hospital

Infliximab i.v can be prescribed for patients as a 3 dose course in the
acute severe setting in hospital (first dose is provided by the
hospital). This is an Authority Required (Streamlined) listing for
public and private hospital patients. The requirements for this
authority are not the same as for the moderate to severe program.

Prescribers may want their patient to continue treatment under the
moderate to severe restriction as there is no continuing available for
acute severe ulcerative colitis (UC).

Prescribers can complete an initial application form for patients who
have received PBS-subsidised acute severe treatment in the last 4 months
providing they can demonstrate that the patient is currently responding
to treatment.

Patient baselines

When a patient qualifies for treatment they will have a defined level of
disease activity. This level, once measured becomes the patient’s
baseline.

For ulcerative colitis, patients qualify on either a Mayo or partial
Mayo score as adults or Paediatric Ulcerative Colitis Activity Index
(PUCAI) if they are paediatric patients. These scores are also used to
demonstrate a response to treatment. The score required to demonstrate
the response to treatment is a standard score and is not impacted by the
entry score.

Enquiries

Transfer enquiries about prescription arrangements to the PBS Complex
Drugs Programs team and choose the option relevant to the condition
treated.

The Resources page contains links to application forms, contact details,
item and restriction codes, PBS treatment and frequency codes, the PBS
schedule and the Services Australia website.

Related links

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process telephone Authority approval application

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Processing Written Authority Required Listings

Written Authority Required Drugs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
