
Process telephone Authority approval application 012-63020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for telephone Authority approval
applications via the Mainframe system.

Telephone Authority approval via the Mainframe system

The Mainframe system can only be used by:

-   Staff who are proficient and
-   has Mainframe access

The Mainframe system is only to be used in the following scenarios:

-   the Online PBS Authorities system (OPA system) is down
-   processing “balance of supply” telephone authority approvals for
    Growth Hormone items for paediatric patients
-   processing “increased quantities” telephone authority approvals for
    streamlined item trastuzumab

If there is a system outage, follow the process in Handle system outages
in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

For the process for telephone Authority approval applications via the
OPA system, please refer to Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
Authorities System (OPA System).

Handling of sensitive issues

A sensitive issue can arise when an approved prescriber is required to
provide the medical condition/indication being treated over the phone in
the presence of their patient. This may create embarrassment or make the
patient uneasy.

Examples of medication that can cause sensitive situations for the
approved prescriber or the patient may include medicines for the
treatment of:

-   cancer
-   mental illness, for example schizophrenia
-   infectious conditions, for example genital herpes

Sensitive issue guidelines

The following guidelines are intended to minimise the sensitivity for
approved prescribers stating medical conditions/indications in the
presence of their patient.

Where an approved prescriber suggests that they are unwilling to state
the indication over the phone, Service Officers can prompt the approved
prescriber with the indication and ask the approved prescriber to
confirm with a simple 'Yes' or 'No' response.

It is up to Service Officers to exercise their judgement when processing
these applications.

Telephone approval for an authority item

An approved prescriber can obtain telephone approval for an authority
item by telephoning Services Australia.

Telephone request for a streamlined authority item

An approved prescriber may request a telephone approval for a
streamlined authority item by telephoning Services Australia.

The Process page, Table 1 contains procedures to follow when an approved
prescriber requests approval of a streamlined authority item.

The Resources page has:

-   a link to the Services Australia website for health professionals
    contact information, and
-   Medicare letters and electronic messaging

Related links

Amend authority approval application

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Handle system outages in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
