
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for the QCS.

Quarterly Confirmation Statement process

Practices approved for WIP - Practice stream should get their QCS by the
15th day of the point-in-time month. The QCS shows all details on the
practice profile.

A practice must review the information on each page of the QCS and
confirm their practice details to continue receiving payments. This
includes eligibility for:

-   WIP
-   Health Professional/s hours

A practice can get and confirm their QCS:

through Health Professional Online Services (HPOS):

-   if the practice’s online subscriptions is set to 'Access Online'.
    Note: most changes made through HPOS are effective immediately. They
    can be made up to, and on the relevant point-in-time date

by mail:

-   if the practice’s online subscriptions is set to ‘receive printed
    copy via mail’
-   if submitted at least 7 days before the relevant point-in-time date

On receipt of the QCS, the practice must:

check that the practice details on the QCS are correct

confirm the actual average weekly hours for each eligible health
professional for the relevant payment reference period. The hours must:

-   be clear and legible, and
-   contain a decimal point (for example, 47.5) or colon (for example
    47:30)

submit the QCS via HPOS or sign the declaration page and return by fax
or email

Only the practice weekly hours and declaration pages need to be
submitted. If there are changes to practice details, the practice must
also submit the relevant page/s.

The practice payments will be automatically put on hold if a practice
does not confirm their QCS by the relevant point-in-time date. Once the
QCS has been confirmed, the practice payments will be released in a
fortnightly payment run.

Health professional weekly hours contains more information about:

-   payment calculations
-   practice requirements when employing an enrolled nurse but not a
    registered nurse, and
-   how practices can amend health professional details for previous
    quarters

See also: Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Changes to the practice details

A practice can make changes to the practice details on the QCS.

The Resources page contains a list of acceptable changes.

The Resources page contains:

-   information about acceptable and unacceptable changes on the QCS
-   links to the conversion table - decimal hours to minutes
-   forms
-   letters
-   useful contact information, and
-   guidelines

Related links

Forms and letters for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Health professional weekly hours in the WIP – Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

Online Services for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
