
Prescriptions and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-60020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding prescriptions, their use
and restrictions and their role within the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS).

On this Page:

Prescriptions

A prescription is a medication order that is written by a medical
practitioner, dental practitioner, optometrist, nurse practitioner or
midwife, and dispensed by a pharmacist or an approved medical
practitioner.

Electronic Prescriptions

An electronic prescription is a medication order in an approved
electronic form generated by a medical practitioner, dental
practitioner, optometrist, nurse practitioners or midwife, and dispensed
by a pharmacist or an approved medical practitioner.

See also, Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Electronic Prescriptions.

Prescribing rules

Under the National Health Act and Regulations, there are a number of
requirements relating to the prescribing of pharmaceutical benefits:

-   The prescription must be written in ink or ballpoint pen in the
    prescriber's own handwriting or printed by computer on approved
    stationery. Medical practitioners who have obtained approval to
    record prescriptions in other than their own handwriting must
    endorse the prescriptions section 40(1)(c) approval obtained or Reg
    40(1)(c)
-   The prescription must be endorsed PBS
-   The prescription must be in duplicate and the duplicate/Medicare
    copy identified as such
-   The prescriber's name and address must be quoted on the
    prescription, and it is mandatory for dental practitioners,
    optometrists, nurse practitioners and midwives to also quote their
    prescriber number
-   The prescription must state the name and address of the person for
    whom the pharmaceutical benefit is to be supplied. A prescription
    can only be written for the treatment of the person named on the
    prescription
-   The prescription must provide enough details to completely identify
    the item, that is, name, form, strength, dosage instructions and
    quantity
-   The prescription must specify the date on which it is written and
    must be signed by the prescriber
-   For computer generated prescriptions the prescriber must sign both
    the original and duplicate copies
-   Computer generated prescriptions must be in approved format and on
    paper supplied by Services Australia
-   Computer-generated prescriptions must also include the Active
    Ingredient

For prescribing rules relating to Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
Electronic Prescriptions see also, Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
Electronic Prescriptions.

Prescribing conditions

When preparing a PBS prescription in a hospital environment a prescriber
must include a prescriber number. However, when preparing a prescription
outside the hospital environment, medical practitioners are only
required to include their name and address. It is not a requirement that
medical practitioners include their prescriber number on these
prescriptions. All other prescribers are required to include their
prescriber number.

The quantity and repeats prescribed must not exceed the maximum quantity
and the number of repeats as specified in the Schedule of Benefits,
unless approval has been obtained from Services Australia (approval must
be obtained from Services Australia prior to supply).

Certain medications can only be prescribed for a particular class of
person, for a specified purpose, disease or condition and where
specified, with telephone, written or electronic authority approval from
Services Australia.

The prescriber is required to endorse the qualifying restriction or
criteria on the third copy (prescriber/Medicare copy) of authority
prescriptions.

Prescribers must not write prescriptions for pharmaceutical benefits and
non-pharmaceutical (private) benefits on the one form.

A medical practitioner, nurse practitioner or midwife can direct that
the original supply and repeat supplies of a pharmaceutical benefit be
supplied at the one time, where the prescriber is satisfied that the
patient meets certain hardship conditions. The prescription must be
endorsed section 49 (previously regulation 24) or Reg 24 by the
prescriber. (There is also section 51 (previously regulation 25), which
applies at the time of supply).

See also: Section 49 (previously regulation 24) and section 51
(previously regulation 25) Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Active Ingredient Prescribing

From 1 February 2021, most prescriptions for supply under the PBS and
RPBS must describe the medicine by active ingredient name to be eligible
for claiming (some exemptions apply).

Prescribers can still prescribe using a brand name where it is
clinically relevant. In this instance, they must include the active
ingredient first followed by the brand name.

Active ingredient Prescribing (AIP) exemptions for the purpose of PBS
include:

-   Handwritten prescriptions
-   Computer generated paper-based National Residential Medication
    Charts
-   Medicines containing four or more active ingredients
-   List of certain medicines on the List of Excluded Medicinal Items
    (LEMI list). The Resources page has a link to the list from the
    Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care website

This new legislation may change the way prescribers communicate drug
names on the phone. It will also change the way in which the Agency
handles written authority applications.

From 1 August 2021, prescriptions that do not comply with the AIP
requirements will be rejected.

Services Australia can approve a written authority when the following is
clearly stated on the prescription:

-   Active ingredient(s)
-   Active ingredient(s) first, followed by the brand name,

The Resources page contains a table outlining the AIP requirement for
the most common written prescriptions.

Note:

-   Brands on the exception list (LEMI) can be approved
-   Computer-generated prescriptions that have <Free text> stated can
    also be exempted from AIP

Anything that falls outside of the above is not compliant with AIP.

Prescriptions written prior to 1 August 2021 and their repeats which do
not meet AIP requirements are still eligible for PBS/RPBS subsidy.
Prescriptions written from 1 August 2021 that do not comply with the AIP
requirements are to be rejected and sent back to the prescriber with a
Rejection slip. The Resources page contains a copy of the Rejection
slip.

Pharmacist forms

The following forms are prepared by pharmacists:

-   repeat authorisation form
-   repeat authority form

See also: Prescriptions and claims for the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS).

Restrictions on prescriptions

Certain medications can only be prescribed for a particular class of
person, for a specified purpose, disease or condition, and where
specified, with telephone, written or electronic authority approval from
Services Australia.

All restricted items are printed in bold italics in Section 2 of the
Schedule, with separate headings for authority and non-authority
restricted benefit items. These items may be prescribed as
pharmaceutical benefits only for use as specified.

Where a benefit is restricted to the treatment of a specified disease,
condition or class of person, the supply of that benefit should only be
prescribed for the specified condition. The prescriber is not required
to note the illness on prescription forms.

A line is drawn between entries for different forms and strengths of an
item to indicate the different restrictions which apply to these various
forms and strengths.

It is only necessary for the patient's condition to be identified on
authority applications on the third (Medicare) copy.

Advertising

While it is not prohibited to advertise on the blank tear-off area of
the original prescriptions and repeat authorisation forms, the
Commonwealth and Services Australia do not endorse this practice.
Advertising on any other part of these forms where script details may be
obscured is strictly prohibited. Drug company advertisements are not
permitted on any part of the original prescription or repeat
authorisation form.

Approved use of computer generated patient identification labels on PBS prescriptions

The following computer generated or handwritten approved prescription
forms are valid for payment if patient information has been provided on
a computer generated patient identification label placed on an:

-   approved hospital prescription form
-   approved dental prescription form where the prescription has been
    prescribed in a dental hospital by a dental practitioner

The following rules must be abided by for the prescription to be valid:

-   the label must satisfy PBS section 40(1)(b) requirements of
    including: 'the name of the person for whom the pharmaceutical
    benefit is to be supplied and the address of that person'
-   the label must be placed on the 'original' and 'duplicate'
    prescription forms by the prescriber
-   the patient information must not be provided on a pharmacy generated
    patient label
-   the label must not obscure any other prescription details

There is no legislative requirement for a prescriber to handwrite the
patient's name where a computer generated patient identification label
has been used, and prescriptions should not be rejected on this basis.

Annotating prescriptions to clarify a prescriber's intention

When something isn't clear on a PBS prescription, and getting a new
prescription will delay the customer's treatment, the pharmacist can
call the prescriber to clarify their intentions. The pharmacist may then
annotate the prescription in line with the prescriber's intentions.

If the prescription requires significant alterations (including multiple
changes), the patient will need to get a new prescription or an
annotated prescription signed by the prescriber before the pharmacist
can supply and claim the medicine.

To clarify a prescription, the pharmacist must:

call the prescriber first

clearly annotate and endorse the prescription with:

-   the date the prescriber was contacted
-   the prescriber's advice
-   the pharmacist's name and signature

keep a record of the discussion with the prescriber in the customer's
dispensing history

Changing an authority prescription

To change an authority prescription the pharmacist must contact the
prescriber and annotate the prescription as above. The prescriber must
also contact the PBS authority line to update the PBS authority approval
record.

If the prescriber does not contact the PBS authority line, the claim
will be rejected.

Changes that won't be accepted

The claim will not be paid if changes are made to:

-   prescriptions for Schedule 8 (Controlled Drugs) medicines
-   supply a completely different medicine (for example, Atenolol to
    Metoprolol) or additional medicine (for example, prescription for
    Atenolol only, changed to Atenolol and Fluoxetine)
-   increase the quantity and/or repeats
-   the date of prescribing
-   supply the medicine to a different patient
-   the prescriber details
-   repeat forms

Note: the pharmacist can only change the repeat form to correct a
previous pharmacist's dispensing error to make it consistent with the
prescriber's original prescription.

The Resources page contains links to examples of various forms that can
be used for prescribing pharmaceutical benefits, a the list of Excluded
Medicinal Items and a link to the With Compliments slip for Active
Ingredient Prescribing.

Contents

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Electronic Prescriptions

Section 49 (previously regulation 24) and section 51 (previously
regulation 25) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Types of information included on prescriptions

PBS prescription stationery for prescribers

PBS stationery for approved suppliers

Related links

PBS Stationery Online Ordering System (PSOOS)

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Electronic Prescriptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
