-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Location Specific Practice
Number (LSPN) Register.

Purpose of the Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology (LSPN) registers

The Diagnostic Imaging Register and the Radiation Oncology Register (the
LSPN Register) allows Services Australia (the agency) to comply with and
administer the legislative requirements of the Health Insurance Act 1973
(the Act) by providing a mechanism to record details about diagnostic
imaging and radiation oncology practices, their equipment and
accreditation.

The register:

-   enables a record of diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology
    practice registrations and equipment located at that practice to be
    entered and maintained electronically
-   provides a mechanism for the allocation of a unique LSPN, and
-   allows monitoring of the required annual registration renewal of
    diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology practice registration

Registering a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice

To register, diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practices must
submit a correctly completed or Application to register or amend a
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form (HW061) to the
agency.

Subsections 23DZQ(2) and 23DZZP(2) of the Health Insurance Act 1973
requires that registration of new diagnostic imaging or radiation
oncology practices begins on:

-   the day a complete and correct application is received, or
-   a later date specified in the application

New LSPNs record registration start dates cannot be backdated, including
those created as part of a relocation.

Note: this form and any supporting documentation can be uploaded and
submitted through HPOS, see Health Professional Online Services. If the
form is received via HPOS, then correspondence should be delivered via
HPOS. Forms received via HPOS can be identified as the naming convention
will contain the 10 digit RA number of the user, and the HPOS Reference
Number field will contain a 9 digit reference number that can be used to
search in HPOS to reply. For example, Business name: 9987654321, and the
HPOS Reference Number field: 123456789-1. For further instructions, see
the Process page in Health Professional Online Services Support Mail
Centre – Managing emails from health professionals.

The HW061 form:

requires information about the:

-   practice ownership
-   practice location and type, and
-   details of equipment used to perform services

can be completed by any person, however, the proprietor of the
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice or a responsible
executive officer/authorised representative (if a company, government
agency or public body) must either:

-   sign the declaration, or
-   tick the declaration acknowledgement box if submitting the form via
    HPOS

Note: the proprietor can be an individual, or group of individuals when
the practice is privately owned.

The practice must be advised in writing of its LSPN within 28 days of
the agency receiving a complete and accurate HW061.

See Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) practice
registration for Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO) for
assessing instructions.

The Resources page contains a link to the HW061 form.

Authorised representatives

-   For partnerships, companies, government agencies and public bodies,
    an authorised representative must be nominated. This person may be
    the responsible executive officer who signs the form but the 2 roles
    (responsible executive officer and authorised representative) are
    distinguished. In the Provider Directory System (PDS), the
    proprietor details are recorded on the Organisation tab and the
    authorised representative details are recorded on the Contact tab
    when recording LSPN information in an LSPN record
-   The nomination of an authorised representative is optional for
    practices owned by an individual
-   There can be up to 2 authorised representatives per LSPN record. The
    Primary Authorised Representative and Secondary Authorised
    Representative have equal authority to act on the proprietors
    behalf, including making changes to the LSPN record or requesting
    information
-   If an authorised representative is nominated, that authorised
    representative or proprietor must sign the form to add or change the
    representative or provide a letter to the agency to this effect

Number of registrations required

An Application to register or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation
oncology practice form (HW061) is required for each diagnostic imaging
or radiation oncology practice at each specific location.

If more than one practice operating under a different business entity is
at the same location, a separate registration and LSPN record is
required.

Registrations required for practices

If a practice provides both diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology
services, only one Application to register or amend a diagnostic imaging
or radiation oncology practice form (HW061) form is required.

Some practices (for example major hospitals) may have diagnostic imaging
or radiation oncology equipment located in more than one campus. A HW061
form for each campus (location) must be completed so a separate LSPN can
be issued.

If registering a hospital with a number of departments who undertake
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology services on the one campus, a
hospital (which includes all buildings and levels located within the
grounds) can register either:

-   one practice with one LSPN record only - the departments located on
    that campus use the same LSPN on patient contacts accounts and
    receipts. The address recorded must accurately reflect the complete
    location, or
-   each department separately - a completed HW061 form is required for
    every department so separate LSPNs can be issued

Registration required for a base for mobile diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment

Each base for mobile equipment must complete an Application to register
or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form
(HW061). The distinction between a premises and a mobile base will
depend on where the majority of services are performed and the amount of
equipment used on site or as a mobile service.

When equipment is used as a dedicated ‘mobile’ service, then a mobile
base registration is appropriate. However, if the mobile equipment is
used for services frequently performed off the premises, but on
occasions is also used at the premises (where other equipment is also
used), then the mobile equipment can be listed with the registration for
the premises.

Upon registration, all mobile vehicles operating from this base use the
same LSPN. Another form must be completed with the address details of
the depot if the mobile equipment is stored in a different location,
such as a vehicle that is not garaged at the LSPN base.

The Resources page contains examples for mobile unit equipment.

Providing LSPN record details to a third party

Before providing LSPN record details to a third party who is not the
authorised representative or proprietor of the practice see Performing
practice staff security check for the Diagnostic Imaging/Location
Specific Practice Number (LSPN) Register.

New practice registrations and LSPN record as part of a relocation

A new LSPN is required when a practice or mobile base changes address.
This includes suite/room changes within a building. To reduce gaps in
Medicare eligibility, practices are responsible for requesting the
cancellation of their existing registration and applying for a new
practice registration and LSPN record.

Practices need to provide the below information on the Application to
register or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice
form (HW061):

-   closure date at question 4 of the form for their existing LSPN
    record, and
-   start date at question 6 for the new practice

Note: if the practice has not provided the closure and start date on the
form, or they are not different dates, return the application form with
the appropriate standard letter template.

Sections 23DZR and 23DZZU of the Health Insurance Act 1973 requires
practices to notify the agency of a relocation within 28 days.

When the practice has notified the agency of these changes prior to them
taking effect, the closure and operational start dates on the
application form should be used

When the practice has notified the agency after the changes took effect:

-   the date of lodgement should be used as the closure date for the
    existing LSPN record
-   all equipment recorded at the existing LSPN record must be end dated
    on the closure date requested on the form (the system does this
    automatically)
-   the date of lodgement is used as the operational start date for the
    new LSPN record

See the Process page for more information on processing a new LSPN
registration as part of a relocation.

Capital sensitivity

The purpose of the capital sensitivity provisions is to encourage
diagnostic imaging (DI) practices to regularly upgrade, and replace
their equipment to ensure patients have access to higher quality
equipment.

Diagnostic imaging services are no longer payable when the equipment has
exceeded its:

-   effective life age, or
-   maximum extended life age

This does not include those with a current approved exemption.

This is in place for almost all DI equipment providing services
(excluding Positron Emission Tomography (PET) services) under Medicare.

See Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for
Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO) for further
information.

The Resources page contains registration start and end dates, equipment
types and descriptions, mobile equipment examples, links to forms,
contact details, external websites and examples relating to the LSPN
Register.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
