
Section 49 (previously regulation 24) and Section 51 (previously regulation 25) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-60020010

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what supply of medication section 49 (previously
regulation 24) and 51 (previously regulation 25) enable medical
practitioners, nurse practitioners and midwives to prescribe.

Section 49 (previously regulation 24)

Section 49 (previously regulation 24) enables medical practitioners,
nurse practitioners and midwives to write a prescription where the
original and repeat supplies of a medicine can be supplied at one time.

At the time of writing the prescription the prescriber must be satisfied
that the:

-   maximum PBS quantity is insufficient for the patient's treatment and
-   patient has a chronic illness and/or lives in a remote area where
    access to PBS supplies is limited and
-   patient would suffer great hardship trying to obtain the medicine on
    separate occasions

The prescription must be endorsed 'one supply' or 'regulation 24' by the
prescriber.

Endorsement of Section 49 (previously regulation 24)

Only a medical practitioner, nurse practitioner and midwife is able to
endorse a prescription 'one supply' or 'regulation 24'. An abbreviation,
is acceptable.

Where there is more than one item prescribed on a single prescription,
endorsement should be made at item level.

If one item only is endorsed 'one supply' or 'regulation 24' and the
patient does not want the non-endorsed item supplied, this item may be
deferred.

Note: in this case usual defer arrangements apply.

Supplying less than all repeats

Despite being endorsed 'one supply' or 'regulation 24' a patient may not
want or need all repeats at one time. A pharmacist is able to supply
what is requested by the patient, however, any remaining repeats become
void.

Discounting of Section 49 (previously regulation 24)

Discounting is allowed on prescriptions endorsed with 'one supply' or
'regulation 24' or ‘Hardship conditions apply’. An allowable discount
can be applied to each individual co-payment for a prescription supplied
under section 49 (repeats supplied at the same time as the original
prescription).

For example, a patient presents a prescription for one original and five
repeat supplies, endorsed as 'one supply' by the prescriber.

The pharmacist can charge a discounted patient contribution for the
original and for each repeat quantity needed to make up the total
supply; that is, six supplies multiplied by the discounted patient
co-payment amount. Record the discounted co-payment amounts for these
prescriptions on the patient’s PRF.

Co-payments cannot be discounted for ‘early supply’ (Safety Net 20 Day
rule) prescriptions and, consistent with existing safety net policy, the
usual full co-payment will apply for these supplies.

Application of Section 49 (previously regulation 24) when crossing the Safety Net threshold

If medication being supplied under section 49 (previously regulation 24)
is going to take the patient over the Safety Net threshold, the patient
has 2 options:

-   pay the usual cost for all supplies and seek a patient refund, or
-   have less repeats supplied which voids the remaining repeats. Note:
    the patient needs to return to the prescriber for the next
    prescription

Section 51 (previously regulation 25)

Once a pharmaceutical benefit has been supplied to a patient, it cannot
be supplied to that patient again:

-   on the same day or within the next 20 days, if it is a benefit
    (other than eye preparations) that has 5 or more repeats allowed, or
-   on the same day or within the next 4 days. For example, if a
    pharmaceutical benefit is supplied on a Monday, it cannot be
    supplied again to that patient until the next Saturday in the case
    of other benefits

Exceptions to section 51 (previously regulation 25)

The exceptions to section 51 (previously regulation 25) are:

-   If a pharmacist believes supply is urgently needed to treat the
    person, or a previous supply has been destroyed, lost or stolen. In
    this case, the pharmacist can provide another supply but must
    endorse 'Immediate Supply Necessary' and sign the prescription
-   When a prescription is endorsed 'one supply' or 'regulation 24' or
    'Hardship Conditions Apply'

Discounting of Section 51 (previously regulation 25)

Where a pharmaceutical benefit has been supplied under section 51
(previously regulation 25), then:

-   Where the supply is of a pharmaceutical benefit that is not
    specified in the early supply instrument (Safety Net 20 day rule),
    then the supply can be made on the PBS. The amount paid will count
    towards the patients’ safety net and the supplier is able to
    discount the co-payment by the allowable discount (up to $1); or
-   Where the supply is of a pharmaceutical benefit that is specified in
    the early supply instrument, and the supply is occurring at an
    interval that would render the supply an early supply for the
    purposes of subsection 84AAA(1) of the Act, then notwithstanding
    that the supply is made under section 51 (previously regulation 25),
    the supply can be made on the PBS. The amount paid will not count
    towards the patients’ safety net and the supplier is not permitted
    to discount the co-payment amount

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and enquiries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
