
Online Services for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-10130040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to support practices to administer
the Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and the Workforce Incentive
Program (WIP) - Practice Stream through online services.

On this Page:

Promoting online services

Services Officers should explain how to use the online services and
their benefits. For example, when a customer enquiries how to perform a
task manually.

The benefits of using PIP/WIP - Practice Stream Online are:

Secure and streamlined interaction

More convenient

-   A customer can interact with Services Australia at a convenient time
    for them
-   No time waiting in telephone queues

Significantly reduces staff time needing to prepare and submit paperwork

Reduces the need for paper forms and their storage

Changes are visible immediately

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Provider Digital Access (PRODA) is an online authentication system used
to access online government services.

These details are used to log on to PRODA:

-   Username
-   Password, and
-   Verification code

PRODA is digital, portable and does not need extra hardware or software.

See PRODA on the Services Australia website for more information. The
Resources page has a link.

See also: Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) is an easy and secure online
service for health professionals. They use it to communicate with
Services Australia.

Health professionals include:

-   General practitioners
-   Specialists
-   Allied health professionals
-   Practice managers, and
-   Practice staff

Using HPOS a health professional can:

create new provider numbers

update the bank account details for:

-   the General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP ACAI)

submit claims

view reports

verify patient eligibility, including a patient 'care plan history'

nominate delegates to do administrative tasks for them. For example,
submit an online claim and check MBS items claiming eligibility

-   delegates cannot update practice details unless they are registered,
    on the PIP and/or WIP - Practice Stream practice profile, as an
    owner or authorised contact person

view program statements, correspondence and subscriptions using the HPOS
Messages

HPOS access will suspend when the account is inactive for 6 months. HPOS
will stay active if a delegate performs a transaction on another
person’s behalf.

To reactivate an account, a practice must:

-   log in to their PRODA account, and
-   select Reactivate Access to HPOS

If an account suspends, Registration Authority (RA) numbers will stay
linked in the PIP and the WIP - Practice Stream. The practice will need
to reactivate their account to access PIP and WIP - Practice Stream
Online.

See HPOS on the Services Australia website for more information. The
Resources page has a link.

See also:

-   Health Professional Online Services
-   General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP ACAI) for
    Practice Incentives Program (PIP)

Registration Authority (RA) number

An RA number is system generated and is used to access PIP/WIP -
Practice Stream Online within HPOS.

Link an individual RA number to their practice profile to grant them
access to PIP and WIP - Practice Stream Online.

If the practice is new to HPOS, an owner or authorised contact person
must contact the Incentives Processing team to link their RA number to
the practice profile.

An owner or authorised contact person can then grant access to other
practice staff. This means other practice staff do not need to contact
Services Australia to link their RA numbers.

A practitioner must have their RA number registered to update their GP
Aged Care Access Incentive bank account details.

Practices can find their RA number by:

Accessing HPOS through their PRODA account

Selecting Profile from the HPOS Home Page

-   The individual’s details will show (user name, email, date of birth,
    gender and RA number)

See linking your PRODA account RA number to your practice profile on the
Services Australia website for more information. The Resources page has
a link.

See also:

-   Health Professional Online Services
-   General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP ACAI) for
    Practice Incentives Program (PIP)

Individual Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate

Before PRODA, Individual PKI certificates were used to access HPOS.
PIP/WIP - Practice Stream Online still hold these RA numbers and they
must be updated when a customer creates a PRODA account.

If an old PKI number is registered on PIP/WIP - Practice Stream Online:

-   Check for the current PRODA RA Number
-   Remove Individual PKI certificate RA Number
-   Add the new PRODA RA Number

See the Process page for more information on how to link and remove an
RA number.

PIP Online and WIP - Practice Stream Online

PIP Online and WIP - Practice Stream Online

The PIP WIP - Practice Stream Online are accessed through HPOS.

To access PIP/WIP - Practice Stream Online, a person must:

-   be a registered owner or an authorised contact person on the
    practice profile

see Authorised contact person changes for more information

have access to HPOS via PRODA, and

link their RA number to the practice profile

-   An owner and/or authorised contact person can:

-   update practice details

-   update patients for the Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI)

-   apply for PIP incentives

-   view payment advices

-   advise other changes

-   complete Quarterly Confirmation Statements (QCS) in WIP - Practice
    Stream

complete Annual Confirmation Statements (ACS) in PIP

-   A provider can update bank account details for:

the General Practitioner (GP) Aged Care Access Incentive (ACAI)

-   See also:

-   Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI) patient registration for PIP

Practice updates via HPOS

The Incentives Processing team get HPOS notifications via the mailbox
when a practice makes the below updates:

-   Relocation
-   Amalgamation
-   Change of practice ownership

All PIP and WIP - Practice Stream practice payments will automatically
go on hold while the practice's details are being checked.

Tell the practice they need to lodge the below forms:

-   Relocation and amalgamation, Practice Incentives Change of practice
    details (IP005) form
-   Change of practice ownership, Practice Incentives Change of practice
    ownership (IP010) form

The Resources page has a link to the forms.

Practice payments will stay on hold until the practice submits these
documents.

See also:

-   Practice relocation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream
-   Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream
-   Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream
-   Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

The Resources page contains a list of RA number errors and fixes,
acceptable RA number overrides and updates over the phone. There are
also links to health professional education resources.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Health Professional Online Services

Helping users create a PRODA account

Helping users self-manage their PRODA account

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
