[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details to assist the 24/7 Medicare Provider
enquiries line. This enquiry line answers questions about the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service, My Health Record and National Authentication
Service for Health (NASH) Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificates.

On this Page:

Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service after hours provider enquiries

Healthcare providers register with the HI Service. They then get a
Healthcare Provider Identifier.

If a caller contacts about the HI Service system not working, or they
receive an error message, refer them to their clinical software vendor
for direct assistance and troubleshooting. For other urgent matters:

-   Get the organisation’s details
-   [\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
    Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-phone.png]Contact the
    Channel Operations Facility. Give them the organisation’s details.
    Channel Operations Facility will advise the Service Officer of their
    next steps
-   Send an email with details to Tier 3 HI Service Support. Add
    ‘URGENT’ in the email subject line

If there are other HI Service enquiries from the below:

-   healthcare providers
-   Responsible Officers (RO)
-   Organisation Maintenance Officers (OMO)

Send an email to Tier 3 HI Service Support.

Add the callers details to the email. Tell them the HI Service
Operations team will contact them back during business hours.

See Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service - Health Professionals for more
details.

My Health Record after hours provider enquiries

To be able to access the records of their patients:

-   healthcare provider organisations must register with My Health
    Record (visit servicesaustralia.gov.au, Healthcare Identifiers
    Service for health professionals, see Resources page for a link)
-   individual healthcare providers must be authorised by their
    organisation (Organisation Maintenance Officer must create a link
    between the provider and the organisation)

If a healthcare provider calls about how to access patient My Health
Records, tell them to visit myhealthrecord.gov.au for more information.
See the Resources page for a link.

If a healthcare provider calls about:

-   accessing a My Health Record in an emergency (where an individual’s
    life is at risk), tell them to contact the My Health Record System
    Operator (option 1)
-   opting out, tell them to visit myhealthrecord.gov.au for
    information. See the Resources page for a link

If a caller contacts about the My Health Record system not working,
refer them to their clinical software vendor for direct assistance and
troubleshooting. For additional support, tell them to contact the My
Health Record System Operator (option 1).

See My Health Record – Health Professionals for more details.

National Authentication Service for Health (NASH)

Healthcare providers need to get a National Authentication Service for
Health (NASH) Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate. They need
this so the My Health Record system can authenticate them.

Healthcare providers who have a NASH PKI certificate are called
subscribers.

If a subscriber calls about a compromised or lost certificate, get their
details and:

-   send an email to the NASH PKI team
-   add ‘URGENT: compromised/lost NASH certificate’ in the email subject
    line
-   tell the caller that the NASH PKI team will contact them the next
    business day

For all other enquiries about NASH PKI certificates, get their details
and email them to the NASH/PKI team.

The Resources page contains links to the Channel Operations Facility
(COF) intranet page, My Health Record websites, Services Australia
websites and contact details for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service and
My Health Record.

Related links

Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service - Health Professionals

My Health Record – Health Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
