
Reactivate Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03100060

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on reactivating Healthcare Provider
Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) records in the Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service.

On this Page:

Reactivate HPI-I record

A HPI-I record is deactivated when the end date stored in the eHealth
program (EHP) system is reached on a provider’s last profession or
specialty.

When a new speciality or profession is added to a deactivated HPI-I
record, or an existing specialty or profession has its end date removed
or extended, the record is reactivated. A current specialty is a
specialty that is present on the record with either no end date, or has
an end date in the future.

For providers registered through the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (Ahpra), notification of the new specialty or
profession is provided by Ahpra automatically.

If not registered through Ahpra, a Healthcare provider can request the
addition of new specialties or professions, or the removal of end dates
from existing specialties or professions associated with an HPI-I
record. This is done via Services Australia service channels. See also
Professional associations and Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

The Healthcare provider must:

provide evidence of registration as a member of either a:

-   health profession
-   professional association that relates to healthcare

provide evidence of the new specialty or profession

When the end date for a profession or specialty of a non-Ahpra
registered practitioner is approaching, a letter is mailed to the
provider to request evidence of their ongoing membership to their
profession.

A HPI-I record cannot be reactivated if a Healthcare provider is no
longer working as a healthcare professional.

Reactivation cannot be backdated or future dated. Reactivation takes
effect from the date of notification.

The originally allocated HPI-I number is retained for the reactivated
Healthcare provider.

Access to the HPI-I record after reactivation

The EHP system allows access to a provider once the HPI-I record has
been reactivated.

After the record has been reactivated, a linked Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI) certificate or Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
account once again has access to the HI Service.

If requested, the reactivated HPI-I record's entry is restored in the
Healthcare Provider Directory (HI HPD) and the Healthcare provider’s
access to the HI HPD is reinstated.

See also: Identify and resolve duplicate eHealth Program (EHP)
individual record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Related links

Deactivate Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Professional associations and Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
