
Telehealth bulk bill claims in Medicare 012-41050050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for telehealth bulk bill claims
in Medicare.

On this Page:

Practitioner billing

Under Section 19(6) of the Health Insurance Act 1973, practitioners are
required to detail individual amounts charged/paid/outstanding against
each individual item number on:

-   accounts
-   receipts
-   bulk bill assignment of benefit forms

This regulation also applies to telehealth consultations, including
derived fee item numbers. There is a requirement for practitioners to
include the charge against any derived fee item numbers billed.

The Resources page provides a table outlining the telehealth
practitioner billing requirements and related direct bill forms to use
for bulk billed telehealth consultations.

Patient signature

A patient's signature is required on all assignment of benefit forms
(bulk bill voucher).

As telehealth consultations are not performed face-to-face with the
specialist/consultant, the requirements for the patient to sign the
assignment of benefit form cannot always be easily met. Each individual
practitioner must obtain a patient's signature in whichever way suits
their needs.

There are several options available to specialists/consultants:

-   request assistance from supporting practitioner (when there is one)
-   post the assignment of benefit form to the patient for signature and
    return
-   email agreement to assign benefit

The Process page provides a table describing the email agreement process
for patient signature.

Use of 'Patient Unable to Sign'

When the patient is unable to sign the approved form, a responsible
person can sign on their behalf.

When a responsible person is not available, then an unsigned assignment
of benefit form may be accepted, when the medical practitioner records
on the form:

-   'patient unable to sign'
-   the reason why, for example unconscious, neurological disorder, in
    the 'Practitioners Use' section

Note: medical practitioners should not use the notation 'patient unable
to sign' when the patient has the capacity to sign, but it is
administratively difficult to obtain the signature. This difficulty must
be overcome via other means.

Audit and compliance

Compliance requirements of the Telehealth Program are:

-   All practitioners are required to meet the telehealth Medicare
    Benefits Schedule (MBS) item descriptor requirements
-   As per MBS Explanatory Note titled 'Practitioners should maintain
    adequate and contemporaneous records'. "All practitioners who
    provide, or initiate, a service for which a Medicare benefit is
    payable, should ensure they maintain adequate and contemporaneous
    records". In the case of telehealth, medical practitioners are
    required to record (either in their clinical notes or some other
    form) that the consultation was carried out via video conference
-   As well as this medical practitioners should observe MBS Explanatory
    Note titled 'Telehealth Support Service by Health Professionals'

MCP119 Telehealth assignment of benefit via email for specialist consultations

The Telehealth Program allows patients in eligible areas to have easier
access to specialist medical services without the time and expense
involved in travelling to major cities.

As telehealth specialist consultations are not performed face to face,
the standard process for the patient assigning their Medicare benefits
to the specialist, consultant or psychiatrist are not always practical.

From 1 February 2012, patients who receive a telehealth consultation
will be able to assign their right to a Medicare benefit to the
specialist via email.

Note: this process is in line with the Health Insurance Act 1973 and the
Electronics Transactions Act 1999.

This policy is retrospective and covers all Telehealth specialist bulk
bill claims with a date of service from 1 July 2011 and can be used for
services that have previously been rejected due to insufficient
information on the original bulk bill voucher.

Note: providers still have the option to either:

-   bulk bill the patient by obtaining a physical signature from the
    patient
-   issue an account (a patient claim)

See also: Telehealth Program for Medicare.

Assignment of benefit via email

Under section 10 of the Electronic Transactions Act 1999, a patient is
able to assign their right to a Medicare benefit to the specialist via
email, where the:

-   specialist and the patient have undertaken a telehealth consultation
    via video conferencing capabilities
-   patient has been identified as part of the consultation
-   patient agrees to assign their right to a Medicare benefit to the
    specialist via email
-   process below has been completed

The Process page provides a table describing the process of the
assignment of benefit via email.

The Resources page contains information on practitioner billing
requirements for Telehealth, example privacy notes and an example
specialist email.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
