
Evidence of identity - apply for an identifier in the EHP system 012-21051721

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about evidence of identity (EOI). EOI
verifies an individual or organisation so they can register with the HI
Service, and get a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate.

On this Page:

EOI documents

An individual or organisation must give the HI Service EOI documents to
verify their identity.

A known customer does not need to supply any of these documents.

In the eHealth Program (EHP) system, record the document types. For
example, an Australian drivers licence and a foreign passport.

Do not record the document identification numbers. For example, a
drivers licence number or a passport number.

Document certification

Copies of the below documents need to be certified. These include:

-   an EOI
-   any Registrar of the Australian Business Register (ABR) document
    used as proof of authority to act

The applicant must get these certified by another person. The other
person must sign each copy and write:

-   'This is a true copy of the original as supplied to me'

Some documents do not scan, photocopy or fax clearly. In these cases,
accept the document if another person has sighted and certified it.

Note: documents uploaded as part of the online seed registration process
do not need to be certified.

See also: Process online registration for Health Provider Identifier –
Organisation (HPI-O).

EOI and the eHealth Program (EHP) system

Individuals that are not known customers must supply full EOI when they
are a:

-   Responsible Officer (RO)
-   Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) – non-Ahpra
    (Australian Health Practitioner Registration Agency)

Organisation Maintenance Officers (OMO) or known customers do not need
to give full EOI. However, an OMO cannot request a PKI certificate until
they do supply EOI.

See Evidence of identity processing for an individual in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service for more information.

Documents to confirm IHI EOI

The customer must supply either 1 primary or 2 secondary documents.

Primary evidence is generally a government issued document. These have
robust processes around:

-   proof of identity
-   issuing, and
-   managing and handling

They are a physical document, usually containing a photograph and
security features.

For example, an Australian passport.

Secondary evidence can come from either government or non-government
sources. They have moderate processes around:

-   proof of identity
-   issuing, and
-   managing and handling

For example, a Medicare card.

The Resources page contains tables of primary and secondary EOI document
types.

EOI for a seed organisation

The business must have an Australian Business Number (ABN).

When processing the Application to Register a Seed Organisation in the
HI Service and My Health Record (HW018):

-   confirm that the ABN is on the Australian Business Register (ABR)

The Online Seed Organisation Registration form in Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS) automatically checks the ABR for the ABN. If the
check fails, the applicant is unable to submit the application online.

See also:

-   Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record
    for network organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service
-   Process online registration for Health Provider Identifier –
    Organisation (HPI-O)

Authority to act

The applicant must have the authority act on behalf of the organisation.
The applicant becomes the responsible officer (RO) in EHP.

The RO can being listed on the organisation’s ABR. This proves they have
the authority to act.

They can also provide 1 of the following if they are not listed on the
ABR.

a certified legal or regulatory document that gives the RO authority to
commit the seed organisation

a pharmacy approval number where the RO is either the:

-   approved pharmacist, or
-   Authorised Trustee/Director for a pharmacy under the Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (PBS)

The organisation could do this with 1 document. For example:

Certificate of registration of a company from the Australian Securities
and Investments Commission (ASIC). The RO’s name listed as the Public
Officer

A notice issued by the Registrar of the ABR bearing the:

business entity’s name

ABN, and

ROs name listed as the Public Officer. This must be certified

The organisation’s appointment as a trustee (if the legal structure is a
trust) with RO as a stakeholder

Contract for the sale or purchase of a business addressed to the RO

A statement of transaction from a financial institution that has:

-   the name of the company
-   is addressed to the RO, and
-   is less than 1 year old

A lease agreement for the organisation’s primary place of business
addressed to the RO. This does not need to be in the trading name

A rates notice for the organisation’s primary place of business
addressed to the RO

A certificate of change of name for the organisation from ASIC, and
addressed to the RO, or

An Australian Taxation Office document with:

-   the organisation’s name
-   tax file number, and
-   addressed to the RO

a Services Australia PKI certificate number

-   for the organisation, and
-   the applicant is the authoriser of the certificate

The Online Seed Organisation Registration form in Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS) automatically checks the ABR to see if the RO is
listed.

If the check fails, the RO must upload their evidence to the online
form.

Documents - name or date of birth change

The customer must give 1 of the below documents:

-   Deed poll or marriage certificate
-   Full marriage certificate issued by a state or territory Birth,
    Deaths and Marriages office
-   Marriage certificate issued by a church or celebrant
-   Birth certificate (birth and where reverting to maiden or birth
    name)
-   Reissued birth certificate in the new name
-   Certificate of name change
-   Current driver licence
-   Current passport

Documents - for an Indigenous person name change

The customer must give 1 of the below documents. This shows that they
are known by that name in the community:

current driver licence

birth certificate

marriage certificate

deed poll

legal document

utility accounts

referee statement and declaration signed by an authorised referee, which
in this case can be:

-   community elder
-   school principal
-   Centrelink officer
-   council chairperson
-   medical or health service manager or nurse
-   Minister of religion
-   welfare organisation worker

Documents for a gender change

The customer must give 1 of the below documents:

-   an amended or reissued birth certificate with the new gender. This
    can be an Australian or foreign birth certificate
-   recognition certificate from the relevant state or territory Births,
    Deaths and Marriages agency confirming the new gender
-   letter from a medical practitioner confirming the person has
    undergone surgery related to gender reassignment
-   current passport showing the new gender. This can be an Australian
    or foreign passport

Known customer

This is an individual who has proven who they are to Services Australia.
They do not need to supply any further EOI.

They prove who they are through 1, or more, of the below:

-   an existing Responsible Officer (RO) registered with another
    organisation in the HI Service
-   a Medicare provider with an existing Medicare provider number
-   an individual with a PKI certificate for other purposes, such as a
    provider using a PKI for Medicare claiming
-   listed as the Certificate Manager under the registration authority
    number for a site PKI certificate
-   an individual with a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account where
    the status is ‘known’
-   a provider registered with Australian Health Practitioner
    Registration Agency (Ahpra)
-   the approved pharmacist for a pharmacy under the Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)

An OMO does not need to give EOI to register with the HI Service. The
registered RO for the organisation verifies the OMO’s identity.

A current OMO who has never given EOI to Medicare must comply with EOI
rules if they want to:

-   become an RO, or
-   apply for a Medicare or National Authentication Service for Health
    (NASH) Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate

Registering as a Responsible Officer (RO)

To register as an RO in the HI service they must give the below. They
only need to if they are not a known customer:

-   EOI that consists of 1 primary and 2 secondary documents, and
-   proof of their authority to act on behalf of the Healthcare Provider
    Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O)

An RO can nominate a person to act as the OMO for either:

-   the seed HPI-O
-   any network HPI-Os in the network hierarchy

Registering as a CSP officer

To be able to register as a Contracted Service Provider (CSP) officer,
an individual must give:

-   EOI that consists of 1 primary and 2 secondary documents, and
-   proof of their authority to act on behalf of the CSP organisation

They only need to give full EOI if:

-   they have not previously done so, and
-   they are not a known customer

A CSP officer can link up to 2 more CSP officers, to the CSP
organisation they are linked to. There can be a maximum of 3 CSP
officers.

EOI rating for PKI certificates requested by organisations and providers

The EOI supplied when applying for a healthcare identifier determines
the type of PKI certificate issued.

If the applicant sends in the original document rather than a copy:

-   photocopy the original
-   sign and date it
-   write 'original sighted' on the document
-   post the original document back to the applicant

Note: the EOI Rating for Registration field/drop down menu will not
appear for individuals with only a 10 digit identifier.

The EOI ratings for Registration field appears on the below tabs in EHP:

-   EOI Details - for an EHP individual
-   Organisation Details - for an organisation

See Evidence of identity processing for an individual in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service for more information

The Resources page has details about EOI ratings and types. It also has
examples of, document types, and examples of known customers. There are
links to the Acceptable Referee Declaration PKI Certificate application
form HW004 and the Australian Business Register (ABN).

Related links

Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for
network organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity processing for an individual in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Process online registration for Health Provider Identifier –
Organisation (HPI-O)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
