
Procedural GP Payment practice application for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) 012-10020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the PIP Procedural General Practitioner (GP)
Payment. This includes information for Service Officers to use when
answering general enquiries and procedures on how to assess and process
the application form for the incentive.

Procedural GP payments

Payments are made in February and August each year.

There are 4 payment tier levels. Practices cannot add tier levels
together.

Written requests are not accepted.

The PIP Procedural GP Payment guidelines have more details about
payments and eligibility requirements.

Procedural GPs

There is no limit to the number of procedural GPs who can generate
payments for a practice.

Practices with more than one procedural GP cannot combine the number of
services.

The GPs must:

-   individually meet the requirements of the tier, and
-   be at the practice at the relevant point-in-time date

GPs can only qualify for one tier level per payment. They cannot
generate a payment at more than one practice at a time.

GPs must notify Services Australia of their procedural GP details. This
includes which practice the payment should go to. They do this using the
Practice Incentives Individual general practitioner, nurse practitioner
or health professional details (IP003) form.

Practitioners in PIP and WIP – Practice Stream has more information
about registering procedural GP details.

Withdrawing from the payment

Practices can withdraw from the Procedural GP Payment by:

-   HPOS, or
-   Submitting a written correspondence

The correspondence must include the:

-   Practice ID
-   Practice name
-   Full practice address
-   Consent to withdraw from the Procedural GP Payment, and
-   Signature by at least one registered owner or authorised contact
    person

Practices can reapply at any time.

The PIP Procedural GP Payment guidelines have more details about
withdrawing.

See also: Enquiry management for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

The Resources page contains links to PIP and PIP Incentives guidelines,
forms and letters.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Practitioners in PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
