
Handle request for increased quantity and/or repeats for unrestricted, restricted and Authority benefit 012-63020090

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to handle requests for an increase in
quantity and/or repeats for unrestricted, restricted and authority
benefits in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

On this Page:

Quantity and repeats

The maximum quantity and number of repeats allowed for PBS items are
recommended by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC). In
the case of Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) items,
the recommendations come from the Repatriation Pharmaceutical Reference
Committee (RPRC).

Only approved prescribers can prescribe repeats.

Prescriptions and repeats can be for any quantity up to the maximum
listed in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits. It is not necessary
to prescribe the maximum quantity if a lesser quantity is sufficient for
the patient's needs. The approved prescriber indicates the quantity and
number of repeats on the prescription.

If an approved prescriber decides the patient's treatment requires an
increase to the maximum quantity or number of repeats, they must
complete an Authority prescription form. The provision of increased
quantities and repeats on Authority prescriptions is intended to provide
approximately 1 month’s therapy, which may be repeated (if clinically
appropriate) to provide 6 months' therapy in total. This situation
usually arises where higher than normal dosages are required.

Approval for increased quantity and/or repeats can be obtained for:

-   unrestricted benefits
-   restricted, Authority required and Authority required (streamlined)
    benefits

Attachment A for Section 85, Section 85A and Section 88 of the National
Health Act. See the References page for a link to the Act.

Increase quantity and or repeats for unrestricted benefits

The approved prescriber must go through the authority process to gain
approval for increase in the maximum quantity or number of repeats for
an item listed as an unrestricted benefit.

Guidelines:

The application for increased quantities and/or repeats can be
authorised to provide approximately 1 month's therapy, with repeats for
up to 6 months’ treatment in total. The dosage tables can be used to
calculate the quantity for approval based on the dose stated by the
approved prescriber.

The Service Officer is not required to check whether use of the
pharmaceutical benefit is in accordance with the product information.

Increase quantity and/or repeats for Restricted, Authority required and
Authority required (streamlined) benefits

The approved prescriber must go through the Authority process to gain
approval for increase in the quantity and/or number of repeats for items
listed as Restricted, Authority required and Authority required
(streamlined) benefits.

Guidelines:

The indication must be consistent with the indication in the Schedule
for that item.

If the restriction indicates that increased quantities and/or repeats
are not permitted then increase quantity and/or repeats cannot be
approved.

The application for the increased quantity and/or repeats can be
authorised to provide approximately 1 month's treatment, with repeats
for up to 6 months’ treatment in total. The approval amounts will be in
line with the dosage tables based on the dose stated by the approved
prescriber.

Drugs of addiction

Approved prescribers must follow state or territory law when prescribing
drugs listed as narcotic, specified or restricted, and must notify or
receive approval from, the appropriate health authority. Approved
prescribers are responsible to ensure they meet their responsibility
regarding state legislation. See Authority approval processing for
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Guidelines:

When a PBS or Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS)
authority application is for a drug of addiction (other than
Dexamphetamine Sulfate), the following guidelines apply:

-   Approved prescribers need to ensure they are complying with state
    and territory requirements

State or territory health authorities may need to be notified about
ongoing treatment. The interval of where repeats are called for may need
to be stated.

Opioids only (no maximum quantity unless stated by restrictions)

-   Prescribers may write prescriptions for the listed quantities of
    opioids without contacting Services Australia. Where the item is
    streamlined, these should not be approved over the phone
-   Services Australia can only approve increased quantities and/or
    repeats for a maximum of 1 month treatment over the phone
-   Applications to prescribe quantities and/or repeats for up to 3
    months treatment can be made via HPOS form upload, post or by
    prescriber self-serve using the Online PBS Authorities System

The Resources page contains the categories of pharmaceutical benefits
listed in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

Related links

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
