
Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes refunds and withdrawals 012-17120400

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing MI refunds applications
and withdrawals.

On this Page:

MI refund applications

Eligible Medical Indemnity Insurers (MII) or Medical Defence
Organisations (MDO) must submit an MI refund application via the Medical
Indemnity Online Claiming (MIOC) system. In the event the MIOC system is
unavailable for a period of time (determined by the Director), a refund
application can be submitted with the relevant supporting documentation,
via post or email.

Services Australia has the authority to recover a payment made to the
Indemnity Insurer that has been overpaid or incorrectly paid. Funds may
be recovered for payments made under the High Cost Claim Indemnity
Scheme (HCCS), Run-off Cover Indemnity Scheme (ROCS), Incurred But Not
Reported Indemnity Scheme (IBNR) and Allied Health High Cost Claim
Indemnity Scheme (AHHCCS).

Recovery may be undertaken for a number of reasons and can include:

-   an insurer has recovered money or identified money claimed that
    needs to be refunded to Services Australia
-   an amount has been overpaid by Services Australia in error
-   an audit outcome or recommendation

An overpayment may arise in any of the following circumstances where:

-   an insurer recovers money from a third party in which the insurer
    had previously paid and had subsequently been reimbursed by Services
    Australia
-   judgment or order becomes subject to an appeal and/or stay, or
-   the amount paid is later found to be not payable under the terms of
    the MI Scheme

Documentation relevant to the expense that has been refunded should have
been provided with the initial or subsequent MI payment application(s)
however, if the refund is for a partial amount, the applicant must
provide copies of relevant invoices or other documentation relating to
the recoverable amount.

Services Australia can request further information from an insurer to
support an application for recovery, under section 38 of the Medical
Indemnity Act 2002 (the Act).

A MIOC refund application that has been approved by the delegate will be
recovered, in the form of a deduction from the total payment being made
to the same Insurer, for the corresponding pay cycle (or can be delayed
for up to 3 pay cycles if insufficient funds are available). Details of
the recovery will be included in a payment advice email, sent to the
applicant.

MI Withdrawn applications

An application submitted in MIOC may be withdrawn by the Insurer or by
Services Australia on behalf of the Insurer. The system will also
automatically withdraw a MIOC application if there has been no response
to a request for further information by the due date allocated in MIOC.

An Insurer may withdraw an application at any stage of the claim process
then resubmit a new application at a later date for payment. This may
occur if they:

-   identify a discrepancy in the claim details
-   have applied for payment under an incorrect MI scheme
-   are unable to provide satisfactory documentation to meet a section
    38 request for further information

If an Insurer needs to withdraw an application, this must be done before
another subsequent claim can be submitted. The withdrawn application
maintains the same claim reference number and the subsequently submitted
application will become the next claim reference in sequence. The
subsequently submitted application will be assessed as a completely new
claim and the Insurer will need to provide all documents required to
support the claim.

The Resources page contains the claims on hand attachment, FAQs about
apportionment Vendor codes, General ledger account codes, contact
details, and links to the Service Australia and Department of Health and
Aged Care websites.

Related links

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes Claiming

High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (HCCS)

Run-Off Cover Indemnity Scheme (ROCS)

Incurred But Not Reported Indemnity Scheme (IBNR)

Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (ECS)

Allied Health High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (AHHCCS)

Allied Health Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (AHECS)

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes finalising assessment

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes delegate approval process

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes registration

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes pay run process

Monthly Medical Indemnity (MI) administrative process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
