
Physiotherapy services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020140

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) physiotherapy services programme for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

Physiotherapy services

DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the veteran
community) that covers physiotherapy services that can only be provided
to entitled persons by registered physiotherapists. Physiotherapy
services claimed must be in accordance with the patient's assessed
clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

Eligibility to receive DVA physiotherapy services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
physiotherapy services based on the type of DVA health care card they
hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most physiotherapy services necessary to meet a clinical need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds physiotherapy related to the card holders accepted
disabilities only and treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is commenced.

Patient Eligibility for VAP contains the steps to follow to verify a DVA
health card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting
physiotherapy services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their physiotherapist provider
accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before commencing treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA physiotherapy services

Only a physiotherapist who is registered with Services Australia (they
have a Medicare provider number) at the time of the service is able to
provide services to eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to ‘Notes for Allied Health Providers
– Physiotherapists’ on the DVA Website. This contains detailed
eligibility requirements and also information for Physiotherapy
services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for physiotherapy services

The DVA Physiotherapy Schedule of Fees contains a range of items
available to eligible DVA health card holders for both professional
attendances in rooms or at a place other than rooms (domiciliary visits)
such as a patients home, residential aged care facility or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range PH10-PH99.

The Resources page contains a link to the physiotherapy Schedule of
Fees.

DVA prior financial authorisation requirements for physiotherapists

Physiotherapy service providers may be required to seek prior financial
authorisation from DVA before providing certain physiotherapy services.
The fee schedules contain information on which items require prior
financial authorisation.

To request financial approval, physiotherapy service providers must
contact DVA before administering services to be able to claim payment by
completing a Chiropractic/Osteopathy/Physiotherapy Prior Financial
Approval Request form. The Resources page has a link to the form on the
DVA Website.

DVA physiotherapy services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by Services
Australia Service Officers processing claims.

-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient. Only 1 subsequent
    consultation per entitled person can be provided each day
-   2 consultations cannot be claimed on the same day, for the same
    patient (with the exception of physiotherapy services PH23 and PH27
    where treatment, not exceeding 5 days, is required for a short term
    acute onset condition. When claiming, providers should indicate AM
    or PM next to each consultation or the time of each consultation)
-   Extended consultations are to be claimed for treatment of 2 acute
    and unrelated areas. Treatment of related areas, or treatment of
    multiple, chronic musculo-skeletal conditions, should not be claimed
    as an extended consultation
-   Concurrent physiotherapy and chiropractic services for the same
    condition for any entitled patient is not permitted. The system does
    not support this DVA business rule, health care providers are
    required to deliver treatment and meet the accountability
    requirements as set out in Notes for Allied Health Providers. The
    Resources page contains a link to the Notes for Allied Health
    Providers
-   Lymphoedema Management is claimed with item PH41. There is a limit
    of 20 services for a patient per calendar year. Prior approval is
    not required
-   Group physiotherapy can be provided using item PH50 and cannot be
    claimed on the same day as any other physiotherapy item for the same
    patient
-   Aquatic physiotherapy can be provided using item PH60 and PH61,
    however, travel cannot be claimed. PH60 and PH61 cannot be claimed
    on the same day as any other physiotherapy item for the same
    patient. Only 1 aquatic physiotherapy consultation per patient can
    be provided each day
-   Treatment in residential aged care facilities (RACF) high care and
    public hospitals requires prior approval.
-   Treatment for White Card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    'Notes for Physiotherapists' available on DVA’s Website. The
    Resources page contains a link to the website

DVA physiotherapy services limitations and restrictions

Physiotherapy and chiropractic treatment or physiotherapy and
osteopathic treatment cannot be provided for the same condition at the
same time.

A complete list of business rules associated with DVA physiotherapy
services can be found in the explanatory ‘Notes for Allied Health
Providers Section 2(f) for Physiotherapists'. The Resources page
contains a link to the Notes.

Claim lodgement information

DVA physiotherapy services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources
page contains a link to claim choices for health professionals on the
Services Australia website.

Online claiming

Physiotherapy service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online.
However a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health card
holder. Service providers should be sure that they can, from other means
of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services Australia or DVA
for evidence of service and details of treatment.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

DVA Webclaim is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that
allows health care providers to submit electronic claims via the
internet, without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the
Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming via DVA
Webclaim. A copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health
card holder. Service providers should be sure that they can, from other
means of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services Australia or
DVA for evidence of service and details of treatment.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA physiotherapist providers are required to lodge both a ‘Health
Practitioner Service Voucher’ form and a ‘Claim for Treatment Services
Voucher’ form. These fillable forms can be printed out and are available
from the DVA Website. Physiotherapist providers can use their own
invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can provide the same level
of information as required by the DVA forms. After completion, service
providers should post the forms to Services Australia for processing as
per the instructions on the form. The Resources page contains a link to
the website.

Enquires escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP physiotherapy services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers
will help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Veterans’ Affairs
Website and question and answers for common enquiries relating to
physiotherapy services.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Manual data entry for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Health Professional Online Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
