
Processing a change in residency status for a medical practitioner 012-19062849

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and process change in residency
status for medical practitioners.

Eligibility

Services Australia is responsible for assessing and processing changes
in residency status for medical practitioners whose immigration status
has changed from temporary resident to permanent resident or citizen
and:

-   are eligible to access Medicare benefits
-   are eligible to access Medicare benefits
-   satisfy section 19AA with a post graduate qualification
-   satisfy section 19AA with a 3GA placement
-   have access to Medicare benefits but does not satisfy Section 19AA

The Department of Health and Aged Care’s website ‘provides comprehensive
information to medical practitioners intending to work in Australia and
access Medicare. See the Resources page for a link.

Disclosure of information/privacy incidents

Services Australia has a responsibility to maintain records relating to
personal and business information. People provide this information with
the understanding that Services Australia will protect this from
unauthorised access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to
remain confident that Services Australia will protect their information
and comply with the privacy provisions of the various legislation it
administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by Services Australia
is inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by Services Australia is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the Team Leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia’s Privacy and
Secrecy page and the Operational Privacy Policy.

Enquiry Escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), is used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer. These
Service Officers escalate complex enquiries to a Programme Support
Officer (PSO) who will liaise with a Programmer Officer (PO) if
required.

Business structure information measure

The mandatory collection of business structure information began on 10
September 2018 and was introduced to improve recovery arrangements for
Medicare debts owed to the Commonwealth under the Health Legislation
Amendment (Improved Medicare Compliance and Other Measures) Bill 2018.

Health professionals who intend to claim Medicare benefits are required
to provide business structure information when:

-   submitting a new provider number application
-   backdating an existing location start date
-   re-opening a previously closed provider number (where the
    information is not recorded)
-   opening a second provider number at an existing location (with a
    different ABN)

The Resources page contains for a link to the Department of Health and
Aged Care - Changes to Legislation – Improved Medicare Compliance
website. Direct all enquiries about this measure to the Department of
Health and Aged Care.

The Resources page contains information about the employment status and
business details measure, additional information about provider numbers
and provider number locations, as well as links to useful contacts,
forms and websites.

Related links

Provider number applications for medical practitioners and their
requirements under the Health Insurance Act 1973

Processing provider number applications for overseas trained or
temporary resident medical practitioners

Processing provider number applications for Interns in Medicare

Business structure and bank account details for EFT for health
professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
