
Processing written authority approval requests 012-63020010

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines information for Service Officers related to
processing, endorsing and replying to Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) written authority approval requests.

Written authority approval requests received by mail or HPOS

Written Authority approval requests include those received by mail or
uploaded via HPOS. Prescribers may choose the mail or HPOS secure form
upload channel when seeking authority to prescribe any PBS medicines.
Common reasons include:

-   the patient has sufficient medication, so the request is not urgent
-   the approved provider finds it more convenient to use the post or
    the HPOS secure form upload facility
-   the request is for an item which must be made in writing (mandatory)

Authority applications for mandatory written authority required items

Some medicines need written authority approval from Services Australia
before they can be prescribed. Due to the clinical use or other special
features of these medicines, applications for authority approval must be
made in writing. Some of these have Authority application forms
available.

The medicine will not be PBS - subsidised without authority approval.
Retrospective approval is not allowed.

For more information about which medicines must have written authority
approval:

See:

-   Written Authority Required Drugs
-   Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program
-   Section 100 in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   The References page contains links to legislation outlining the
    supply of pharmaceutical benefits and the specific Complex Authority
    Required (CAR) medications that are required to be in writing
-   Alzheimer’s disease treatment and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
    (PBS). These medicines are not considered as Complex Authority
    Required but they are listed in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical
    Benefits as written authority required for the initial 2 treatment
    phase
-   Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme -
    Drugs of addiction - opioid medicines for greater than one month's
    supply. The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits outlines the maximum
    quantity and repeats allowed for of these medicines

Privacy when returning authority prescriptions by mail

Approved authority prescriptions (without any letters attached) are to
be returned to the patients or the prescribers in non-window faced
envelopes. This is to prevent personal information showing through
window-faced envelopes when authority prescriptions without letters are
returned. For example, date of birth, Medicare number and medication
prescribed.

Check the prescription to see if the prescriber has indicated that the
prescription can be returned to the patient.

Note: patient's name and address details can be printed using the
envelope wizard in Word.

Privacy when providing Authority request results via HPOS

All written authority responses should be a reply to the prescribers'
original email within HPOS.

Open the attached file/s from the original email to ensure the response
is to the correct patient and prescriber.

Rejection slip for Active Ingredient Prescribing (AIP)

Computer generated prescriptions for PBS authority items sent to
Services Australia for assessment will need to comply with AIP changes.

If a written authority prescription is not compliant with Active
Ingredient Prescribing, a Rejection slip for Active Ingredient
Prescribing will need to be sent to the prescriber with the approved
prescription. The Resources page contains a link to the Rejection Slip.

The Resources page contains links to PBS letters, contact details, links
to the Department of Health and Aged Care and Aged Care PBS website and
the Rejection Slip. It also contains email text for use in response to
Doctor or Delegate, secure print information and recording customer
addresses.

Related Links

Alzheimer’s disease in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Dosage calculators and charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Handle 'too soon' Authority prescription

Health Professional Online Services Support Mail Centre - managing
emails from health professionals

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program

Manage work items in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process for Authority required (STREAMLINED) item

Processing written authority approval requests

Processing Written Authority Required Listings

Rapid Addressing for Medicare

Section 100 in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Written Authority Required Drugs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
