
Identify and resolve replica eHealth Program (EHP) individual record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to identify and resolve
replica eHealth Program (EHP) individual records in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

On this Page:

Determination of a replica record

The determination of a replica record may only be made where the HI
Service has genuinely allocated the same identifier to two or more
individuals (due to a system malfunction).

This does not include the inappropriate assignment of identifiers within
the health sector. Follow-up action may need to occur to rectify
external health sector issues.

All potential replicas must be referred to Tier 3 support for follow-up
action and resolution.

A weekly report is produced to enable the resolution of any potential
replica records.

EHP individuals

EHP individuals, for the purposes of this document, are defined as
either a:

-   Healthcare Provider Individual (HPI-I)
-   Responsible Officer (RO)
-   Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)

Identify replica records for EHP individuals

Notification must be received by the Services Australia to flag the
affected record.

The potential replica can be identified by a:

-   Healthcare Provider Individual (HPI-I)
-   Responsible Officer (RO)
-   Organisation Maintenance Office (OMO)
-   data source

A weekly report is produced which contains a list of all records flagged
as potential replicas.

Manual identification of potential replica record

Where notification is received of a record that is a potential replica,
a search must be conducted on the relevant identifier or demographic
information provided.

Where the replica is found, the record must be flagged for later
investigation and resolution. The record then has a status of 'potential
replica'.

Flagging a record for replica resolution does not prevent updates being
made to a record.

Records that have been investigated and found not to be a replica can be
re-flagged at a later time if it is once again determined to be a
potential replica.

Note:

-   HPI-I records with a status of active or deactivated maybe flagged
    as a potential replica
-   RO or OMO record with a status of active may be flagged as a
    potential replica

Notification of replica records via data source

A single identifier must be provided for every request made to notify
the HI Service that an identifier is a replica. A successful replica
notification results in all affected records being flagged with a
replica marker for further follow up.

Resolve replica records for EHP individuals

If it is determined that two or more EHP individuals have been allocated
the same identifier, two or more new records must be created for the
individuals involved.

If a record is determined to be a replica, organisation links are
manually end-dated.

Potential replica records may be determined not to be a replica and have
the replica flag removed.

Resolved replica records:

-   may be searched and viewed by Service Officers
-   are removed from the Healthcare Provider Directory Service, if an
    entry exists

Related links

Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Identify and resolve duplicate eHealth Program (EHP) individual record
in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
