
Dental practitioners provider eligibility and dental specialist registration 012-19091214

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for dental practitioners and dental specialists.

Dental practitioners

To provide services under Medicare as a dental practitioner, the health
professional must be recognised in this field.

Dental practitioner registration categories covered under Medicare are:

-   dentists, and
-   dental specialists
-   dental hygienists, dental therapists and oral health therapists
    (from 1 July 2022)

Dentists

Dentists are practitioners who practice in the field of dentistry. They
provide the below services:

-   assessment
-   diagnosis
-   treatment and management
-   prevention

Dental practitioners are issued with a 112 specialty code.

Dental specialists

These are dentists who have completed extra specialised training and
education. Medicare accepts the below specialties:

-   Dento-Maxillofacial Radiology (specialty code 157)
-   Endodontist (specialty code 140)
-   Oral Medicine and/or Oral Pathology (specialty code 142)
-   Orthodontist (specialty code 155)
-   Paedodontist (specialty code 141)
-   Periodontist (specialty code 143)
-   Prosthodontist (specialty code 139)
-   Special Needs Dentistry (specialty code 159)

Dental hygienists, dental therapists and oral health therapists

Dental hygienists, dental therapists and oral health therapists are
tertiary trained and Ahpra registered dental practitioners. Their
primary focus is on oral health promotion, prevention and early
intervention of oral diseases and maintenance dental work.

Prior to 1 July 2022, the Dental Benefit Rules 2014 7(a) allowed for
dental hygienists, dental therapists and oral health therapists to
render services for the Child Dental Benefit Schedule (CDBS) under
supervision and on behalf of a dentist. These rules allow dental
hygienists, dental therapists and oral health therapists to render these
services but they are not classified as dental providers. They are not
issued with their own Medicare provider number. This service is billed
under the dental practitioner’s provider number.

From 1 July 2022, dental hygienists, dental therapists and oral health
therapists can continue to render services on behalf of a dentist or if
eligible, they may apply to Services Australia for their own Medicare
provider number at the respective location and bill for services
rendered within their scope of practice directly.

The following specialty codes apply:

-   dental therapists (specialty code 670 and 207)
-   dental hygienists (specialty code 671 and 208)
-   oral health therapists (specialty code 672 and 209)

Dental Prosthetists

Prior to 1 December 2012, dental prosthetists were eligible to be issued
with a provider number under the Chronic Disease Dental Scheme (CDDS).

On 1 December 2012, the CDDS ceased and dental prosthetists were no
longer eligible to claim services under Medicare.

From 1 December 2012, dental prosthetists may be issued with a provider
number in order to provide services under private health insurance or
Department of Veterans' Affairs arrangements.

Dental prosthetists are issued with a 156 specialty code.

Medicare eligibility and registration

To be registered with Medicare, an applicant must have a current
registration with the Dental Board of Australia. This is a board
supported by the Australian Health Practitioners Regulation Agency
(Ahpra)

Evidence of Registration may be:

-   a copy of the AHRPA registration certificate submitted with the
    application for an initial provider number
-   where there is an existing 'shell' record in the Provider Directory
    System (PDS), registration details are pre-populated within the
    'shell' record
-   Ahpra Information window (if available), or
-   Ahpra website search result

Further confirmation of registration (such as a certificate) is not
required if PDS shows a current Australian (AUS) registration in the
Registration section of the provider's record.

Registration is renewed annually on 30 November. The Resources page has
a link to the Ahpra website. Medicare benefits cannot be paid for
services provided or requested when they are not registered with the
Ahpra.

Gaps in registration result in gaps in eligibility for Medicare
benefits.

Representative public dentists and Representative public dental practitioners (RPDs and RPDPs)

RPDs are dentists nominated by a state or territory. The RPD is issued a
separate stem for this purpose. Speciality code 106 identifies RPDs.

RPDPs include dental hygienists, dental therapists and oral health
therapists and can also be nominated by a state or territory. The RPDPs
are issued a separate stem for this purpose. The following specialty
codes apply:

-   RPDP Dental therapist (specialty code 673)
-   RPDP Dental hygienist (specialty code 674)
-   RPDP Oral health therapist –(specialty code 675)

To help identify applications for an RPD and RPDP the below details may
be provided:

a letter of support from:

-   the state or territory, or
-   a trusted source who employs the RPD or RPDP to provide public
    dental services under the Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS)

a note on the application advising they are a RPD or RPDP

a 106 speciality code for RPD is already recorded on the stem

a 673, 674 or 675 specialty code for RPDP is already recorded on the
stem

The application will request a provider number for a public facility
(for example, a hospital) and EFT details.

Preventative dental checks done in public dental clinics are billed
under:

-   the dental practitioners name, and
-   RPD or RPDP provider number

Medicare pays 100% of the benefits for these services. The benefit goes
in to the state, territory or public health service controlled bank
account.

RPDs and RPDPs must have:

-   a general or specialist registration with the Dental Board of
    Australia, and
-   a provider number for each public sector clinic location they are
    responsible for under the representative public dentist model

Escalate all RPD and RPDP applications to the National Office escalation
folder in PaNDA.

Oral and maxillofacial surgeon

Oral and maxillofacial surgeons are specialists in the diagnosis and
treatment of a broad range of disorders affecting the:

-   facial complex
-   skeleton
-   jaws, and
-   oral cavity

To be recognised as an oral and maxillofacial surgeon with Medicare, the
applicant must:

-   be registered as a medical practitioner with the Australian Health
    Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra), and
-   supply an Application for recognition as a specialist or consultant
    physician form (HW077) form

Speciality code 062 is used to recognise medical practitioners who are
eligible for recognition in:

-   oral, and
-   maxillofacial surgery

Medical practitioners with the 062 specialty code are eligible to access
oral and maxillofacial MBS items in Category 3 and 7 of the MBS

Speciality code 062 must only be applied against a medical practitioner
stem. If speciality code 062 has been recorded against a dental stem,
contact a Provider Registration Program Support Officer (PSO) for
further investigation

Previously, speciality codes 102 and 158 were registered for dental
practitioners approved to carry out prescribed medical services

Dental practitioners with a current 102 and 158 specialty code are
eligible to access oral and maxillofacial MBS items from Category 4 and
7 of the MBS

Specialty codes 102 and 158 remain open on existing eligible dental
practitioner records

More provider numbers can be issued for dental practitioners with an
active speciality code 102 and/or 158. Do not add these specialty codes
to new dental practitioners stem

Note: Claims for oral and maxillofacial MBS items for maxillofacial
surgeons recognised as a specialist medical practitioner, will reject if
claimed using a dental provider number.

Child Dental Benefit Schedule (CDBS)

The CDBS is a dental benefits program for eligible children that can be
used to pay for check-ups, fillings and other basic dental services.

Prior to 1 January 2022, the age eligibility was 2-17 years for CDBS.

From 1 January 2022, the eligibility age changed to children aged 0-17
years.

In order for a dental practitioner to be eligible to provide and claim
services under CBDS, they must:

-   hold general or specialist registration as a dentist or allied
    dental practitioner with the Dental Board of Australia, and
-   have a Medicare provider number

See Provider eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare.

Speciality code 107 is added onto the stem to allow access to CDBS.
Dentists do not apply for CDBS, the 107 speciality code is automatically
added.

Note: In the public dental sector, claiming CDBS services must be billed
under the Medicare provider number of the relevant Representative Public
Dentist (RPD) or Representative Public Dental Practitioner (RPDP).

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to Ahpra. The Resources page
has the contact details.

Speciality code 115 (no longer added)

Speciality code 155 Orthodontist replaces this code. If a speciality
code 115 is identified on a health professionals record, add a 155
speciality code if the Ahpra certificate shows Orthodontist.

Enquiry escalation

-   Refer all enquiries about eligibility to access Medicare to Medicare
    Provider Registration
-   Service Officers via the Provider Registration Tier 2 telephony line
    handle all provider registration enquiries
-   Complex enquiries are escalated by Provider Registration Service
    Officers to a Provider Registration Programme Support Officer (PSO).
    A PSO can then liaise with a Programme Officer (PO) if required

The Resources page has:

-   the dental practitioner's quick reference guide
-   contact details, and
-   links to external websites

Related links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Ahpra Information Window

Dental services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
