
Administration for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03010000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the administration procedures
for the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service enabling Service Officers to
keep securely stored and accurate documents in the Health Professionals
(HP) Records Manager. It outlines how to correctly format addresses in
letters ensuring these are received at the correct address.

Address formatting

Address blocks for Registration letters can be keyed in the eHealth
Program (EHP) in upper or lower case. The address will reformat to upper
case when entered. See Address formatting in Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service.

Document storage

Due to the personal information collected in HI documentation, it is a
requirement that forms and documents are stored securely. HP Records
Manager is the electronic storage system used by Services Australia to
securely store HI Service documentation. See Document storage for
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

HP Records Manager

The HP Records Management system is used to securely and correctly store
application forms that have been processed by Tier 2 and Tier 3. This
ensures future searches for the application are easy to find and is an
efficient way of filing past applications. See Health Professionals (HP)
Records Manager for Health Identifiers (HI).

Batch processing

Batch processing occurs when HI Service transactions are processed in a
Medicare Service Centre and the process is followed so envelopes are
marked and batched correctly.

The Resources page contains information for mailing batched HI Service
transactions processed in a Medicare Service Centre.

Contents

Address formatting in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Document storage for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Health Professionals (HP) Records Manager for Health Identifiers (HI)
Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
