
Remote Area Aboriginal Health Services (RAAHS) 012-65010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines RAAHS and related processing.

Supply of PBS medicines to RAAHS

Special arrangements apply under section 100 of the National Health Act
1953 for the supply of Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medicines to
approved RAAHS.

The RAAHS program may also be referred to as:

-   Aboriginal Medical Services (AMS)
-   Aboriginal Health Services (AHS)
-   Remote Aboriginal Health Services (RAHS)

Under the RAAHS arrangements an approved AHS must choose an approved
supplier/s to provide Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medicines. An
approved supplier is:

-   a community or hospital pharmacy
-   approved to supply PBS medicines at a particular premises

Each participating AHS will keep a stock of PBS medicines to be
dispensed as needed. These are ordered on a bulk and individual supply
basis from an approved supplier.

An approved AHS submits an Aboriginal Health Services (AHS)
pharmaceutical supplies request and claim form (PB042) to an approved
supplier to receive certain PBS medicines free of charge. These are
available on Services Australia website. The RAAHS then supplies PBS
medicines to eligible patients free of charge. Approved suppliers submit
RAAHS claims for payment to the agency and are reimbursed by an EFT
payment in 30 calendar days from date of lodgement of a correctly
completed and submitted claim.

Note: a patient who receives pharmaceutical benefits under the RAAHS
program is still eligible to receive pharmaceutical supplies under
standard PBS arrangements. For example, medicines can be supplied by an
approved supplier following the presentation of a prescription.

Handling enquiries from providers about the RAAHS programs

The Process page contains information to help Service Officers with
enquiries about the PBS General Line from Aboriginal Health Services
(AHS) and approved suppliers about the RAAHS program.

Enquiries about the RAAHS program, payment and claiming should be
directed to the AHS processing team:

-   see Aboriginal Health Services for contact numbers
-   approved suppliers may email their enquiry directly

Service Officers may request a call back. Enquiries regarding AHS
eligibility criteria and approval should be directed to the Department
of Health and Aged Care.

AHS Stationery enquiries

The agency no longer issues AHS stationery products. The Aboriginal
Health Services (AHS) pharmaceutical supplies request and claim form
(PB042) is on the Services Australia website.

Reason Codes

There is a set of reason codes to inform the Service Officer of
assessment outcomes. Reason codes are applied by the system once a line
entry is submitted on the AHS Item Details screen. These will show in
the reason code column of the Item Summary. Reject reason codes applied
to items will also show on the AHS Claim Summary Statement. There are
also several operator reason codes that can be manually applied to
reject an item, as opposed to a system rejection.

The Resources page contains a list of AHS reason codes and the relevant
Service Officer instructions.

The Resources page contains:

-   a description of the fields available for performing a search on the
    Query Aboriginal Health Services (AHS) screen
-   a list of the query AHS reason codes
-   a link to the Aboriginal Health Services (AHS) pharmaceutical
    supplies request and claim (PB042) form
-   AHS payment authorisation recipient list
-   internal and external websites
-   letters
-   AHS Access Database task card
-   contact details

Related links

Remote Area Aboriginal Health Services (PBS Payments) quality checking

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
