
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program under
Section 100 of the National Health Act 1953.

HSD Program

The Australian Government provides funding for certain specialised
medications under the HSD Program.

The HSD Program provides Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) subsidised
medicines for the treatment of chronic conditions. These include (but
are not limited to) human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), schizophrenia
and rheumatoid arthritis. Some of these subsidised medicines have
restrictions on where they can be supplied because of their clinical
use, or other special features.

HSD

HSD are medicines:

-   recommended by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC)
    for listing on the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (the PBS
    Schedule), and are for the treatment of a small identifiable patient
    target group needing ongoing specialised medical supervision. For
    example, human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune deficiency
    syndrome (HIV/AIDS) or the treatment of schizophrenia
-   for the treatment of chronic conditions which, because of their
    clinical use or other special features, are restricted to public,
    public participating and private hospitals with access to
    appropriate specialist facilities. An exception is items supplied
    under the Highly Specialised Drugs Community Access Arrangements.
    See the Resources page for a diagram showing the arrangements.
-   administered and funded under Section 100 of the National Health Act
    1953.

Note: benefits are available for listed clinical indications only. Usual
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient co-payments apply.

Patient eligibility

Persons eligible for Commonwealth subsidy through this program must be:

-   patients in the community or attending day services (that is, not
    in-patients), and
-   be an 'eligible person' satisfying the following criteria from the
    Health Insurance Act 1973

To be prescribed HSD as Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) items, a
patient must attend an HSD approved public or private hospital and be a:

-   day admitted patient
-   non-admitted patient, or
-   patient on discharge

and

-   be under appropriate specialist medical care
-   meet specific medical criteria
-   be an Australian resident in Australia (or other eligible person)
-   Note: an exception is items supplied under the Highly Specialised
    Drugs Community Access Arrangements. See the Resources page for a
    diagram showing the new arrangements.

Patients on discharge

HSD are prescribed to a patient on discharge and are dispensed within
the hospital setting to take home. These are not medicines administered
in the hospital.

Those admitted as an inpatient, should not have medicines administered
to them in the hospital funded by the PBS. This is even when those
medicines were administered on the same day that the patient was
discharged.

Prescriber eligibility

To prescribe HSD as Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) items,
prescribers are required to be affiliated with specialist hospital
units. A General Practitioner (GP) or non-specialist hospital doctor can
only prescribe HSD to provide maintenance therapy under the guidance of
a treating specialist.

A person eligible to prescribe HSD will be either:

-   a staff hospital specialist
-   a visiting or consulting hospital specialist
-   an accredited prescriber of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
    immune deficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) medication
-   an accredited prescriber of Hepatitis maintenance medication
-   a hospital doctor or GP to provide maintenance therapy
-   a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner for opioid dependence
    treatment (ODT) medicines

Acceptable situations

Hospital based doctors and medical practitioners can prescribe HSD:

-   where they are accredited prescribers of HIV/AIDS medication (a
    medical practitioner or non-specialist hospital doctor can be
    accredited to prescribe HIV/AIDS medication following State or
    Territory approval)
-   to provide maintenance therapy in public and private hospitals in
    situations where it is impractical to obtain a prescription from the
    treating specialist and with their agreement

A medical practitioner can:

-   provide maintenance therapy in situations where it is impractical to
    obtain a prescription from the treating specialist and with their
    agreement
-   only prescribe for maintenance therapy and only with the approval or
    referral of the treating specialist, the specialist maintains the
    link to the HSD approved hospital

Note: hospital based doctors and community based non-specialist doctors
may also prescribe HSD to provide initiation therapy, where the
State/Territory, Commonwealth and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory
Committee (PBAC) agree on an arrangement, specifically to allow
accredited doctors to provide initiation therapy. As of December 2009,
there are no such arrangements.

Prescribing outside hospital location

The HSD Program was developed for out-patient clinics, however private
hospitals do not usually have out-patient clinics. It is therefore
acceptable for the specialist to be located away from the hospital but,
for private hospitals, they are required to have admitting rights to the
hospital.

Since the hospital is approved, the hospital must provide the hospital
approval number to the specialist doctor. The doctor then needs to
supply the hospital approval number to Services Australia (the agency)
in order to gain approval for an HSD, thus ensuring compliance with the
program requirements.

This link to the hospital is essential, as HSD are medicines that are
restricted to supply through public and private hospitals with access to
appropriate specialist facilities.

Note: an exception is items supplied under the Highly Specialised Drugs
Community Access Arrangements. See the Resources page for a diagram
showing the new arrangements.

Improved Community Access Arrangements for the HSD Program

On 1 July 2015, the process for prescribing and dispensing human
immunodeficiency virus antiretroviral therapy (HIV ART), Hepatitis B and
Clozapine (maintenance therapy only) medicines was simplified. On 1 July
2023, opioid dependence treatment medicines were added to this
arrangement.

These changes make it easier for practitioners to prescribe and for
patients to have their prescription/s dispensed. These changes reflect
current clinical practice, where treatment is increasingly being
provided in the community setting.

See the Resources page for a diagram showing the improved community
access arrangements.

Patients are able to access these medicines from the pharmacy of their
choice, regardless of where these medicines are prescribed.

The approval process to prescribe these medicines is the same for all
prescribers, with Streamlined Authority requirements applying for
community, private and public hospital based prescribers. Authority
approval is still required for increased quantities and/or increased
repeats.

The HSD Program arrangements for all other medicines covered in this
program was not changed.

Opioid dependence treatment (ODT) medicines

From 1 July 2023, ODT medicines have become part of the Section 100 HSD
Program (Community Access) arrangements. The agency will administer PBS
claiming for prescriptions for ODT items only. The agency does not make
payments to PBS Approved Suppliers for provision of ODT services to
patients, this is administered by the Pharmacy Programs Administrator
(PPA).

See the Resources page for links to PBS and Services Australia websites
with information on ODT.

Transitional arrangements for opioid dependence treatment (ODT) medicine
prescriptions

A transition period for prescriptions written before 1 July 2023 can be
used to support PBS supplies after 1 July 2023. For the purposes of
submitting claims for payment to the agency, prescriptions written
before 1 July 2023 will be treated as if written on 1 July 2023, using
authority prescription details available on the fact sheet for
pharmacists.

The pharmacist must submit the claim as an original PBS prescription for
the first supply only under the transitional arrangements. They must
refer to the fact sheet for guidance on whether the patient is eligible
for any repeats to be applied.

If the patient is eligible for repeat supplies, these must be processed
as per current procedures via the dispense software and PBS Online.

Any prescriptions written after 1 July 2023 are not covered by these
transitional arrangements.

See the Resources page for links to:

-   opioid dependence treatment program
-   factsheet for community and hospital pharmacists
-   transition arrangements for private clinics and non-PBS approved
    dosing sites

The Resources page contains links to PBS and Services Australia
websites, improved community access arrangements attachment and fact
sheets.

Contents

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) in public hospitals

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) in private hospitals

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Authority required and Section
100 - Health Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
