
This document outlines details of the previous Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) subsidies for bevacizumab for patients with Glioblastoma.
This program has been decommissioned and this page is for informational
purposes only.

For information on how to process a PBS Authority see Processing Complex
Authority Required Listings.

Glioblastoma

Glioblastoma is an aggressive type of cancer that can occur in the brain
or spinal cord.

Listing dates were as follows:

-   bevacizumab – listed 1 August 2019, delisted 1 June 2021

From 1 June, 2021 the bevacizumab is no longer PBS subsidised under the
Complex Drugs program. Bevacizumab is still a PBS listed item under the
brand Mvasi, and is listed as an unrestricted item. Prescribers can
write a standard script for this item, up to the list quantity and
repeats. The previous brand of Avastin, is no longer a PBS subsidised
item, and cannot be approved or supplied at the pharmacy after 1 June.

Enquiries

If a prescriber contacts the Complex Drugs enquiry line after 1 June
2021 to enquire about prescribing bevacizumab under the brand Avastin,
advise the prescriber that this brand is no longer PBS subsidised, and
that a new brand is available as an unrestricted listing.

Processing written applications post 1 June, 2021

When the date of prescribing is before 1 June 2021

Attempt to contact the prescriber. Explain to the prescriber that
although the item was valid at the time the prescription was written, it
was removed from the PBS schedule as of 1 June, and is no longer
available to be dispensed. Advise the prescriber that they can instead
write a standard prescription for the new brand of bevacizumab and
provide this to their patient.

There is no benefit to approving the application, as the item cannot be
supplied at the pharmacy.

If the prescriber cannot be contacted, escalate the application to the
Pharmaceutical Advisor team according to the standard processes for
escalating written scripts.

When the date of prescribing is 1 June 2021 (or later)

Return the application to the prescriber with the relevant letter. From
1 June, bevacizumab is no longer an ‘Authority Required’ item.

Related links

Written Authority Required Drugs

Processing Complex Authority Required Listings

Processing written authority approval requests

Process telephone Authority approval application

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
