
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the PIP GP ACAI and how to assess and process the
General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive Payment banking details
form (IP011).

Aim of GP ACAI

The GP ACAI encourages general practitioners (GP) to provide increased
and continuing services in residential aged care facilities (RACF).

Eligibility and payment types

-   To be eligible for the GP ACAI, GPs must provide a minimum number of
    eligible Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) services in
    Commonwealth-funded residential aged care facilities (RACF) in a
    financial year. This includes services provided to Department of
    Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) patients
-   There are 4 payment tiers. Each tier has a minimum qualifying
    service level (QSL) that must be met to generate a payment. The QSL
    is the minimum number of eligible MBS services a GP must provide for
    each payment tier. The GP services are cumulative over the financial
    year

See the Resources page for information about QSLs and eligible MBS items
numbers.

Payments to bank accounts

GP ACAI payments are paid to:

-   the GP who provided the services, unless they make other
    arrangements
-   the GP's nominated bank account in the next payment quarter, once
    the required number of services has been processed by Medicare

To be eligible for the GP ACAI payments, the GP must:

-   be registered as an associated GP with a general practice that is
    approved for PIP and meets the PIP eligibility requirements
-   provide eligible MBS services to residents in RACFs
-   reach the QSLs by providing the required number of MBS services in
    RACFs in a financial year
-   provide MBS services using a Medicare provider number that is linked
    to a PIP practice

A GP does not need to apply to participate in the GP ACAI. GPs who are
eligible for payments must provide bank account details using General
Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive Payment banking details form
(IP011)

GPs can update their registered GP ACAI banking details or via Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) using their Provider Digital Access
(PRODA) Account.

Eligibility and payments are based on the services provided under the
provider stem - it is not location specific

See Provider number for health professionals in Medicare for more
details about the structure of a provider number.

Changes to the GP ACAI

As part of the 2021-22 Federal Budget the GP ACAI was boosted to
increase face-to-face servicing by GPs in RACFs. The maximum payment for
GPs for a financial year doubled to $10,000. The number of service level
payment tiers increased from 2 to 4.

See the Resources page for more information about the payment tiers.

Changes to GP ACAI payments:

-   commenced in November 2021, and
-   were based on services provided from 1 July 2021

The August 2021 GP ACAI payments were adjustment payments for the
2020-21 financial year. These payments were calculated based on the
previous GP ACAI payment tiers and qualifying service levels.

Ceased incentives

On 31 July 2019, the following incentives ceased:

-   Asthma Incentive
-   Cervical Screening Incentive
-   Diabetes Incentives

Final payments associated with the ceased incentives were made to GPs in
April 2021. After this date, any remaining held payments were cancelled.

Privacy and security of information

Information about GP ACAI payments can only be released to the GP who
provides the services. Do not give payment details to a practice owner
or authorised contact person who is not the ACAI GP

Service Officers must perform a telephone security check before
releasing any information

Requests to add or update GP ACAI banking details must be confirmed with
the GP before updating the form. Staff must:

-   make 2 genuine attempts to contact the GP by phone before returning
    the form to the GP, and
-   wait a minimum of 30 minutes between attempts to phone the GP

The GP can give verbal consent to release details to another person.
Service Officers must get verbal consent at the start of each call

See the Perform security check for Access to Patient Verification
Information table for more details.

Payment advices

-   Payment advices are sent to the GP’s preferred mailing address (PMA)
    as recorded in the Medicare Provider Directory System (PDS). GPs can
    update their PMA and access their payment advices using HPOS
-   General practitioners unable to access HPOS can submit a written
    request for duplicate payment advices
-   Payment advices are available for a period of up to 7 years.
    Requests for payment advices over 7 years cannot be accommodated

The Process page contains information about requesting a duplicate
statement.

The Resources page contains:

-   a link to PIP letters
-   forms
-   contacts and guidelines
-   error messages and resolutions
-   Qualifying Service Levels (QSL) targets, payments and enquiries
-   payment codes, and
-   eligible MBS items numbers

Related links

Incentive Programs

Forms and letters for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce
Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
