
Release of Centrelink data to approved suppliers in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-60100010

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Centrelink data that can be released to
approved suppliers in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

On this Page:

Release of Centrelink data

Policy 49

This policy covers the release of Centrelink data to an approved
supplier via PBS General enquiries.

The Resources page contains contact details.

Services Australia can release a person's Centrelink data (card number
and name only) to an approved supplier for the purpose of verifying a
person's entitlement to PBS medicines. This information cannot be
released unless the approved supplier has obtained patient or agent
consent, and has informed the patient or agent that Centrelink data is
being obtained and the purpose for which it will be used.

Note:

-   faxed requests for Centrelink data are not to be accepted
-   a maximum of five Centrelink numbers can be released in one phone
    call

Records disposal

PBS records (claims history records) are kept in two forms, which are
retained for different periods by Services Australia.

Paper records

Paper records such as claim forms and prescriptions, including Authority
prescriptions, are held for two years after final payment of claim and
are then destroyed in accordance with Records Disposal Authority (RDA)
1270.

Computer records

Computer records are held for five years after final payment of claim
and then archived at the Department of Health and Aged Care in
accordance with RDA 1223.

Claims history requests

Forward all requests for individuals' PBS claims histories to the
Release of Information team in the appropriate state. For contact
details, see Release of information.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
PBS contact details and a list of questions to ask approved suppliers
before releasing Centrelink data, and contact details for release of
information and PBS general enquiries.

Related links

Release of information in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Approved suppliers - Health
Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
