
Alzheimer's disease in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-19071904

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the approval process for a Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) subsidised medications for patients with
Alzheimer's disease.

Alzheimer’s disease and listing dates

Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative condition characterised by
loss of memory and cognitive function.

Listing dates are as follows:

-   donepezil hydrochloride – 1 February 2001
-   rivastigmine – 1 February 2001
-   galantamine – 1 December 2004
-   memantine hydrochloride – 1 July 2008

Treatment phases

Initial 1 and Initial 2 applications

Up to a maximum of 2 month’s initial supply can be approved over the
phone or electronically (using Online PBS Authorities system) for the
requested drug and strength under Initial 1 restriction.

When a previous telephone approval under Initial 1 is approved, the
balance of 6 months initial treatment for the same drug and same
strength must be made in writing. The restrictions do not limit a
prescriber from requesting another 2 months approval over the phone or
electronically for initial 1 for different strengths or drugs.

If a prescriber requests the entire 6 month’s supply, this must be via
Initial 2 written authority application.

Prescribers applying for authority approval for initial PBS subsidised
treatment for their patient are able to use the initial form to address
the criteria.

Initial 2 applications not meeting PBS criterial

When a prescriber submits an authority prescription for initial PBS
subsidised treatment that has not addressed the PBS criteria, reject the
application. However:

if only the specialist diagnosis/confirmation of Alzheimer disease is
missing, refer to the prescriber details on the Authority Prescription

-   If one of these words “Geriatrician / Neurologist / Psychiatrist /
    FRACP / FRANZCP” is present, approve the application if all other
    PBS criteria is addressed

if prescriber has omitted part of the criteria information, for example,
missing initial or not exceed a total of 6 months initial therapy, do
not reject. Staff should do a manual authority history check in OPA to
establish PBS eligibility. For example:

-   If there is an existing initial 1 approval for the same strength,
    staff can approve the balance of the 6 months therapy
-   If there is no previous approval in OPA, staff can approve up to 6
    months therapy

Continuing applications

Continuing treatments are Authority Required (STREAMLINED). Authority
approval is not required for listed quantities and repeats. Advise the
prescriber to visit the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme website or their
prescribing software for the restriction information and the streamlined
code. The Resources page has a link to the website.

Cognitive tests

Cognitive tests are used to determine the extent of the patient’ disease
and there are different cognitive tests used at specialist clinics.
However, there are only 3 assessments used in PBS restrictions for
Alzheimer medications.

MMSE

The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) assists in measuring cognitive
impairment. The Resources page contains a table outlining the MMSE
scale. The baseline MMSE is required for all written initial
applications.

A Standardised Mini-Mental State Examination ((S) MMSE) scale may also
be used.

Note: an MMSE date is not required.

CIBIS/CIBIC

MMSE score 9 or less

The Clinicians Interview Based Impression of Severity (CIBIS) scale is
used for assessment in a patient with Alzheimer’s disease:

-   with a baseline (S) MMSE score of 9 or less, and
-   who is unable to register a score of 10 or more for reasons other
    than their Alzheimer’s disease

The reason that the patient cannot register a (S) MMSE test score of 10
or more must be selected from 6 groups. The patient may qualify under
more than one group. The Resources page contains a table with more
information.

ADAS-Cog

The Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive sub-scale (ADAS-Cog)
is another examination used to assist in determining a patient's
cognitive state. The ADAS-Cog is a 70 point scale with scores towards 70
indicating more severe mental impairment.

Prescribers may provide this when the patient’s baseline MMSE or SMMSE
is between 25-30 points. Services Australia do not have to record this,
however if the prescriber wishes, it can be added in the authority
comments field of OPA.

Enquiries

For escalations and support for processing Alzheimer’s disease
applications refer to Escalate calls in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS).

The Resources page contains Alzheimer’s disease treatment restriction
and item codes, contact details, forms, links to websites and a table
for MMSE scores 9 or less.

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Process the Authority required (STREAMLINED) item

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
