
Link or unlink Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) to an organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03100040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about linking or unlinking Healthcare
Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) to an organisation in the
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

On this Page:

Link or unlink HPI-I to or from an organisation

A Healthcare Provider record maybe linked to or unlinked from an
organisation at the request of an Organisation Maintenance Officer
(OMO). The OMO is the only person authorised to establish and modify
relationships between a provider and an organisation.

Linking and unlinking is available via Health Professional Online
Services (HPOS) and business to business (B2B) where the OMO has
administrative access to the organisation that the provider wishes to be
linked to.

There is no specific form for an OMO to complete for this process. The
preferred method is for the OMO to logon to HPOS to maintain the
provider links. If HPOS is not an accessible channel for the OMO to use
at the time, a Service Officer may send the OMO a form to complete and
send back for processing.

See also:

-   Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
    Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
    organisation
-   Handle 'Act for' call in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Link HPI-I to HPI-O

Both the HPI-I and Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O)
records must be active at the time the link is created.

The linked relationship is displayed in:

-   both the HPI-I and HPI-O records
-   the Healthcare Provider Directory (HI HPD), where a provider has
    requested a HPD entry to be published

Where an individual is an Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) or
Responsible Officer (RO) only, they may not be linked to an organisation
via the linked Provider Details tab. An individual must have an active
HPI-I number to be linked to an organisation as a provider.

An OMO may manage links between a provider and an organisation where the
OMO is linked to an organisation at the same level or a level higher in
the organisational hierarchy than the provider wishes to be linked to.

If requested by the OMO, the HPD of the organisation can be amended.

Unlink HPI-I to HPI-O

This function is available via Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS) and business to business (B2B) where the Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) has administrative access to the organisation that the
provider wishes to be unlinked from.

Where a HPI-I record is unlinked from a Healthcare Provider Identifier -
Organisation (HPI-O) record, the relationship is end-dated.

The HPI-I remains active in the HI Service, regardless of whether it has
any other current links to other HPI-O.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
