
Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI) patient registration and withdrawal for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) 012-10070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for registering or withdrawing
patients from the IHI.

Aims of the Incentive

The PIP IHI aims to support general practices and Indigenous health
services to provide better health care for Aboriginal and/or Torres
Strait Islander patients, including best practice management of chronic
disease.

Eligible practices can register their patients for the Indigenous Health
Incentive. Practices must register patients for the IHI each calendar
year.

The patient registration payment is paid once per patient, per calendar
year for patients registered between 1 January and 31 October. If a
patient is registered for the first time in November or December of a
year, they will be registered from 1 January to 31 December of that
year, and for the following year. Practices will receive 1 patient
registration payment of $250 in the February payment quarter of the
following year.

Patient registrations

A practice can register their Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
Australian patients using 1 of the below:

-   HPOS (Health Professional Online Services), or
-   PIP IHI patient registration and consent (IP017) form

A practice can send an electronic version of the form created using
their practice software. Accept these forms when:

-   The form is current
-   Its structure is the same
-   The declaration refers to Services Australia

If the form is missing any of these details, return the form to the
practice. If not sure whether to accept the form, escalate to the
Program Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives Escalation Database.

When a practice uses HPOS, they do not need to send a copy of the form.
However, they must keep a copy of the signed patient consent for 6 years
for compliance and audit purposes.

Patient withdrawals

Patients can withdraw from the PIP IHI at any time. To withdraw they
must complete the PIP Indigenous Health Incentive patient withdrawal of
consent (IP029) form.

Practices can request a patient withdrawal by sending a message or email
using HPOS. The request should include:

-   the patient’s name, and
-   Medicare number

They do not need to complete the IP029 form.

Note: do not use the IP029 form for a patient who wants to change their
usual practice. Patients who want to change their usual practice can
complete the Practice Incentives Program Indigenous Health Incentive
patient registration and consent form with the new practice details.

PBS Co-payment Measure

From 1 July 2021, patient registrations for the Closing the Gap (CTG)
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Co-payment Measure are no longer
managed through the PIP IHI.

Practices must register eligible patients for the PBS Co-payment Measure
online through Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS) using their
Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account.

The Resources page contains links to letters and useful websites. There
are also details about consent dates and signing consent forms and
guidelines about warning messages.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Application for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) Indigenous Health
Incentive (IHI)

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Closing the Gap (CTG) PBS Co-payment Program

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
