
Retire Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03110110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to retire a Healthcare Provider Identifier -
Organisation (HPI-O) organisation in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service.

On this Page:

Retire HPI-O

When a HPI-O record is retired all associated Healthcare Provider
Identifier - Individual (HPI-I), Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation
Maintenance Officer (OMO) and networked organisations will be unlinked,
preventing access to the HI service for the retired HPI-O. It will also
update the status of any linked Contracted Service Provider (CSP)
organisations to 'Deactivated' and their accesses to the retired HPI-O
organisations are also removed.

Where an organisation wants to permanently withdraw and cease their
participation from the HI Service, the HPI-O record for the organisation
can be retired by a Service Officer.

A request for the retirement of an organisation must be made by a:

-   RO for a seed organisation
-   OMO for a network organisation

The retired HPI-O record:

-   has a current status of 'Active' or 'Deactivated'
-   is end-dated from the current processing date

Linked network organisations

Where a seed or network organisation is retired, all network
organisations that are linked to the retired organisation are
automatically retired and end-dated with the current date.

Any Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) records linked
to the retired Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O)
record are end dated.

Any Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
records for the retired HPI-O record are end dated.

When a HPI-O record is retired, its entry in the HI Provider Directory
is removed.

Service Officers can search and view retired HPI-O records.

Relevant information is automatically sent to the Certificate Issuance
and Management System (CIMS) in order to revoke HI Service Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI) certificate permissions.

Note: a HPI-O record may be reinstated if it was retired in error.

Related links

Handle 'Act for' call in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifiers Service using the
eHealth Program (EHP)

Reinstate Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O)
organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
