
This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Location Specific Practice
Numbers (LSPN).

Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO)

Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology procedures help to diagnose,
treat and monitor an extensive range of illnesses and conditions.
Diagnostic imaging services include ultrasound, computed tomography,
nuclear medicine, radiography (x-ray), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and positron emission tomography (PET). DI and RO services are provided
with specialised equipment and the professional input of a radiologist
(or other medical specialist) to interpret the generated images.

Eligibility and registration

Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN)

Practices intending to provide Medicare eligible diagnostic imaging and
radiation oncology services must apply to and be registered with
Services Australia. As part of their registration, each practice is
allocated an LSPN to be used for claiming Medicare benefits. Diagnostic
Imaging practices must also be accredited in order for Medicare benefits
to be payable.

Registration

An LSPN is required for each practice. Services Australia processes
registration forms, allocates and administers LSPNs.

Accreditation

Once a DI practice has an LSPN, they are required to apply for
accreditation as specified by the Diagnostic Imaging Accreditation
Scheme (DIAS). Accreditation must be attained and recorded for each
modality before Medicare benefits are payable.

Accreditation can be attained from the approved accrediting bodies
below:

-   HDAA Australia Pty Ltd (HDAA)
-   National Association of Testing Authorities Australia (NATA)
-   Quality Innovation Performance (QIP)

Radiation oncology is not subject to DIAS, so is an exception to
accreditation requirements. Practices are still required to list
radiation oncology equipment with Medicare.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Health and Aged
Care for further details about LSPNs and the DIAS.

Diagnostic Imaging Services Table

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) together with the Diagnostic
Imaging Service Table (DIST) (a tabular list of Medicare-subsidised
diagnostic imaging services) provides up-to-date details about the
current arrangements for the payment of Medicare benefits under the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

The MBS is an up-to-date record of Medicare subsidised items and the
conditions of their use including:

-   Medicare Benefit Schedule fee (the $ fee set by government). Note:
    diagnostic imaging providers are entitled to set their own fees.
    Therefore the actual fee charged may be different to the Schedule
    fee
-   Medicare benefit (the $ amount patients can expect to get back from
    Medicare)
-   description of the service
-   provider requirements
-   request and referral requirements

Medicare diagnostic imaging item categories (modalities):

-   Ultrasound – Group 11
-   Computed Tomography (CT) – Group 12
-   Diagnostic radiology (including x-ray) – Group 13
-   Nuclear Medicine (including PET) – Group 14
-   MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) – Group 15
-   Management of bulk-billed services – Group 16

An LSPN is required to receive Medicare benefits for diagnostic imaging
services. For more details about LSPN error codes on claims, see the
Resources tab.

General Medical Services Table

The MBS together with the General Medical Services Table (GMST) (a
tabular list of various Medicare-subsidised medical services) provides
up-to-date details about the current arrangements for the payment of
Medicare Benefits under the Health Insurance Act 1973.

The General Medical Services Table lists all the radiation oncology
services that are Medicare-subsidised.

An LSPN is required to receive Medicare benefits for Radiation Oncology
services.

For more details about LSPN error codes on claims, see the Resources
tab.

LSPN for the purposes of Medicare

A Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) is a unique identifier
allocated by Services Australia for a:

-   diagnostic imaging and/or radiation oncology premises, or
-   base for mobile diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment

LSPNs are used to record:

the location diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology services are
performed (or equipment is ordinarily located in the case of a base for
mobile equipment)

the types of equipment based at the premises

the age of the equipment

the accreditation status of the practice

for practices with MRI equipment:

-   if the equipment is eligible for Medicare benefits, and
-   which providers are listed to provide MRI services at the practice

all other information as required under the Health Insurance Act 1973

LSPN records on Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Users who have their HPOS account linked to their LSPN record are able
to view, amend and renew their registration online.

For more details, see LSPN and system (PDS and HPOS).

Legislation

The Health Insurance Act 1973 requires practices and bases for mobile
equipment to be registered with Services Australia to maintain
eligibility for Medicare benefits.

The legislation provides a mechanism to collect details about the
rendering of diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology services and
assists the Australian Government and the diagnostic imaging industry
to:

-   monitor the services provided
-   assess compliance for benefits by ensuring that where applicable,
    the equipment used meets the eligibility requirements for a
    particular Medicare claim
-   develop future programs to maintain and improve patient access to
    high quality services

The References page contains links to legislation.

Legislative requirements for LSPN

Primary details

Sections 23DZV and 23DZZU of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act)
requires proprietors of practices to advise Services Australia in
writing of any change to primary information within 28 days of the
change. They must complete a Application to register or amend a
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form (HW061) to
provide the details of the change.

Primary information is:

practice business details, including:

-   proprietor
-   business name
-   Australian Business Number (ABN), and
-   Australian Company Number (ACN)

the premises or base for mobile equipment address

the types of DI or RO equipment ordinarily located at the premises or
base

details of legal agreements to use equipment within the premises

Annual renewal process

Sections 23DZW and 23DZZV of the Act requires practices to respond to
requests for information made by Services Australia. Annual reminder
letters are automatically sent to practices each year, which requires
them to:

-   confirm all details on the LSPN register are correct and up to date,
    or
-   submit a HW061 form so the register is up to date

Practices can renew their registration in HPOS if no changes are
required.

Once the required information is received, the practice's registration
is renewed for an additional 12 months.

Suspension for failing to respond

Failure to respond to this request by the date specified in the notice
(which is the registration End Date in PDS), results in:

-   Medicare benefits not being payable until a response is received
-   a Work Item being created in PaNDA which prompts an APS5 delegate to
    consider suspension of registration in line with sections 23DZX or
    23DZZW of the Act

Suspensions are actioned by the Provider Services Support team. A letter
is automatically sent to the practice advising of the suspension, and
that the practice's registration is cancelled if it remains unresponsive
for a further 3 months after the registration End Date.

A response within this 3 month period results in the practice's
registration being renewed for an additional 12 months from the End
Date.

Cancellations for failing to respond

Sections 23DZW and 23DZZV of the Act allows Services Australia to cancel
the practice's registration if:

-   a practice fails to respond within 3 months after its registration
    End Date, and
-   the above requirements have been met

A Work Item is created in PaNDA for the LSPN record to be referred to an
EL1 delegate.

Suspensions are actioned by an EL1 in the Provider Services Support team
or the Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging Team. A letter is sent to the
practice advising:

-   the practice's registration has been cancelled
-   the proprietor will not be entitled to request registration of the
    practice for 12 months from the decision date

Sections 23DZW and 23DZZV of the Act allows a proprietor to write to ask
for permission to register the practice within 12 months of a decision
to cancel. All requests must be made to the Pathology and Diagnostic
Imaging Team as instructed in the cancellation letter.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Practices that must be registered and allocated an LSPN

Practices

A diagnostic imaging and/or radiation oncology premises is a building or
part of a building where diagnostic imaging procedures and/or radiation
oncology services are carried out under a single business name

A base for mobile diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment is:

-   the premises where DI and/or RO equipment is ordinarily located when
    not in use, and
-   DI and/or RO services are not carried out at the premises, or
-   are frequently carried out off the premises under a single business
    name

Each practice must have its own LSPN

Where different business entities operate from the same premises, they
must be registered separately

For example, a medical centre has suites that are leased to 2 private
medical practices. Both practices have diagnostic imaging equipment in
their suites, have different owners and operate independently of each
other. Even though these practices operate from the same premises, each
practice must have its own LSPN.

Radiation oncology practices

Radiation oncology practices are included under the LSPN Registration
arrangements to:

-   streamline the practice registration process under the one system
    and
-   standardise the details collected across public and private
    radiation oncology practices

Note:

-   only practices that provide radiation oncology services by or under
    the supervision of specialist radiation oncologists must be
    registered
-   practices that perform superficial or orthovoltage radiation
    oncology services, for example dermatologists, ophthalmologists and
    general practitioners, and who have no other diagnostic imaging or
    radiation oncology equipment as part of their practice, are exempt
    from registration

Medicare claiming and LSPN

To be eligible for Medicare benefits, individual providers must include
on patient accounts/receipts or bulk billing claims, including
electronic claims, and the LSPN of the practice.

This applies for claims where the date of service is on or after 1 July
2003. If this information is not provided from this date, the service
will be ineligible for a Medicare benefit until the information is
supplied to Services Australia.

Services Australia checks claim forms for:

-   an LSPN, and
-   that the LSPN has equipment and accreditation recorded which is
    eligible for the item(s) claimed

See Claims for Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare for
more details.

Equipment details to be provided

Basic details about the equipment and who has a financial interest in
the equipment are collected under the relevant modality classification:

-   Ultrasound
-   Computed tomography (details of gantry only)
-   Nuclear medicine
-   Diagnostic radiology (includes x-ray with image intensifier -
    recorded as fluoroscopy, mammography, orthopantomography and
    angiography)
-   Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Full and Partial Medicare- eligible
    must be recorded on the LSPN register
-   Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Ineligible for Medicare is
    optional for recording on the LSPN register for the purposes of
    Medicare benefits, but is required for some Veterans’ Affairs
    payments
-   Radiation oncology equipment

When supplying the equipment details, the practice must supply the
serial number of the equipment being listed and the age of the equipment
(date of manufacture or date first installed in Australia). If the
serial number is unavailable, an accountable asset or other number is
required and must also be displayed on the equipment.

Note: Services Australia cannot record the equipment if these numbers
and dates are not supplied. The processing of the application will be
delayed until these details are provided.

Access to MRI services for Medicare

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):

-   uses strong magnetic fields to generate images used to diagnose
    conditions such as cancer and strokes
-   is especially effective on soft tissue, and
-   does not use ionising radiation, unlike some other imaging equipment
    such as x-rays and computed tomography (CT) scans

MRI is an expensive and sophisticated technology and since its inclusion
in the Medicare Benefits Schedule, these services are carefully managed
through requester, provider and item level restrictions. These controls
help support the provision of high quality, safe and cost-effective
health care for all Australians.

See Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services assessing in Medicare for
more information.

Eligible MRI equipment for Medicare

To be eligible for Medicare benefits, an MRI service must be provided
within a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice that has:

eligible MRI equipment which meets the capital sensitivity requirements

MRI accreditation, and

met the definition of a comprehensive practice as defined in the Health
Insurance (Diagnostic Imaging Services Table) Regulations (No. 2) 2020
(the DIST) by having the following equipment registered:

-   X-ray
-   ultrasound, and
-   computed tomography.

In addition to these requirements, a practice must also be:

-   allocated a licence by the Department of Health and Aged Care (the
    Department) which provides either full or partial eligibility , or
-   located in an MMM2-7 area (1 November 2022 and after)

The Department is responsible for provision of MRI licenses, which give
diagnostic imaging practices eligibility to claim Medicare benefits for
practices in MMM1 locations. Until 30 October 2022, this was a
requirement for all MRI equipment in Australia.

For practices in MMM1 areas, Services Australia must ensure an MRI
license has been issued by the Department to a diagnostic imaging
practice before adding an eligible MRI to the LSPN Register. The
Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging team consults with the Department to
administer MRI licences.

From 1 November 2022, MRI equipment located in MMM 2-7 areas does not
require a licence to be fully eligible for Medicare rebateable services
if the other requirements are met. Practices are required to declare
they:

-   are located in a MMM2-7 area as shown on DoctorConnect, and
-   have, and will maintain a comprehensive practice as defined in the
    DIST

Services Australia receives advice from Health about MRI eligibility.
Practices must submit a LSPN form (HW061) before changes are made to MRI
equipment in the LSPN register.

Transfer of MRI eligibility

The Department is required to notify Services Australia when an MRI
licence has been transferred from:

-   one LSPN site to another, or
-   between MRI equipment at the same site.

The Department notifies the Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging team of
each approved transfer, including the:

LSPN(s) involved in the transfer

-   MRI equipment details (make, model, serial number), and
-   eligibility start and end dates.

The MRI transfer details must be recorded on the equipment register of
the relevant LSPN(s). Once an MRI licence is transferred to another
machine, the previous equipment ceases to be eligible.

Temporary MRI licence transfers

Sometimes an MRI licence is temporarily transferred. This happens when
equipment is temporarily unavailable because it needs to be repaired,
upgraded or replaced.

Where MRI eligibility is temporarily transferred, Health also provides
the details for the return of eligibility. Where ineligible MRI
equipment exists at the receiving site and this equipment is receiving
Medicare eligibility for a limited period, it is not necessary to end
date this equipment. The ineligible equipment is not assessed for
Medicare purposes and the LSPN register will allow the same serial
number, make and model to be recorded where the equipment codes are
different.

The same applies if equipment has partial eligibility and the site is
temporarily granted full eligibility. The equipment with partial
eligibility will retain this eligibility during and after the transfer
has ceased (that is, the MBS items claimable on the partially eligible
MRI can be claimed on the fully eligible MRI).

Once eligible MRI equipment is replaced, the original machine ceases to
be eligible. If eligibility is transferred to another location the
practice is required to submit:

-   an LSPN amendment form (HW061) to request the removal of the MRI
    machine, and
-   a second amendment form adding the MRI machine at the new location
    (LSPN). This form should include a list of providers providing MRI
    services at this location

Note: for a transfer of eligibility, the MRI start date at the new site
cannot overlap the end date at the previous site.

Ineligible MRI equipment and provider services payable by DVA

Ineligible MRI equipment is optional information, as Medicare benefits
are not payable for services provided on this equipment. Ineligible MRI
equipment is not defined as ‘primary information’ for purpose of LSPN
registration under the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act). However, if
details are provided by the practice, the equipment is to be recorded on
the LSPN register.

The Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) pays benefits for services on
ineligible MRI equipment for eligible DVA patients. The presence of this
equipment allows MRI providers to be linked to the LSPN as an MRI
provider.

See MT items for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) for more
information.

Eligible MRI providers

To provide services on eligible MRI equipment a specialist must have
ongoing participation in the Royal Australian College of Radiologists'
quality and accreditation program. Failure to do so will result in the
cancellation of Medicare eligibility to provide MRI services.

The proprietor or authorised representative of an LSPN site with MRI
equipment advises Services Australia of the specialists that are to
provide MRI services. By completing these details on the HW061 form the
proprietor or authorised representative is confirming that the
practitioners listed are specialists in diagnostic radiology, are
participants in the Royal Australasian College of Radiologists Quality
and Accreditation Program, and will provide MRI services on the eligible
MRI equipment located at the relevant LSPN.

Provider eligibility is effective from the date a complete LSPN form is
received by the agency or a future date if specified. Requests to
backdate an MRI provider link should be escalated to a PSO for
consideration by the Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging team.

Cardiac MRI providers

Eligible providers need to have specification code 655 added to their
provider stem in PDS to enable claiming for the following MBS items:

-   63395
-   63396
-   63397
-   63398

A provider is eligible to claim the above items if the provider is:

-   a specialist in diagnostic radiology or a consultant physician; and
-   recognised by the Conjoint Committee for Certification in Cardiac
    MRI

The Department of Health and Aged Care sends Services Australia details
of providers that have been certified by the Conjoint Committee for
Certification in Cardiac MRI. Services Australia then confirms the
provider is a recognised specialist in diagnostic radiology or a
consultant physician. The specification code 655 is added to the
provider’s stem in PDS if these requirements are met.

Note: the Provider does not need to be linked to an LSPN to access the
above item numbers.

The Resources page contains MRI provider processing work flow, links to
forms, HPOS user guide and links to letters.

Capital sensitivity

The capital sensitivity measure’s purpose is to encourage practices to
regularly upgrade, and replace their equipment to ensure patients have
access to higher quality equipment.

This means that any diagnostic imaging services are no longer payable
for services provided using equipment that has exceeded its:

-   effective life age, or
-   maximum extended life age

Except for those who have a current approved exemption.

This is in place for almost all diagnostic imaging equipment providing
services (excluding Positron Emission Tomography (PET) services) under
Medicare.

Prior to 1 May 2020, almost all services listed in the Diagnostic
Imaging Services Table, excluding PET services, had 2 different schedule
fees - schedule '(K)' items (100% of the MBS fee) and schedule '(NK)'
items (approximately 50% of the MBS fee) for diagnostic imaging services
provided on aged equipment impacted by capital sensitivity.

From 1 May 2020, NK items were removed from the Diagnostic Imaging
Service Table (DIST). This means that any equipment that has exceeded
its effective life age or maximum extended life age are no longer
payable except for those who had a current approved exemption on the
date of service.

There were 2 exemption categories in place until 30 April 2022:

practices located in outer regional, remote and very remote areas were
automatically exempt from the capital sensitivity provisions, and

practices located in inner regional areas that are also classified as
Rural Zone 4 or 5 under the Rural Regional and Remote Area (RRMA)
classification system of 1991. The regulations provided that an
exemption may be granted, on application, where the equipment:

-   was operated on a rare and sporadic basis, and
-   provided crucial patient access to diagnostic imaging services

Practices could apply for the above exemptions via Department of Health
and Aged Care. The Resources page has a link to their website.

An additional exceptional circumstances exemption (ECE) was added in
conjunction with the 1 May 2020 changes to NK items:

-   where the exemption was requested before the end of the equipment’s
    life age
-   the practice was unable to replace the equipment before its life age
    due to unforeseen circumstances

The Department of Health and Aged Care administers ECE applications,
which are entered into PDS by Services Australia, National Office.

Calculating the effective life age of equipment

The date from which the age of equipment is worked out is:

-   the date that the equipment was first installed in Australia; or
-   if the equipment was imported as used equipment — the date of
    manufacture of the oldest component

A table to assist with calculating the effective life age and maximum
extended life age can be found on the Resources page

Upgrades

DI equipment has been upgraded if:

-   an additional reasonable investment has been made within the new
    effective life age for the diagnostic imaging equipment that
    improves the overall performance of the imaging system so that it is
    equivalent to new diagnostic imaging equipment supplied in Australia
    at the time of the improvement, or
-   the diagnostic imaging equipment is currently accredited under The
    Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists'
    Mammography Quality Assurance Program

For full details about the rules for claiming the schedule '(K)' and
schedule '(NK)' items, the exemptions, and the definition of equipment
upgrade, providers should access the Department of Health and Aged
Care's website. See the Resources page for a link.

Privacy provisions and the LSPN register

The Health Insurance Act 1973 allows Services Australia to publish an
extract of the LSPN Register on the Services Australia website and
requires the agency to make available, on request, an extract of the
Register to a person for the purpose of determining whether Medicare
benefits are likely to be payable. This does not include the LSPN
provider register for the purposes of the Act.

The LSPN register includes the following publicly available details:

-   LSPN
-   Practice Name
-   Address
-   Suburb
-   Start Date
-   End Date

From 19 June 2022, the following accreditation details are also
available:

-   Modality
-   Status
-   End date
-   Accreditor's name

For all other information related to an LSPN, an enquirer must be able
to pass the relevant security check before information is provided to
them.

See Performing practice staff security check for the Diagnostic
Imaging/Location Specific Practice Number (LPSN) register for security
check procedures.

The Resources page contains:

-   an attachment for investigating LSPN errors for claims
-   a table for calculating age of equipment
-   a link to the HW061 form
-   a link to contact details for Medicare Provider Registration, and
-   links to the Services Australia and Department of Health and Aged
    Care websites

Contents

Register for a Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare

Amend Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) register for Medicare

Claims for Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare

Performing practice staff security check for the Diagnostic Imaging
/Location Specific Practice Number (LPSN) register

LSPN and systems (Provider Directory System and Health Professional
Online Services)

Related links

Health Professional Online Services Support Mail Centre - managing
emails from health professionals

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services assessing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
