
Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes delegate approval process 012-21031642

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for conducting Quality Control (QC)
or Approvals on applications in the Medical Indemnity Online Claiming
(MIOC) system, by the delegate. Assessing Officers assess applications
and make a recommendation to the delegate to accept or reject.

On this page:

Approval process

When Assessing Officers assess an application they make a recommendation
that will flow through to the delegate to accept or reject.
Recommendations to the delegate include:

-   Approved
-   Deemed not payable
-   Further information is required

The delegate is required to have Approver level access in MIOC.

Approved

The payment application is paid to the Indemnity Insurer when:

The Assessing Officer identifies during the assessment process that:

-   a payment application meets the eligibility requirements
-   is payable, and
-   makes a recommendation of ‘Approved’

the delegate accepts the recommendation of ‘Approved’

Where the delegate accepts a recommendation of ‘Approved’ for a refund
application, Services Australia will recover funds from the Indemnity
Insurer.

Deemed not payable

The Medical Indemnity Act 2002 (the Act) does not use the term 'reject'
when referring to an application that does not meet the requirements of
a MI scheme. The Act instead refers to determining whether an 'indemnity
scheme payment is payable'.

The application is not paid when:

The Assessing Officer identifies during the assessment process that:

-   a claim is not eligible, and
-   is deemed not payable

The delegate accepts a recommendation of ‘Deemed not payable’

These applications are not be paid and a deemed not payable letter is be
sent to the applicant.

Further Information is required - The Medical Indemnity Act 2002

The Medical Indemnity Act enables the delegate to request further
information to determine eligibility or to clarify information in
relation to an MI application. Where the delegate accepts a
recommendation of ‘Further information is required’, the application
will not be paid/recovered and a Request for further information
(section 38) letter will be sent to the applicant.

Related links

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes Claiming

High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (HCCS)

Run off Cover Indemnity Scheme (ROCS)

Incurred But Not Reported Indemnity Scheme (IBNR)

Allied Health High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (AHHCCS)

Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (ECS)

Allied Health Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (AHECS)

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes finalising assessment

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes refunds and withdrawals

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes registration

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes pay run process

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes administrative process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
