
Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-63020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures relating to Authority approval
processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

New patient or visitor entitlement to pharmaceutical benefits

There are situations where some patients are entitled to receive
pharmaceutical benefits but, for various reasons, do not have a Medicare
card or whose Medicare number will not be available at the time of
consultation or supply. For example the patient is:

-   a newborn infant
-   a visitor from a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) country,
    such as Sweden, who is entitled to access the PBS. See Reciprocal
    Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
    Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) for more information on
    reciprocal agreements
-   an Australian Defence Force (ADF) personnel without a Medicare card

See Table 4 Record a new patient or visitor on the Process page for more
information.

Situations where Authority applications can be rejected

The acceptable situations for rejecting an Authority prescription are:

-   the approved prescriber does not state the criteria that meets the
    restriction
-   the patient does not meet the criteria
-   answers provided to questions do not qualify patient for an
    Authority prescription
-   the application is considered to be too soon
-   someone other than the approved prescriber is requesting the
    Authority
-   the item, form or strength of the Authority prescription is not
    subsidised under the PBS
-   the approved prescriber changes their mind
-   the approved prescriber is abusive or demonstrates inappropriate
    behaviour, and the Service Officer terminates the call
-   an incomplete written application

Restriction and Quality Assurance (QA) guidelines

Criteria for increased quantity and repeats

When an approved prescriber requests an Authority for increased quantity
and/or repeats and the drug is listed with restrictions, an appropriate
restriction/indication must be provided.

Criteria for Authority applications

For online and phone applications, the approved prescriber is required
to satisfy Services Australia that the patient meets the restriction
criteria listed in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Schedule. See The
Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (the PBS Schedule).

For phone applications, due to the sensitive nature of some diseases or
conditions, the restriction criteria can be read to the approved
prescriber who can then respond as to whether the patient's disease or
condition conforms.

For written applications, the approved prescriber must write the
indication for the disease, purpose or condition for which the benefit
is required.

Manner of administration

An item may not be supplied as a pharmaceutical benefit if it is to be
administered in any other way than indicated in the PBS Schedule (Refer
S.85 and S.88). For example, injections can only be used for injection
and not for inhalation.

Gender reassignment

Sex reassignment surgery and/or hormone therapy are not pre-requisites
for the recognition of a change of gender in Australian Government
records, however evidence is required to establish or change the sex
and/or gender details in personal records. The Resources page contains
link to the Gender Guidelines Implementation.

Refer to a Pharmaceutical Adviser if changes have not been recorded on
the Medicare system.

Maximum supply

The maximum supply for medication is 6 months treatment consisting of
approximately one month's supply (subject to pack size) in the quantity
and 5 repeats, or where requested by the approved prescriber, the PBS
listed maximum quantity and repeats where appropriate.

Some pharmaceutical benefits cannot be approved for more than the PBS
listed quantity and repeats regardless of dose. Where applicable, this
is stipulated in the restriction and identified in the drug description
on mainframe.

Exception for relevant opioid listings:

-   Authority requests extending treatment duration up to one month may
    be requested through the Online PBS Authorities system or by calling
    Services Australia
-   Authority requests extending treatment duration beyond one month may
    be requested by a prescriber through the Online PBS Authorities
    system or in writing (either via post or HPOS form upload) and
    cannot exceed 3 months’ treatment. That is, quantity sufficient for
    up to 1 month’s treatment and up to 2 repeats

Calculation of allowable quantity and repeats

The quantity is determined by the following parameters:

-   requested daily dose
-   number of days therapy requested
-   for reconstituted oral liquid medication - the volume
-   narcotics limited to treatment duration up to one month may be
    requested through the Online PBS Authorities system or by calling
    Services Australia. Treatment duration of up to 3 months may be
    requested by a prescriber through the Online PBS Authorities system
    or in writing (either via post or HPOS form upload)
-   pack size

To calculate the quantity and repeats that can be approved, see Dosage
calculators and charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Where the PBS listed maximum quantity and repeats is more than that
permitted by the non-opioid dosage chart, prescribers may request and be
approved the listed quantity and repeats.

Changes to quantity and repeats for authority required (telephone) approvals

The prescriber should initially be offered the quantity and/or repeats
(as per dosage chart) that the patient is entitled to, based on the
daily dose. However, if the prescriber requests the PBS listed maximum
quantity and repeats be approved, it may be granted regardless of dose.
For listings that do not require authority approval for listed
quantities and repeats, follow the process for Streamlined listings.

If the opportunity arises, explain to the prescriber that the
prescription may be out of date before the patient uses the repeats.

Changes to quantity and repeats for authority required (written) approvals

Prescriptions where the quantity and repeats guidelines are not met may
need to be considered further.

See:

-   Handle request for increased quantity and/or repeats for
    unrestricted, restricted and Authority benefit
-   Maximum Supply
-   Narcotic dosage chart, Non-narcotic dosage chart and Dosage chart
    Insulin sections in Dosage calculators and Charts for Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (PBS)

If the quantity and repeats are to be reduced:

-   approve prescription with changes as per Processing written
    authority approval requests

If the quantity is required to be increased to fit the pack size:

-   if increase in quantity is for up to 3 days' supply, with the
    exception to medications of abuse and for items that only need a
    specified course of treatment (for example antibiotics), approve
    prescription with changes as per Processing written authority
    approval requests;
-   if increase in quantity is for greater than 3 days' supply, refer to
    a Pharmaceutical Adviser (PA) to contact prescriber to determine
    whether the prescriber feels that an increase in quantity to fit
    pack size is appropriate for their patient
-   if the prescriber has indicated for x number of days or weeks or
    months, this would indicate it was for a specified course of
    treatment

Please refer to a PA if unsure.

The Resources page contains definitions for medication of abuse and
helpful hints for the recognition of antibiotics.

Drugs of addiction

Where the Authority application is for opioid listings:

-   Authority requests extending treatment duration up to one month may
    be requested through the Online PBS Authorities system or by calling
    Services Australia
-   Authority requests extending treatment duration beyond one month may
    be requested by a prescriber through the Online PBS Authorities
    system or in writing (either via post or HPOS form upload) and
    cannot exceed 3 months’ treatment. That is, quantity sufficient for
    up to one month’s treatment and up to 2 repeats

To calculate the quantity and repeats that can be approved for drugs of
addiction, see Dosage calculators and charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS).

Reconstituted oral liquid items

Reconstituted oral liquid products are manufactured in powder form due
to the short shelf life in liquid form. Once the product is
reconstituted, a new shorter shelf life (often 7, 10 or 14 days) is
activated. Any remaining portion of these reconstituted items must be
discarded after the shelf life.

Many reconstituted oral liquid products are used for short term
treatments. However, repeats can be increased to cover the course of
treatment.

The maximum quantity on reconstituted items is determined by the
following parameters:

-   requested daily dose
-   number of days therapy requested
-   volume and shelf life of reconstituted preparation

Extemporaneous items

An extemporaneously prepared (EP) item is one that is manufactured by
the pharmacist, by incorporating a number of ingredients in a specified
manner to form one final product. They can be Standard Formula
preparations for which a formula is found in approved reference books,
or Non-standard, for which the doctor devises their own formula.

The maximum quantity and repeats permissible on a non-Authority
prescription for each type of extemporaneous preparation is available in
Section 4 of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

Note: increased quantities and repeats are permitted by making an
Authority application.

Process Authority approvals for HSD items

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) are medicines for the treatment of
chronic conditions which, because of their clinical use or other special
features, have additional rules.

See Section 100 in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Process Authority application for extemporaneous items

All ingredients for extemporaneous items must be listed in the Schedule
of Pharmaceutical Benefits under Extemporaneously-prepared
pharmaceutical benefits - Drug Tariff.

Points to consider

-   An ingredient listed in the Drug Tariff which has no
    requirement/qualification attached (for example, for use as a base)
    may be approved as a sole ingredient or part of a total
    extemporaneous formula
-   Ingredients listed in the Drug Tariff which have a requirement for
    'use as additive only' must be used as an additive in the total
    formula for a PBS prescription. These cannot be approved as 'sole'
    or 'single' item, for example, olive oil ('use as additive only')
    cannot be approved solely as 'olive oil' - it must be used as an
    additive with other PBS listed ingredients
-   Ingredients listed in the Drug Tariff which have a requirement for
    'use as a base combined with active ingredients' must only be used
    as the base in a PBS prescription. The approved prescriber must
    confirm the ingredient is to be used as the base before approval
-   The approved prescriber is to confirm the selection of the type of
    preparation they request. For example, cream, ointment or lotion
-   The use of a ready-prepared item with one or more extemporaneous
    drugs listed in the Schedule is not a pharmaceutical benefit
-   The approved prescriber may list ingredients by the commonly known
    name instead of the generic name appearing in the drug tariff. The
    Resources page contains a list of common names for items included in
    extemporaneously prepared pharmaceutical benefits

Further information

Contact a Pharmaceutical Adviser (PA) for further information or
assistance. See Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - National
Pharmaceutical Adviser (PA) pilot.

Situations where Authority applications can be pended

The acceptable situations for pending an Authority application are:

-   An Authority request has been referred to a Pharmaceutical Adviser
    or Team Leader for a decision
-   A Service Officer is processing a written Authority prescription and
    a phone enquiry comes through. In this case, the Service Officer
    will return to processing the written Authority application at a
    later stage
-   A medical practitioner cannot be contacted to clarify details needed
    to process an Authority
-   A Service Officer is waiting for further information to process an
    Authority

PBS Authority processing and Commonwealth and state law

PBS prescriptions are required to be processed in accordance with
relevant Commonwealth law. See Claim Processing in the New Claim
Processing System for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Each state or territory has its own legislation that determines how
medical practitioners and authorised optometrists should prescribe
certain drugs listed in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

Services Australia does not enforce state law but the Service Officer
may be prompted to remind medical practitioners of their responsibility
to comply with state laws.

Informing medical practitioners and authorised optometrists

When a medical practitioner or an authorised optometrist is seeking
Authority approval under Commonwealth legislation from Services
Australia for an item that also requires the practitioner to comply with
State legislation, a statement in the Question field may be displayed on
the Authority screen that must be acknowledged by the approved
prescriber. This statement only displays for drugs that the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) and Department of
Health and Aged Care has found necessary to flag in the Schedule, and is
not applicable for unrestricted dangerous drugs.

This statement informs the medical practitioner or authorised
optometrist of their responsibility to comply with state legislation
when prescribing drugs. The statement is:

'Please note that this drug may be subject to specific state or
territory legislation'.

The Service Officer does not need to record any comments made by the
medical practitioner or authorised optometrist.

Storing PBS Authority information

Archiving Authority information

Authority information is recorded daily and backed up.

Written Authority requests are scanned and recorded on the system and
the Medicare/Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) copy of the
prescription is destroyed by secure shredding as it is no longer
archived.

Removing old Authority information

All Authority information contained in Services Australia systems is
kept for 24 months. Due to the high volume of Authority applications
stored, Authority information older than 24 months is removed to ensure
that there is sufficient space for new Authority requests.

Authority information (excluding exemptions) more than 24 months old is
permanently deleted on the 4th day of each month.

Exemptions to Authority information removal

Authority information for specific Authority items is kept for longer
than 24 months. For example medicines for the treatment of Alzheimer's
disease. These exemptions are based on PBS restriction requirements.

The Resources page contains a list of the state and territory code to
use when searching for an approved prescriber, a table of codes, maximum
quantities and repeats for extemporaneously prepared benefits, common
names for items included in extemporaneously prepared pharmaceutical
benefits and the Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) approval number prefixes
and their pharmacy dispensing restrictions.

Contents

Claim for Payment form in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Processing written authority approval requests

Process telephone Authority approval application

Participating public hospital Authority approval application

Process the Authority Required (STREAMLINED) item

Record comments for Authority approval application

Amend authority approval application

Process seemingly valid and not seemingly valid Authority prescription

Process emergency Authority prescription

Handle request for increased quantity and/or repeats for unrestricted,
restricted and Authority benefit

Handle 'too soon' Authority prescription

Handle system outages in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Related links

The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (the PBS Schedule)

Dosage calculator charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Section 100 in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Pricing and fees in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Claim Processing in the New Claim Processing System for Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) in public hospitals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
