
Authentication required to access digital health 012-03120000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information, processes and resources the
authentication required to access digital health systems.

PRODA

PRODA (Provider Digital Access) is used to access the:

-   My Health Record read-only National Provider Portal (NPP)
-   administrative Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service functions in
    Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Only individual healthcare providers registered in the HI Service can
use PRODA to access the NPP.

See also: Manage healthcare provider enquiries, issues and feedback
relating to My Health Record.

NASH PKI certificates

NASH PKI certificates for Individual healthcare providers

National Authentication Service for Health (NASH) Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI) certificates for Individual Healthcare Providers
are used to access the read-only National Provider Portal (NPP).

Individual healthcare providers cannot get new certificates, but
existing certificates can still be used until they expire. All existing
certificates should be expired by 2020.

Once existing certificates expire, individual healthcare providers will
need to get a PRODA (Provider Digital Access) account to access the
read-only National Provider Portal.

NASH PKI certificates for Healthcare Provider Organisations

NASH PKI certificates for Healthcare Provider Organisations can be used
to access:

-   My Health Record
-   healthcare identifiers in the HI Service
-   secure message delivery

They will need to check with their software vendors to see if they use
NASH PKI to access the HI Service. If they cannot, they need a Medicare
PKI site certificate.

NASH PKI certificates for Healthcare Provider Organisations expire after
2 years. They are not automatically renewed, so organisations need to
request new certificates every time.

NASH PKI certificates for Supporting Organisations

NASH PKI certificates for Supporting Organisations can be used to access
the following, either on behalf of a healthcare provider organisation,
or because they provide technology in the digital health space.

-   My Health Record
-   Healthcare identifiers in the HI Service
-   Secure message delivery

Supporting organisations need to update their system to use NASH to
access healthcare identifiers. Until then, they need to use a Medicare
PKI site certificate.

NASH PKI certificates for Supporting Organisations expire after 2 years.
They are automatically renewed, and so supporting organisations do not
need to request new one.

Medicare PKI site certificates

Medicare Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) site certificates cannot be
used to access the My Health Record.

If a healthcare provider organisation or supporting organisation cannot
use a National Authentication Service for Health (NASH) PKI certificate
to access healthcare identifiers in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service, they need to use a Medicare PKI site certificate.

Applying for PRODA

Individual healthcare providers need to follow the instructions on the
PRODA (Provider Digital Access) web page.

The Resources page contains a link to PRODA information on the Services
Australia website.

Applying for a NASH PKI certificate

Individual healthcare providers can no longer apply for a National
Authentication Service for Health (NASH) Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
certificate.

Healthcare provider organisations need to be registered in the
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service to get NASH PKI certificates. They
request certificates through Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)
on the organisation’s HI Service Certificate tab. Certificates are
delivered digitally. The organisation’s Organisation Maintenance Officer
(OMO) will get an SMS telling them:

-   the certificate is ready for downloading in HPOS
-   their personal identification code (PIC) needed to activate the
    certificate

Supporting organisations need to be registered in the HI Service to get
NASH PKI certificates. They request certificates using the following
forms (whichever is applicable):

-   HI Service - My Health Record system - Application to register a
    Contracted Service Provider organisation record form (HW012) – Part
    C
-   HI Service - Application to register a General Supporting
    Organisation form (HW013) – Part D

The Resources page contains links to the forms.

The Resources page contains contact details for Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service, links to forms, the Services Australia website and
external websites, in addition to tables detailing NASH PKI certificate
application forms and processing teams, different field descriptions and
a list of certificate policies for Tier Service Officers.

Related links

Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service - Health Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
