
Application for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI) 012-10070000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This document outlines practice eligibility and applying for the PIP
IHI.

Aims of the Incentive

The PIP IHI supports general practices and Indigenous health services to
provide better health care to Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
patients, including best practice management of chronic disease.

Applying for the IHI

Practices can apply for the IHI using:

-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS), or
-   the PIP IHI practice application (IP026) form

Do not accept applications submitted via letter.

For more details about eligibility requirements for the IHI guidelines.

Types of payments

There are 3 types of PIP IHI payments:

One-off practice sign-on payment to register for the PIP IHI

Annual patient registration payments for each eligible Aboriginal and/or
Torres Strait Islander patient

Tiered outcome payments:

-   Tier 1, for providing chronic disease management
-   Tier 2, for providing the majority of eligible MBS Services to the
    patient

The Resources page links to the IHI guidelines for more details.

IHI practice register

The IHI practice register:

includes practice details:

-   practice name
-   contact name
-   phone number, and
-   location

help patients locate an approved PIP IHI practice

Program Management get weekly reports showing practices recently
approved for the PIP IHI.

Program Management will:

invite the practices to participate in the IHI practice register by
sending a:

-   letter, and
-   Practice Incentives Program Indigenous Health Incentive practice
    register authority (IP009) form

update the PIP IHI practice register at:
R:\SA\ADEL-209-Greenhill\INCENTIVESWORKFLOW\Incentives.Processing\3.IHI\6.PracticeRegister

Disclosing IHI practice register information

Patients must contact Incentives Processing to access practice details
on the IHI practice register.

To access these details:

-   patients must identify as an IHI registered patient
-   if the patient does not identify as an IHI registered patient, ask
    'Are you registered for the Indigenous Health Incentive?’

Only these practice details can be disclosed:

-   Practice name
-   Location, and
-   Contact phone number

Do not disclose any practice details if practice name does not appear in
IHI Practice Register.

Primary Health Networks contact Incentives Processing and ask if a
practice is registered for the IHI.
Only these practice details can be disclosed:

-   Confirm if the practice is registered for the IHI, and
-   The date approved

Do not provide any other practice details.

Do not disclose any practice details if the caller is not from their
local Primary Health Network. See the Resources page for a link to the
Primary Health Network map locator.

Practice withdrawal

Practices can withdraw from the IHI through:

-   HPOS, or
-   written correspondence via letter or email

The request must include the:

-   practice ID
-   practice name
-   full practice address, and
-   consent to withdraw from the IHI, and
-   signature by 1 registered owner or authorised contact person

Practices can reapply at any time.

Practices reapplying for the IHI within 12 months of their withdrawal
are not eligible for the sign-on payment.

The Resources page contains links to the incentive guidelines, Chronic
Disease Management information from the Department of Health and Aged
Care. Links to Practice Incentives Program Standard letters templates
and PIP contacts are included.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Health Professional Online Services

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
