
Process organisation change of ownership in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03110070

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the change of organisation
ownership in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Change of ownership

A healthcare provider organisation must notify the HI Service of changes
affecting their eligibility to have a Healthcare Provider Identifier -
Organisation (HPI-O). This includes a change of ownership.

Organisations that operate in the same capacity as prior to the change
of ownership, for example the organisation continues to operate as a
general practice or hospital, retain their HPI-O.

Note: if the existing HPI-O is changing location and trading/enterprise
name, and will operate in a new capacity, for example the organisation
changes from a general practice to a dentist. Then the new owners need
to complete the Healthcare Identifiers – Register Seed Organisation
application process in Health Professional Online Services (HPOS).

Types of changes of ownership

There are 2 types of changes of ownership:

Simple - refers to stand-alone healthcare provider organisations or seed
organisations where:

-   there is no network hierarchy attached to the previous organisation
-   there are only minor changes required to the details of the
    Responsible Officer (RO) and/or
-   Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)

Complex – refers to either seed or network healthcare provider
organisations where:

-   the new organisation inherits a network hierarchy and wants to make
    changes to the structure
-   a network organisation wants to become a seed organisation

Seed to seed change of organisation ownership (simple change)

The Resources page contains information on the responsibilities of the
RO and OMO when processing a seed to seed change of organisation
ownership.

A RO and OMO who needs help should email the HI Service Team with Change
of ownership in the subject line.

The Resources page contains links to the HI Service Team contact
details.

Seed becomes a network of another seed or network moves to a different hierarchy (complex change)

The:

-   incoming organisation is the original seed/network organisation (the
    organisation moving from its original hierarchy to a new hierarchy)
-   gaining seed organisation is the organisation receiving the incoming
    organisation
-   losing organisation is the original seed of the incoming
    organisation (for a network moving to a different seed)

The Resources page contains information on the responsibilities of the
RO, OMO and Service Officers when processing a complex change of
organisation ownership where the seed becomes a network of another seed
or a network moves to a different hierarchy.

An RO and OMO who needs help should email the HI Service with Change of
ownership in the subject line.

The Resources page contains links to the HI Service Team contact
details.

Network becomes seed organisation (complex change)

The:

-   new seed organisation is the network organisation converting to a
    seed organisation
-   losing organisation is the original seed organisation which loses
    the network that is becoming the new seed organisation

The Resources page contains contact details for Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service, information on the responsibilities of the new seed
organisation, losing seed organisation and HI Service Officer when
processing a network that becomes a seed organisation.

An RO and OMO who needs help should email the HI Service Team with
Change of ownership in the subject line.

The Resources page contains links to the HI Service Team contact
details.

Change of ownership and RO for a seed organisation online

[] To change ownership online, applicants must:

log onto Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) using a Provider
Digital Access (PRODA) account

select My programs from the main menu

to open the application, select:

-   Healthcare Identifiers – Change Organisation Ownership to change
    ownership of a seed or network organisation, or
-   Healthcare Identifiers – Change Responsible Officer to replace the
    existing RO with the new RO details

The applicant:

must provide the new Australian Business Number (ABN)/Australian Company
Number (ACN) for the organisation
Note: to identify the organisation for the RO to be updated, the RO
(applicant) in addition to the ABN must also provide either the
organisations HPI-O or trading name (and address)

can update

-   organisation details (address and contact details)
-   their own details (address and contact details)

can elect to update the ABN/ACN of some, none or all networked
organisations which may be associated with the seed organisation

must provide evidence that they have authority to commit to the business
and/or that a legal change of ownership has taken place

The Documents tab allows an applicant to upload evidence of their
authority to commit on behalf of the organisation and change of
ownership documents.

Note: for evidence of authority to commit, the form does an upfront
check to see if the applicant is on the organisation’s Australian
Business Register (ABR) record as a person with authority to commit. If
the applicant:

-   is on the ABR with authority to commit, the applicant will not need
    to provide evidence of authority to commit
-   is not on the ABR with authority to commit, the applicant will need
    to upload evidence of their authority to commit

If an applicant is unable to apply or change RO online, they can request
the HW037 or HW040 and apply manually. Download the relevant form via
the intranet and send to the applicant. See Handle call for request for
hard copy forms.

Related links

Restructure Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Amend Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
