
Claims for Telehealth video consultations in Medicare 012-41050020

-   Background
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about claims for Telehealth video
consultations in Medicare.

On this Page:

Telehealth MBS item numbers

According to Telehealth Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) item
descriptors, Telehealth services are:

-   available to Medicare and Department of Veterans' Affairs patients
    living in Australia. Telehealth consultations must be conducted from
    locations within Australia in order for a Medicare rebate to be
    applicable.
-   not payable for in-hospital consultations.
-   only payable where the patient is located in a Telehealth eligible
    area.
-   only payable where there is at least 15kms distance between the
    patient and the provider.

Note: as they can be located anywhere in Australia, the distance
requirement does not apply to:

-   residents of Residential Aged Care Services (RACS)
-   patients of Aboriginal Medical Service (AMS)/Aboriginal Controlled
    Community Health Services (ACCHS)

The Resources page contains assessing information, including MBS items,
and a link to the MBS Online for a complete list of Telehealth MBS item
numbers, their descriptors and related explanatory notes.

Specialist and consultant physician derived fee MBS items

Specialists, consultant physicians and psychiatrists have 11 Telehealth
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) derived fee items for billing video
consultations they provide to eligible patients. These items must be
used with 55 existing MBS attendance items across these medical
specialties for video conference claims.

Note: specialists or consultants must claim appropriate Telehealth MBS
items with a derived fee item.

For example, a specialist claims MBS Item 104 (existing consultation
item) plus MBS Item 99 to show they provided a Telehealth video
consultation.

Supporting health professional MBS items

Medical practitioners, nurse practitioners, midwives, Aboriginal health
workers, and practice nurses have 23 time-based Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) items for billing clinical support services they provide
at the patient end during a video consultation with the specialist or
consultant physician.

Psychological therapy and focussed strategies services (Better Access telehealth)

For more information on Allied Mental Health MBS video consultations see
Better Access Initiative under Medicare.

The Resources page contains a list of Telehealth services and their
claiming channels, assessing information to assist Service Officers with
Telehealth claims, and a link to MBS Online.

Related links

Derived fee items for Telehealth claims in Medicare

Codes and return messages for Telehealth claims in Medicare

Telehealth bulk bill claims in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
