
Enquiry management for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-10010140

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines enquiry management including telephone, written
and processing enquiries.

Incentives customers

Business owners of medical practices and their staff, including:

-   Practice Managers
-   Receptionists
-   Medical Practitioners
-   Practice Nurses
-   Allied Health Workers
-   Persons who are nominated on behalf of business owners

General Public

Primary health networks – organisations that work directly with GPs to
improve access to primary care services to patients

Medicare liaison officers / business development officers

Types of calls

Enquiries can include:

-   general enquiries about the Incentive programs
-   who is eligible
-   how to apply
-   payment enquiries
-   what form to complete
-   notification of changes to existing registrations
-   how to use online services
-   adding a user’s RA number to the practice profile

Direct customers to the specific area of the guidelines where
appropriate The Resources page has a link to the guidelines.

IVR Options

When calling the agency, Incentives Programs and Health Care Homes line,
the options available to customers are:

1. Practice Incentives Program

2. Workforce Incentive Program – Practice Stream

3. Health Care Homes

9. To hear these selections again

Warm transferring calls

Service Officers must try to finalise an enquiry at the first point of
contact.

If the Service Officer cannot resolve the enquiry direct the call to the
correct business area or person using a warm transfer.

Use the ‘internal transfer number’ to transfer calls for other areas of
the agency. Provide the actual business line phone number to the
customer in case they are disconnected during the transfer and for
future enquiries.

See Conditions for transferring or referring calls to specialist staff
and managers for more information.

Interpreter Service

Interpreters help customers who speak a language other than English
conduct their business with Services Australia.

See Interpreter Services for more information.

Language services provides free interpreting and translating services
for customers with limited English language proficiency. The Contacting
an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect) service is
solely for staff and provides immediate access to an interpreter over
the telephone. The interpreting service connects staff to the most
qualified and available interpreter.

See Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)
for more information.

Complaints and feedback

A customer can submit feedback to the agency. Feedback includes
complaints, compliments and suggestions.

The agency’s webpage for more information on how customers can submit
complaints and feedback.

See Managing customer complaints and feedback for more information.

PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Only an owner or authorised contact person who registers with PIP/WIP –
Practice Stream can request practice specific details. See the Process
page for more information on how to check a practice’s owner or
authorised contact persons.

Aged Care Access Incentive (ACAI)

The ACAI is payments made to practitioners. Details can only be provided
directly to the practitioner related to the payment.

If the service provider is not available to take the call, they can
provide verbal permission to openly discuss the provider’s services and
payment with someone else.

Telephone and processing escalations

Health Service Delivery uses an Operator Support Model that includes
Program Support Officers (PSOs).

Before contacting a PSO, check all available reference material. This
includes:

-   Operational Blueprint
-   Training Manuals
-   Guidelines
-   Incentives News Updates
-   PaNDA for any relevant processing notes
-   PIP / WIP – Practice Stream Online – Comments and Associated
    documents

If the enquiry cannot be resolved immediately, take a message and follow
up with the customer at a later time.

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division PSO has more information
on contacting a PSO and escalating telephone enquiries.

The Process page has more information about escalating a processing
enquiry.

Audit and compliance

Audit and compliance are completed by the Department of Health.

A customer should contact the relevant area to discuss any audit or
compliance enquiries. A customer can find the relevant contact details
on the correspondence they receive.

Customers may still call and enquire about these matters. The Process
page has more information about handling audit and compliance enquiries.

Review of Decision

The PIP and WIP – Practice Stream has a review of decision process. This
is separate to reviews relating to audit and compliance.

Decisions made are based on the published guidelines at the date of the
event.

An owner or authorised contact person must submit a complete the
Practice Incentives Review of Decision (IP027) form within 28 days of
receiving the decision to be reviewed.

The Resources page has a list of review of decision FAQs.

Incentive News Update (INU)

The INU is a quarterly newsletter for practices. It provides information
and updates on the Incentive Programs and other relevant programs.

The INU is available through News for health professionals on the
agency’s website. A practice can stay up to date and get the latest
information about the agency’s payments and services by subscribing to
the News for Health Professionals. The Resources page has a link.

The INU is sent to practice’s with their PIP payment advice, it is not
sent to practices that are in WIP – Practice Stream only.

The INU is sent to a practice with the PIP, but not with the WIP –
Practice payment advice.

The Resources page contains practice changes that do not need a form, a
glossary of terms and abbreviations and links to definitions,
guidelines, forms and contact details.

Related links

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Allocation (PaNDA)

Call transfers for Medicare and PBS telephony

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare and PBS telephony

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Quality Call Standards

Call and screen recording – information and access

Authorised contact person changes for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Online Services for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
