
Identify and resolve duplicate Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03110090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify and resolve duplicate Healthcare
Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) records in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service. A duplicate record is defined where more than
one identifier has been allocated to the same healthcare provider
organisation. A potential duplicate report is generated weekly for
manual follow-up and resolution.

Seed organisations created incorrectly

Two seed organisations created incorrectly cannot be merged as
duplicates. The record that is to become the secondary record must first
be moved into the same hierarchy as the seed (primary) and made a
network organisation. It can then be resolved as a duplicate of the seed
organisation.

See also: Process organisation change of ownership in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

Identify potential duplicate HPI-O record – manual process

A Service Officer can flag two or more records if they suspect that they
belong to the same organisation.

Flagged records have the status ‘Potential Duplicate’ (flagged awaiting
resolution) until a manual resolution process takes place. A record with
a status of ‘Potential Duplicate’ cannot be flagged again before being
resolved.

The potential duplicate flag can be removed once it is determined that
the record is not a duplicate.

Retired records cannot be flagged as potential duplicates.

Identify potential HPI-O record – automatic process

The HI Service performs real-time checks and flags potential duplicate
organisations.

This involves searching for an exact match on all of the following
criteria:

-   preferred organisation name
-   preferred organisation address
-   Australian Business Number (ABN) or Australian Company Number (ACN)

The automated duplicate checking process occurs:

-   against all organisation records in the HI Service
-   during each create and amend process

A record with a status of ‘Potential Duplicate’ cannot be flagged again
before being resolved.

Potential duplicate (HPI-Os) are identified:

via automatic checks:

-   when creating a new HPI-O
-   in the Identify Duplicate process

via external sources

Resolution of duplicate organisation records

A Service Officer must complete a manual duplicate resolution process.

A record flagged as a potential duplicate can be:

-   resolved if it is determined that the record is a duplicate of
    another record
-   determined not to be a duplicate and have the potential duplicate
    flag removed
-   amended if required

For the purpose of duplicate resolution a:

-   primary record is the record that was originally created
-   secondary record is the record that was created subsequently and in
    error

Where the secondary record is determined to be a duplicate:

-   the record is end-dated and the status changes to ‘Retired
    Duplicate’
-   any child organisations of the resolved secondary record are
    unlinked from the secondary record and re-linked to the parent
    organisation of the secondary record (the child’s grandparent)
-   any Healthcare Provider links to the resolved secondary record is
    end-dated with the current date and time stamp
-   any Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer
    (OMO) links to the resolved secondary record is end-dated with the
    current date and time stamp
-   amended details are updated in the Healthcare Provider Directory
    Service (HI HPD), based on preferences
-   the system logs for the two records are not merged
-   the system log for the resolved secondary record can be requested if
    required

Refer potential duplicates

Refer all potential duplicates to Tier 3 HI Service Provider support
team for follow-up action and resolution.

See Resources for a link to contact details.

Related links

Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Identify and resolve replica Healthcare Provider Identifier -
Organisation (HPI-O) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
