
Speech pathology services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020160

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Department of Veterans’ Affairs
(DVA) and the Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) speech pathology
business rules used by Services Australia Service Officers.

Speech pathology services

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers Speech Pathology services provided to
entitled persons by registered Speech Pathologists.

Speech Pathologists assist people who have swallowing and communication
difficulties, through the provision of treatment and counselling. Speech
pathologists assess, diagnose and manage disorders of speech and
language. Speech Pathology services must be claimed in accordance with
the patient’s assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this program.

Eligibility to receive speech pathology services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
Speech Pathology services based on the type of DVA health care card they
hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most Speech Pathology services necessary to meet a clinical
need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds Speech Pathology services related to the card holder's
accepted disabilities only, and treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is commenced.

Patient Eligibility for VAP contains the steps to follow to verify a DVA
health card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting Speech
Pathology services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their Speech Pathology service
provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting
treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA speech pathology services

Only a Speech Pathology service contracted with DVA as a participating
DVA provider that is registered with Services Australia (has a Medicare
provider number) at the time of the service is eligible to provide
services to eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement, which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to ‘Notes for Allied Health Providers
– Speech Pathologists’ on the DVA website. This contains detailed
eligibility requirements and also information for Speech Pathology
services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for speech pathology services

The DVA Speech Pathologist Schedule of Fees contains a range of
consultation items available to eligible DVA health card holders for
both professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care facility or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range SH01- SH99.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Speech Pathology service providers may be required to seek prior
financial authorisation from DVA before providing certain Speech
Pathology services. The fee schedules contain information on which items
require prior financial authorisation.

To request financial approval, Speech Pathology service providers must
contact DVA before administering services. To be able to claim payment
service providers must complete a Treatment Prior Financial Approval
Request form. The Resources page has a link to the DVA website.

DVA Speech Pathology services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims:

-   All speech pathology items have time-based fees
-   Speech Pathology fees are based on an hourly rate and payment is
    made to the nearest quarter of an hour
-   Services rendered away from the provider's rooms attract a loading
    in addition to the normal time-based fee. This loading is equal to
    one quarter of the normal hourly rate
-   Treatment in residential aged care facilities (RACF) which requires
    a greater level of care and treatment in public hospitals requires
    prior approval. The Resources page contains a link to the DVA Speech
    Pathologist Services Fee Schedule. See also Prior Financial
    Authorisation (PARS Approval) for VAP
-   Treatment for White card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    Notes for Dental and Allied Health Providers available on the DVA
    website

Claim lodgement information

DVA Speech Pathology services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The
Resources page contains a link to how to claim for health professionals
on the Services Australia website.

Online claiming

Speech Pathology service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online.
However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health card
holder. Speech Pathology service providers should be sure that they can,
from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services
Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of treatment.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming via DVA
Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA
health card holder. Service providers should be sure that they can, from
other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services
Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of treatment.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA Speech Pathology providers are required to lodge ‘Health
Practitioner Service Voucher’ and ‘Allied Health Time-based Voucher’
forms. These forms can be printed from the DVA website. Service
providers can use their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if
they can provide the same level of information as required by the DVA
forms. After completion, service providers should post the forms to
Services Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP Speech Pathology services enquiries. VAP trained Service
Officers will help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate
department for resolution.

The Resources page contains links to external websites for information
related to Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Speech Pathology
services, information about resolving pend return messages, a link to
the Services Australia website, and links to contact details and the
eligibility query form.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
