-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains prescriber number details for health
professionals in Medicare.

Prescriber number

A prescriber number:

-   uniquely identifies a health professional who is eligible to
    prescribe medication under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   is not location specific

One prescriber number is allocated per profession. When an eligible
health professional provides services in a second health profession,
which is also eligible to prescribe under the PBS, then a second
prescriber number is allocated on the provider stem for that health
profession. The National Health Act 1953 provides details about eligible
PBS prescribers. The References page contains a link to the Act.

A prescriber number may be allocated to a registered medical
practitioner, dentist, authorised optometrist, authorised nurse
practitioner, or authorised midwife.

Medical practitioners

A prescriber number can be allocated to a medical practitioner at the
same time the provider stem is issued but is dependent on any medical
registration or legislative restrictions.

A medical practitioner may ask for a prescriber number when completing
the Application for a Medicare provider number and/or prescriber number
for a medical practitioner form (HW019).

To be eligible to be issued with a prescriber number, a medical
practitioner must hold registration with Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Dentists

To be eligible to be issued with a prescriber number, a Dental
Practitioner or Dental Specialist must hold registration to practice
with Dental Board of Australia. This is a board supported by Ahpra.
Dental Prosthetists are not eligible for a prescriber number.

A dentist may ask for a prescriber number via HPOS, as part of the
Medicare Provider Number application. If the dentist applies for a
prescriber number on its own, an Application for a Medicare provider
number and, or prescriber number for allied health and non-medical
health professionals form (HW093) can be completed, however they must
have an existing provider number.

The Resources page contains a link to the form.

Applications from dentists must be approved by the authorised APS6
delegate before a prescriber number can be allocated.

The following are not eligible for a prescriber number, therefore cannot
be issued with a prescriber number:

-   Representative public dentists (RPDs)
-   Representative public dental practitioners (RPDPs)
-   Dental prosthetists
-   Dental hygienists
-   Dental therapists, and
-   Oral health therapists

Optometrists

Optometrists whose Ahpra registration has an endorsement confirming
their eligibility to prescribe medications can be issued with a
prescriber number. Their registration record with the Optometry Board of
Australia, must include the endorsement:

-   'Endorsed as qualified to administer, obtain, possess, prescribe,
    supply or use topical schedule 2, 3 or 4 medicines for the purposes
    of the practice of Optometry'

Optometrists are not eligible for a prescriber number when the
registration record contains the following notation:

-   'The Optometrist is not qualified for endorsement for scheduled
    medicines and is not able to prescribe Schedule 4 medicines for the
    treatment of conditions of the eye'

An Optometrist may ask for a prescriber number via HPOS, as part of the
Medicare Provider Number application. If the optometrist applies for a
prescriber number on its own, a form for Application for a Medicare
provider number and, or prescriber number for allied health and
non-medical health professionals form (HW093) can be completed, however
they must have an existing provider number.

The Resources page contains a link to the form.

Applications from Optometrists must be approved by the authorised APS6
delegate before a prescriber number can be allocated.

Nurse practitioners

An eligible nurse practitioner must be endorsed as a Nurse Practitioner
on their Ahpra registration record for a prescriber number to be issued.

A Nurse Practitioner may ask for a prescriber number via HPOS as part of
the Medicare Provider Number application. If they only apply for a
prescriber number, the Application for a Medicare provider number and/or
PBS prescriber number for a midwife or nurse practitioner (HW088) can be
completed, however they must have an existing provider number.

The Resources page contains a link to the form.

An application must be approved by an authorised APS6 delegate before a
prescriber number can be allocated.

Midwives

A midwife needs a specific endorsement on their Ahpra registration
record that reads:

-   'An endorsed midwife qualified to prescribe schedule 2, 3, 4 and 8
    medicines and to provide associated services required for midwifery
    practice in accordance with relevant state and territory
    legislation’ or 'Endorsed as qualified to prescribe schedule 2, 3, 4
    and 8 medicines required for midwifery practice across pregnancy,
    labour, birth and postnatal care, in accordance with relevant State
    and Territory legislation'

When appropriate endorsement is not present, a prescriber number must
not be issued.

A midwife may ask for a prescriber number via HPOS as part of Medicare
Provider Number application. If only applying for a prescriber number,
the form Application for a Medicare provider number and/or PBS
prescriber number for a midwife or nurse practitioner (HW088) can be
completed, however they must have an existing provider number.

The Resources page contains a link to the form.

An application must be approved by an authorised APS6 delegate before a
prescriber number can be allocated.

Allied health professionals

Allied health professionals are not eligible for a prescriber number
because they are not authorised to prescribe under the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Enquiries

Further enquiries about applying for a prescriber number should be
directed to Medicare Provider Registration Tier 2.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, forms and letters
for health professionals.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
