
Associated documents and comments for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-10140060

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to upload, extract, merge, split and view
associated documents in PIP Online and WIP - Practice Stream Online. It
also includes information on how to add appropriate and meaningful
comments to PIP and WIP - Practice Stream Online.

Examples of associated documents

Associated document are:

-   related to the PIP and the WIP – Practice Stream
-   sent and received by the Incentives Processing team
-   sent and received by a practice participating in the PIP and/or the
    WIP – Practice Stream

The below are examples of associated documents:

-   Incentives forms
-   A Letter advising of a change to practice details
-   Supporting documents for a change of practice ownership
-   General correspondence
-   An accredited or registered for accreditation certificates
-   A review of decision (ROD) request and ROD outcome letters
-   Annual Confirmation Statement in PIP
-   Quarterly Confirmation Statements in WIP – Practice Stream
-   Email enquiries
-   Rejection letters

Only upload the below IHI forms if they are rejected:

-   PIP Indigenous Health Incentive patient registration and consent
    (IP017) form
-   PIP Indigenous Health Incentive multiple patient registration and
    consent (IP019) form
-   PIP Indigenous Health Incentive patient withdrawal of consent
    (IP029) form

The Resources page has a link to forms.

See also:

-   Forms and letters for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream
-   Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream
-   Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP – Practice
-   Enquiry management for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and
    Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream
-   Annual Confirmation statement (ACS) in PIP
-   Quarterly Confirmation Statement (QCS) in WIP – Practice Stream

Uploading documents and adding comments during processing

The Incentives Processing team can upload and view associated documents
to a PIP and WIP – Practice Stream Online practice profile. See Table 2
on the Process page.

Upload all associated documents to the practice profile on PIP and/or
WIP – Practice Stream Online. Do not upload internal emails from Program
Management.

Do not upload documents to record notes. For example:

-   A Word document, or
-   Work items with sticky notes

A document can only be viewed in the system that it was uploaded in.

Record notes and additional information as a comment on the PIP and WIP
– Practice Stream Online practice profile (see Table 8 on the Process
page). These include:

-   Events
-   Actions
-   Decisions, and/or
-   Telephone conversations

This is a different process to upload documents and record comments in
PaNDA. The Resources page contains a table of appropriate and meaningful
comments.

The Process page has information on how to extract Work Items from PaNDA
to help with preparing documents for upload to PIP and/or WIP – Practice
Stream Online.

Practice access to documents and comments

Practice staff cannot view uploaded documents and comments recorded on
their PIP and WIP – Practice Stream practice profile via Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS).

All recorded comments must be appropriate and professional as practice
staff can ask for documents and comments under the Freedom of
Information Act 1982.

See also: Health Professional Online Services.

The Resources page contains examples of types of associated documents,
information about documents submitted for both PIP and WIP – Practice
Stream together, the naming conventions used when uploading documents
and release of information policy.

Related links

KOFAX for Incentive Programs

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA

Work Optimiser for staff

Health Professional Online Services

Link Practice WIP – Practice Stream non-consenting practices with PIP

Forms and letters for Incentive Programs

Online Services for the PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
