
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioners - provider eligibility and registration 012-18063033

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility and registration for Aboriginal
Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioners.

On this Page:

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioners

For Medicare purposes, an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health
Practitioner is an allied health professional who provides health
services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioners work in a
variety of environments and may be employed in:

-   Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations (ACCHOs) or
-   Government Health Sector, or
-   mainstream services such as general practices and other
    non-government organisations

They provide:

-   clinical and primary health care for individuals, families and
    community groups
-   assistance with arranging, coordinating and providing health care

See Resources page for a quick reference detailing speciality codes,
prescriber numbers, referrals and eligibility to 90 day cheque scheme.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to the Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra). The Resources page has the
contact details.

Medicare eligibility and registration

An applicant must have current registration to practise with the
Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Health Practice Board of Australia.
This is a board supported by the Australian Health Practitioners
Regulation Agency (Ahpra)

Evidence of registration may be at least one of the following:

-   a copy of the AHRPA registration certificate submitted with the
    application for an initial provider number
-   registration details pre-populated within the 'shell' record in PDS
-   Ahpra Information window (if available), or
-   Ahpra website search result

Further confirmation of registration (such as a certificate) is not
required if Provider Directory System (PDS) shows a current Australian
(AUS) registration in the Registration section of the providers record.

Registration is renewed annually on 30 November. The Resources page has
a link to the Ahpra website.

Medicare benefits cannot be paid for services provided or requested when
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioner is not
registered with Ahpra.

Gaps in registration result in gaps in eligibility to access Medicare.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers raise
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) for assistance. Where required, the enquiry will be escalated to a
Programme Officer (PO), who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility
team in National Office for assistance.

The Resources page contains quick reference information, links to useful
contacts, and external websites.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

Aboriginal Health Worker – provider eligibility and registration

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Ahpra Information window

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
