
Reinstate Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03070090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on reinstating a Contracted Service
Provider (CSP) organisation record to the status it held before it was
retired, that is, either 'Active' or 'Deactivated', in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

Reinstate CSP organisation record

A CSP organisation record that has been retired in error can only be
reinstated by a Service Officer.

The request for the record to be reinstated can only be made from a CSP
Officer. When making a request, the CSP Officer must provide sufficient
documentation to the Service Officer to support the request.

The record to be reinstated must have a current status of ‘Retired’.

Once the record has been reinstated, any of the following which were
previously linked to the organisation, are automatically reinstated:

-   CSP Officers
-   Healthcare Provider Identifier-Organisations (HPI-O)

In situations where there is no ‘Active’ CSP Officer registered and
linked to the CSP record to be reinstated, the Service Officer must link
a current ‘Active’ CSP Officer to the CSP organisation before the
organisation can be reinstated.

The reinstated CSP organisation record is updated to the status prior to
the incorrect retirement (either ‘Active’ or ‘Deactivated’).

When a record is reinstated, access to the HI Service is restored using
the existing Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) location certificate.
Reinstating the HI Service permissions will allow access by the
organisation to the HI Service.

A reinstated record will retain the original allocated CSP number.

The PKI will be reinstated also for access to the HI service only.

For every transaction request in the eHealth program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officer ID details, the details of
the requestor are also recorded.

Related links

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
organisation

Contracted Service Provider (CSP) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Amend Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Amend Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Link or unlink Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Link or unlink Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Deactivate Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Retire Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
