
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for when a practice moves.

Practice relocation

The definition of relocation for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream is:
‘when the practice’s physical location has changed and is established as
a place of business at the new premises’.

-   Current accreditation must be transferred to the new premises and
    accreditation status is retained
-   All current practitioners must obtain a new provider number
    associated with the new relocated practice address
-   The old location is no longer operating as a medical practice

A Practice can relocate to any location regardless of distance. However,
if the practice wants to transfer the historical Standardised Whole
Patient Equivalent (SWPE) value, it must relocate within the same local
area as the original location. See effect of a relocation on the SWPE
below for more information.

Do not process a relocation during a calculation month. See Payments for
PIP and WIP – Practice Stream for more information.

Documents needed for a practice relocation

For a practice to request a practice relocation, the practice must
submit the following forms:

Practice Incentives Change of practice details (IP005) form

-   All pages of the form must be received
-   Only Questions 1-17, 26-31 and 37 need to be completed

Practice Incentives Individual general practitioner, nurse practitioner
or health professional details (IP003) forms

-   needed for all practitioners who join the practice or change
    locations as part of the relocation
-   If only one IP003 form is received for a relocating provider,
    Services Australia can complete the relocation process
-   all current practitioners must get new provider numbers for the new
    relocated practice address

The practice must contact their accrediting body to confirm that they
still meet the rules for accreditation at the new location. The practice
must provide an accreditation certificate showing the new relocated
practice address within 6 months of the relocation. Practice payments
will be placed on hold until an updated accreditation certificate is
provided.

If a practice relocates and amalgamates with a non-PIP practice, go to
the Relocation scenarios table on the Resources page for more
information on document requirements.

If a practice changes ownership as part of the relocation, the practice
must submit the Practice Incentives Change of practice ownership form
(IP010) and supporting documents. The practice updates should be updated
in order of when they occurred.

See also:

-   Payments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream
-   Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Multiple IP005 form changes

A practice can use the IP005 form to notify of multiple changes to
practice details. A relocation may be notified with:

-   an amalgamation
-   updating practice bank account details
-   a change of authorised contact persons, and/or
-   ceasing a general practitioner or nurse practitioner

If the practice notifies of a relocation and amalgamation, the change
with the earliest date must be assessed and processed first. For
example, if the date of relocation (Question 11) is before the date of
amalgamation (Question 19), assess and process the relocation first.
Then process the amalgamation.

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream has more
information about assessing and processing an amalgamation.

The Process page has more information about processing a relocation
including other changes.

What is an address update?

An address update is different to a relocation. At times called a
'static relocation', the practice does not physically move premises.

The address change is due to:

-   a rezoning by the council
-   the re-numbering of a shopping complex
-   an administrative error made by the practice, or
-   errors in the practice details in PIP/WIP - Practice Stream Online.
    For example, an address variance

The practice must provide a signed letter from the practice owners. It
must include:

-   confirmation of the address update
-   the updated practice address
-   documents to support the change, such as a letter from the council
-   the signature of at least 1 registered owner
-   an accreditation certificate that shows the updated practice address

Practitioners do not need a new provider number. They must change the
address linked to their provider number before submitting the update. To
do this, they contact Medicare Provider Registration.

To update an address, escalate to the Program Support Officer (PSO) via
the Incentives Escalation Database.

Do not accept a Practice Incentives Change of practice details (IP005)
form for an address update, unless there are documents to support the
change.

See also Forms and letters for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream.

Effect of a relocation on the SWPE

A practice can transfer their Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent
(SWPE) value when they meet the below criteria:

The old location is not operating as a general medical practice

The patient base is the same

-   All patient records are at the new location

Both the original and new locations are in the same local area

A practice can relocate to any location regardless of distance. To be
able to transfer their historical SWPE value, it must relocate within
the same local area as the original practice. The local area is defined
by the Department of Health and Aged Care on a case-by-case basis.

For more details, see relocation scenarios on the Resources page.

The Resources page contains information about practice relocation types
and scenarios, contact details, as well as links to forms and letters.

Related links

Incentive Programs

General policy and procedures for Incentive Programs

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Update practice bank details in PIP or WIP - Practice Stream

Authorised contact person changes for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice location amendments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Failed Payments (GDES) for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
