
Practice amalgamation for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) – Practice Stream 012-10010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for amalgamating practices for the
PIP and WIP – Practice Stream.

Practice amalgamation

The definition of amalgamation for the PIP and WIP – Practice Stream:

'Two or more practices coming together into one common location and
sharing access to all patient records, belonging to each of the
previously individual practices, and the closure of the remaining
original location(s)'.

-   The practice must submit completed forms and provide the necessary
    supporting documents
-   If a practitioner is moving from the amalgamated location to the
    current location, the practitioner must have a provider number
    associated with the current location

Definitions

Current location – the practice location that is remaining open. This is
indicated as the current practice address at Question 6 of the Practice
Incentives Change of practice details (IP005) form.

Amalgamated location – the practice location that is closing and merging
their patient records with the current location. This is indicated at
Question 23 on the IP005 form.

Documents needed for practice amalgamation

For a practice to request a practice amalgamation, the correct forms
must be completed and submitted.

In all cases the below forms and documents must be submitted:

The Practice Incentives Change of practice details (IP005) form

-   All pages of the form must be received
-   Only Questions 1-17, 18-31 and 37 need to be completed

The Practice Incentives Individual general practitioner, nurse
practitioner or health professional details (IP003) form

-   Needed for all practitioners who join the practice or change
    locations as part of the amalgamation
-   If only 1 IP003 form is received for a relocating provider, Services
    Australia can complete the relocation process

An accreditation certificate showing the current location (if
applicable)

-   Must be provided within 6 months of the amalgamation. Practice
    payments will be placed on hold until an updated accreditation
    certificate is provided. For further assistance, see Effect of
    practice amalgamation on practice accreditation

A letter from the practice:

-   confirming they have amalgamated with another practice
-   including the date of amalgamation and practice IDs of the current
    and amalgamated locations
-   which additional practice branch(es) are to be transferred to the
    current practice address (if applicable)
-   signed by at least 1 of the practice owners from each of the
    amalgamated practices

If a practice relocates and amalgamates with a non-PIP practice, go to
the Relocation scenarios table for more information on document
requirements.

If a practice changes ownership as part of the amalgamation, the
Practice Incentives Change of practice ownership form (IP010) and
supporting documents must also be submitted. The practice updates should
be updated in order of when they occurred.

Note: if the current location has never applied for the Procedural GP
payment and GPs from the amalgamating locations have indicated ‘yes’ at
Question 14 of the IP003 form, the practice must register for the
payment to be eligible for payments to be made to GPs. The practice will
not be entitled to any Procedural GP back payments.

Multiple IP005 form changes

A practice can use the IP005 form to notify of multiple changes to
practice details. An amalgamation may be notified with:

-   a relocation
-   a change of bank account details
-   a change of authorised contact persons, and/or
-   ceasing a general practitioner or nurse practitioner

If the practice notifies of an amalgamation and relocation, the change
with the earliest date must be assessed and processed first. For
example, if the date of amalgamation (Question 19) is before the date of
relocation (Question 11), assess and process the amalgamation first.
Then process the relocation.

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream has more
information about assessing and processing a relocation.

The Process page has more information about processing an amalgamation
including other changes.

Effect of practice amalgamation on practice accreditation

Existing location

If practices are amalgamating at a location that is already accredited,
there is no need for the current location to undertake the accreditation
process. This is only needed when the current accreditation is due to be
renewed.

If practices are amalgamating at a location of an unaccredited practice,
the current location must undertake accreditation (if applicable).
Practice payments will be placed on hold until an updated accreditation
certificate is provided If it is not provided within 6 months after the
date of amalgamation, the payments will remain withheld and the three
quarter rule will apply.

New location

If practices amalgamate and move to a new location, the current location
needs to provide evidence of accreditation in that location. Evidence
must be in the form of an accreditation certificate issued by the
accrediting body, which indicates the current location’s address.
Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream has more
information about accreditation certificate requirements.

Practice payments will be placed on hold until the new certificate is
provided. If it is not provided within 6 months after the date of
amalgamation, the payments will remain withheld and the three quarter
rule will apply.

Change of practice name with change of practice ownership

An accreditation certificate must match either the registered practice
name, company name or trading name. If the practice name changes where a
sale of the practice has occurred as part of an amalgamation, it will
need a new accreditation certificate with the new practice name.

Practice payments are placed on hold until the new certificate is
provided. If it is not provided within 6 months after the change of
ownership, the payments will remain withheld and the three quarter rule
will apply.

Effect of practice amalgamation on SWPE

The Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent (SWPE) value of a practice may
be transferred when practices amalgamate.

Example:

Practice A (the closing location at Question 23) is amalgamating with
Practice B (the current location at Question 6).

-   The practitioners registered to Practice A are end dated and/or
    transferred to Practice B
    The system will list these practitioners as non-current
    practitioners on Practice B
-   The practitioners at Practice A must apply for new provider numbers
    associated with Practice B. The new provider numbers are then added
    to practice B
-   The practitioners registered to Practice B will remain the same as
    they did not move location
    The SWPE services from Practice A will be included/transferred into
    the SWPE calculation of Practice B
-   Practice A is then closed

The Resources page contains links to forms and letters.

Related links

Incentive Programs

General policy and procedures for Incentive Programs

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Update practice bank details in PIP or WIP - Practice Stream

Authorised contact person changes for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Failed Payments (GDES) for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
