
Provider location details for health professionals in Medicare 012-42010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on provider number location details
for health professionals in Medicare.

Provider location details

Provider location details include:

-   full provider number for the health professional at a specific
    location
-   physical address and contact details at the location
-   start and end dates (if applicable) of the location or the health
    professional's eligibility to access Medicare benefits for services
    rendered at the practice location
-   location type (if applicable)
-   location specific specialty codes (if applicable)
-   provider service rules (if applicable)
-   employment details
-   organisation details
-   bank account details

Note: health professionals using home locations may contact and request
to use a PO Box as the location address. For information on requests to
use alternative location addresses, see Provider number for health
professionals in Medicare.

Change of practice location address

A health professional must have a provider number for each practice
location. If the health professional moves to a new practice location,
they must apply for a new provider number at that location.

Over-keying an address on an existing practice location is not permitted
unless:

-   the correct Australia Post address has been identified for that
    practice location
-   there is or has been a keying error
-   the location was issued in error and the provider number at the
    location has never been released or used
-   the practice is relocating within the same physical address, that
    is, change of suites / rooms

3GA placements and 19AB exemptions are issued for a specific location
and any changes to an address will have a flow-on impact. Also, some
incentive payments are made based on the area or the address of a health
professional’s provider number.

The following areas and programs depend on accurate address information
in the Provider Directory System (PDS):

-   practices registered under the Practice Incentive Program (PIP)
-   3GA placement approvals which are time and location specific
-   19AB exemptions which are time and location specific
-   IBIS (data warehouse) team and Department of Health and Aged Care
    using PDS for statistical analysis. Note: this information is used
    in determining Distribution Priority Areas or Districts of Workforce
    numbers when issuing 19AB exemptions etc.
-   old Medicare claims lodged for payment may be rejected where address
    details do not match
-   pharmaceutical benefit claims may be rejected where the health
    professional's name and practice location do not match provider
    number details in the PDS

Business structure legislation effective 1 July 2018

Important changes resulting from the Health Legislation Amendment
(Improved Medicare Compliance and Other Measures) Act 2018 (the Act)
took effect 1 July 2018. The Act amends the Health Insurance Act 1973.
The amendment to legislation introduces the requirement for capturing
organisation and banking details on the application for a provider
number when the health professional intends to claim a Medicare benefit.

Shared Debt Recovery Scheme

The Act also introduced the Shared Debt Recovery Scheme (SDRS) on 1 July
2019. The Scheme enables the Commonwealth to hold both a practitioner
(primary debtor) and another party (secondary debtor) responsible for
repayment of compliance debts, arising as a result of incorrectly
claiming Medicare benefits, through the making of a shared debt
determination.

The Scheme was introduced because Medicare billing is often:

-   delegated to non-practitioners
-   administered through centralised billing areas, and
-   can be influenced by organisational processes and policies

In some instances this has led to incorrect billing practices.

Closing a provider location

A provider number can only be closed at the request of the health
professional.

A provider number can be closed by:

-   telephone call with the health professional
-   email from the health professional’s email address, as indicated on
    the health professional’s stem
-   a signed written request
-   an application form for a provider number for their health
    profession

When closing a provider number, use the date of the telephone call, or
date of request lodgement as the end date. Requests for a future end
date can only be accepted via an email request, a signed written request
or indicated on the application form for a provider number. Provider
locations cannot be closed retrospectively. This ensures benefits can be
paid for services provided before the health professional's request for
closure. Service Officers need to ensure the health professional
understands they will not be able to claim any Medicare benefits for
services provided at that location in the future.

Service Officer should escalate the enquiry if suspicious that:

-   closing a provider number may result in some claims or referrals not
    being paid
-   the health professional may not be aware of the consequences of the
    closure
-   the request may be related to a dispute or suspected fraud

Escalate the enquiry to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) if further
assistance is required.

More than one provider number at the same location

Service Officers can allocate a second provider number for the same
health professional at the one location in the following circumstances:

-   Health professionals working at a location covered under a section
    19(2) or 19(5) Direction, generally an Aboriginal Community
    Controlled Health Service, where the second provider number is used
    for any after-hours services and Medicare benefits for these
    services are to be paid to the health professional performing the
    services. Note: Medicare benefit payments for these after-hours
    services are not pay group linked to the relevant community or
    organisation but instead are paid to the health professional
-   Specific services provided within certain specialties, for example,
    angiography, where the cardiologist provides both the surgical and
    radiological service, yet the radiology service is to be paid to the
    radiology practice
-   A health professional working in separate, distinct suites or
    departments at the one street location
-   Business name is different
-   A different ABN has been supplied for the second provider number
-   A second 3GA placement is received
-   Where a medical centre is located within hospital facility/grounds

See the Process page for more information.

Simplified billing agents

Some simplified billing agents prefer a health professional to have more
than one provider number at a location to assist them in splitting
payments. Services Australia will not allocate a second provider number
for this purpose. Provider numbers are not allocated for account keeping
purposes.

Electronically transmitted claims

Claims transmitted electronically through Services Australia's
electronic channels (Medclaims and online services) use a minor
identification number. Only one provider number per minor identification
number is permitted.

Provider location claim activity

An automated system update calculates claiming activity for each open
practice location on a fortnightly basis. The Resources page contains a
table describing the indicators used.

Location type

A provider location identifier is a flag added to a provider number in
PDS. The provider location identifier denotes the location falls under a
section 19(2) or 19(5) Direction or a class exemption is applied to a
medical practitioner subject to section 19AB. One or more location types
can be selected when creating new provider number locations or updating
existing provider number locations.

Provider number location identifier information is released to the
Department of Health and Aged Care via the Provider File Release and is
used for reporting purposes.

The Resources page contains a table of the location type identifiers and
when they should be used.

The Resources page contains information on claiming activity indicators,
location type identifiers and where to direct enquiries.

Related links

Business structure and bank account details for EFT for health
professionals

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions

Ahpra Information window

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
