
Social worker services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020170

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) Social Work services program for Veterans’ Affairs
Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

Social Worker services in DVA

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) including Social Work services provided to entitled
persons by registered Social Workers. Social Workers assess a patient’s
total social and psychological situation to assist them to overcome
problems caused by illness as well as social and financial change.
Social Worker services must be claimed in accordance with the patient’s
assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this program.

Eligibility to receive Social Worker services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
Social Work services based on the type of DVA health care card they
hold.

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TOP) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most Social Worker services necessary to meet a clinical need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds Social Work services related to the card holder's accepted
disabilities only. Treatment may require prior financial authorisation
before it is commenced.

Patient Eligibility for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP) contains the
steps to follow to verify a DVA health card holder’s eligibility before
paying or rejecting Social Work services when the system returns
2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their Social Work service
provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting
treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA Social Work services

To be eligible to provide services to DVA health card holders, Social
Workers must be:

-   contracted with DVA as a participating DVA provider, and
-   registered with Services Australia (hold a Medicare provider number)
    at the time of the service

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement, which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to ‘Notes for Allied Health Providers
– Social Workers’ on the DVA website. This contains detailed eligibility
requirements and information for Social Work services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for Social Work services

The DVA Social Workers’ fee schedule contains a range of consultation
items available to eligible DVA health card holders for both
professional attendances in rooms, patients’ homes (domiciliary visits),
residential aged care facilities or institutions.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range SW01- SW99.

The Resources page contains a link to the Social Workers’ Fee Schedule.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Social Work service providers may be required to seek prior financial
authorisation from DVA before providing certain Social Work services.
The fee schedules contain information on which items require prior
financial authorisation.

To request financial approval, Social Work service providers must
contact DVA before administering services to be able to claim payment by
completing a Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form.

The Resources page has a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA Social Work services’ business rules

The following business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff
when processing claims:

-   Up to 2 initial consultations can be claimed in a 12 month referral
    period. Each initial consultation must be for a new episode of care,
    or a new and unrelated condition, and requires a separate referral
-   An initial consultation is claimed when the entitled person is seen
    for the first time
-   A new episode of care refers to a period of more than 3 months since
    the entitled person last received treatment for the same condition
-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient. Two subsequent
    consultations cannot be claimed on the same day
-   Subsequent consultations are to be claimed for ongoing treatment of
    a condition
-   Treatment in residential aged care facilities (RACF) which require a
    greater level of care and treatment in public hospitals both need
    prior approval. The
    Resources page contains a link to the DVA Social Worker Services Fee
    Schedule. See also
    Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans' Affairs
    Processing (VAP) for more information
-   Treatment for White Card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   Social workers cannot claim from the DVA Social Workers’ Schedule of
    Fees and the Social Workers’ (mental health) Schedule of Fees for
    the same patient on the same day
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    ‘Notes for Social Workers’ on the DVA website. The Resources page
    contains a link to the DVA website

Claim lodgement information

DVA Social Worker services’ claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The
Resources page contains a link to claim choices for health professionals
on the Services Australia website.

Online claiming

Social Work service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online.
However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health card
holder. Social Work service providers should be sure that they can, from
their own records, satisfy any request from Services Australia or DVA
for evidence of service and details of treatment.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming via a DVA
Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA
health card holder. Service providers should be sure that they can, from
their own records, satisfy any request from Services Australia or DVA
for evidence of service and details of treatment.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA Social Work providers are required to lodge ‘Health Practitioner
Service Voucher’ and ‘Claim for Treatment Services Voucher’ forms. These
forms can be printed from the DVA website. Service providers can use
their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can provide the
same level of information as required by the DVA forms. After
completion, service providers should post the forms to Services
Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

The Resources page contains some common enquires and suggested responses
for Service Officers as well as links to relevant resources on the DVA
website.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
