
Pharmaceutical Advisers (PA) in Services Australia 012-60120000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Pharmaceutical Advisers (PA) in
Services Australia. A PA is a Services Australia pharmacist who is
available to provide professional knowledge and advice about
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) related issues to internal and
external stakeholders.

On this Page:

PBS Pharmaceutical Adviser line

The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - National Pharmaceutical
Adviser (PA) pilot is available for Service Officers (SO) to escalate
calls to PAs.

Pharmaceutical Advisers are available on the PA line from 8:30 am to
6:00 pm NSW time Monday to Friday.

Note: reduced PA availability applies to Public Holidays and the reduced
activity period (RAP).

Calls are distributed to any PA logged into the PA line.

If there is no PA available (or if the phone is not answered), the
Service Officer should advise the caller that a PA is not available at
present. If the caller requests a call back, the Service Officer must
fill in a General Authorities / Complex Authorities PA call back form.
Links to the forms are available on the Resources page. The Service
Officer should advise the caller a PA will call them back when they are
available.

Guidelines for answering calls – Service Officer

Service Officers manage most PBS Authorities calls without assistance.
Occasionally, a Service Officer will need to escalate a call to a
Program Support Officer (PSO) or a PA. Reasons for this can range from a
direct request by the caller for clarification or interpretation of the
intent of PBS policies or criteria.

Depending on the situation, the Service Officer may escalate to a PSO or
a PA. If the PSO is unable to assist, after resuming the call, the
Service Officer can contact a PA or other appropriate Tier 2 escalation
point as advised by the PSO.

If a caller requests to speak with a PA, the Service Officer should try
to obtain some background information before escalating to the PA. The
Service Officer must introduce themselves to the PA by stating their
name and P number. The Service Officer should then provide the name of
the caller and details of the issue to the PA. A PA may either ask for a
call to be conferenced (3 ways) or transferred depending on the nature
of the call. A Service Officer who remains on a conference call will
undertake any input or post call work that is appropriate for the
operator to do.

If a PA cannot be contacted in a timely manner, the Service Officer
should obtain contact details from the caller and refer these, together
with a preferred contact time and the nature of the problem, to a PA for
a call back. This is done by completing either a General Authorities or
Complex Authorities PA call back from which will be emailed to the PA
group.

If applicable, Service Officers should ‘pend’ an authority application
and add an Authority comment. This helps the PA identify the problem, or
allows another Service Officer to identify a potential problem should
the prescriber attempt to obtain an Authority before clarification, or
where approval is inappropriate.

Guidelines for answering calls – PSO

Where a Service Officer seeks advice from a Program Support Officer
(PSO) the PSO should try to provide that advice, to satisfy the problem
and to educate the Service Officer. The PSO may be a liaison point to
ensure only calls outside of the expertise or training of Service
Officer are referred to a PA.

Guidelines for answering calls - PA

A PA will try to answer all relevant queries escalated to them. The
Service Officer will provide the name of the caller and details of the
issue to the PA if required. The PA may ask for a call to be conferenced
(3 ways) or transferred depending on the nature of the call. Service
Officers who remain on a conference call will undertake any input or
post call work that is appropriate for the operator to do.

The Resources page contains contact details for National Pharmaceutical
Advisers and a link to the General or Complex Authorities Pharmaceutical
Adviser Call Back Request Form.

Related links

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
