
Coordinated Veterans' Care (CVC) Program for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020040

-   Background
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Coordinated Veterans' Care
(CVC) Program for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

Program intent

DVA started this program on 1 May 2011. The CVC program is a community
health care model for eligible veterans:

-   with chronic condition/s, and
-   who are at risk of hospital admission/readmission

Until 30 June 2021, only Gold Card holders with one or more chronic
condition/s were eligible.

From 1 July 2021:

-   Gold Card holders with one or more chronic conditions are eligible
    for the CVC program
-   White Card holders with one or more accepted mental health
    condition/s, are eligible for the CVC Mental Health pilot

Eight fee items cover the services provided associated with this program
by:

-   GPs
-   practice nurses, and
-   DVA contracted community nursing providers

Services Australia process claims and payments for this program.

Eligibility to receive CVC services

The CVC Program is a planned and coordinated health care model for:

Gold Card holders

-   with 1 or more targeted chronic conditions
-   who are at risk of being hospitalised

White Card holders

-   with one or more accepted mental health condition/s

White Card holders who receive only Non-Liability Health Care are not
eligible for the CVC Program. A Non-Liability Health Care White Card
Holder can be identified by the following accepted conditions on their
Client file:

-   general (non specific) mental health condition codes such as ‘all
    mental health conditions’, or
-   after a specific mental health condition having a qualifier such as
    treatment only or provisional

The following notes on a client file, or next to the mental health
condition, relate to treatment covered under NHLC, not CVC:

-   'all mental health conditions'
-   'treatment only', or
-   'provisional'

Clients meet the conditions for CVC program treatment if they have both

-   an accepted mental condition, and
-   Non-Liability Health Care conditions

Veterans must have an accepted mental health condition on their client
file for services covered under CVC items to be payable. See the
Neurodevelopmental disorders table on the Resources page for a list of
accepted conditions.

See Patient Eligibility for VAP for the steps to verify a DVA Health
Card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting chiropractic
services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

Eligibility to provide DVA CVC services

GPs can provide services to eligible DVA Health Card holders if:

-   they are registered with Services Australia, and
-   have a Medicare provider number

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA Health Card
holders through a payment arrangement. This means the card holder does
not pay for the services.

The Resources page contains a link to CVC Guide for General Practice on
the Department of Veterans' Affairs Website. This contains information
about eligibility and the CVC program.

Program fees - Coordinated Veterans' Care

The Coordinated Veterans' Care Program fees can be found on the
Resources page. Items in this fee schedule are in the range UP01 – UP11.

Note:

-   only Gold Card holders are eligible for the CVC program
-   only White Card holders with an accepted Mental Health condition are
    eligible for the CVC program Health Pilot
-   MBS incentive items will not be payable in association with a UP
    item when claimed by a GP

The Resources page contains a list of CVC program item numbers and
definitions, fee information, business rules, frequently asked
questions, accepted mental health conditions, user guides and links to
external websites.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
