
Provider number for health professionals in Medicare 012-42010010

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines information on provider numbers for health
professionals in Medicare.

Definition of a provider number

A provider number is:

-   Allocated by Services Australia to a registered medical practitioner
    or non-medical health professional (dentist, optometrist, nurse
    practitioner or midwife) and identifies the person and their health
    profession at the practice location/s where the person practises
    their profession
-   Sometimes referred to as a provider/registration number for allied
    health professionals
-   Generated by the Provider Directory System (PDS) on processing of an
    application for a provider number and is allocated from a provider
    number stack held in the database tables
-   not automatically granted with access to Medicare benefits. The
    issuing of a provider number does not mean the medical practitioner,
    non-medical health professional or allied health professional is
    eligible to attract Medicare benefits for their professional
    services

The term 'provider number' is used throughout the Medicare Provider
Eligibility reference material as relating to the number issued by the
agency to identify the health professional in the Medicare PDS system.

A provider number may allow the health professional to either:

-   refer their patient to another health professional (usually a
    specialist or consultant physician) or to request diagnostic imaging
    or pathology services where their patient will be able to claim
    Medicare benefits at the referred rate, or
-   attract Medicare benefits for their services at particular practice
    locations or at all practice locations, or
-   both of the above

Medicare benefit eligibility is determined by the Health Insurance Act
1973 (the Act) and supporting Regulations and Determinations. The
References page contains a link to this Act.

To ensure accuracy of advice, refer all enquiries about a health
professional's eligibility to access Medicare benefits for their
services to Provider Registration staff in the state or territory where
the health professional intends to provide services. Only give advice
about a health professional's eligibility to the health professional or
a third party after a security check is completed.

Provider number for each location

A health professional must have a provider number for every practice
location where they provide services. This policy is supported by the
Health Insurance Regulations 2018.

The exception does not apply when they are subject to any restrictions
on accessing Medicare benefits.

Provider location address

A practice address is recorded in PDS and is known as the provider
number or provider location address. The address in PDS is available to
authorised recipients, including:

-   private health funds
-   Department of Health
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs

Recording the correct practice address in PDS allows payment of Medicare
incentive items. The incentive payment is linked to the Rural, Remote,
and Metropolitan Arear (RRMA) and the Modified Monash Model (MMM) 2019
geographical classification system for the location where the service is
performed.

For more information, see Provider location details for health
professionals in Medicare.

Legislation requires a claim for a Medicare benefit must include:

-   the name of the health professional and the address of the place of
    practice, or
-   the provider number of the health professional for the practice
    location

For more information, see Account and receipt documents for Medicare
claims processing.

Use of a home address as the provider number location address

Services Australia is unable to suppress a provider number address.
Therefore, health professionals should carefully consider using a home
address for a provider number, as the provider number location address
may be publicly available. For example:

-   viewable on pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheques. Note: health
    professionals can request a pay group link to direct payment of
    Medicare benefit cheques to a PO Box address. See Payment pay group
    link for Medicare benefit cheques for more information and the form
    required
-   requests for pathology services
-   available to private health funds for the purposes of their business

Information for health professionals about using a home address as a
practice location with the address being publicly available is included
in the Application for a Medicare provider number (HW019 and HW093).

Note: Provider addresses are no longer visible in a patient's myGov or
My Health Record claims history, effective February 2021.

Requests from health professionals to use an alternative provider
location addresses (such as a PO Box)

Due to the coronavirus (COVID-19), an increasing number of health
professionals are provding COVID-19 specific telehealth services
(currently included in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) until 30
June 2021) from their home address.

Services Australia is aware some health professionals have expressed
safety concerns following their move to home-based consultations.

Under the COVID-19 arrangements, health professionals can continue to
use their current practice location number and address while delivering
telehealth services from home. They do not need to apply for a new
provider number.

Services Australia may consider recording an alternative address (such
as PO Box), for a health professional where:

-   the home is the only practice location, and
-   the health professional is only providing telehealth services or
    mobile consultations

All health professionals requesting an alternative address must:

submit a signed request, and

include the information below the:

-   current practice location arrangements. For example, the physical
    practice is closed due to COVID-19 and only providing telehealth
    services from the home location
-   reason for using an alternate address. For example, safety concerns
-   proposed alternative address. For example, a PO Box
-   physical practice (home address). This is recorded in the Notes
    section of PDS

Note: the process for requesting a provider number for a new location,
including home addresses, remains the same.

Medical or non-medical practitioner requests to use alternative provider
location address

All requests from medical practitioners and non-medical health
professionals are escalated to National Office

-   See Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
    Medicare for information on provider registration enquiry
    escalations

The requests are assessed on a case-by-case basis to ensure legislative
requirements are met

The use of an alternative location address may affect eligibility with
other programs. For example:

-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   Prescription Shopping Programme (PSP)
-   Practice Incentives Program (PIP)
-   Workforce Incentive Program (WIP)
-   Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Allied health professional requests to use alternative location address

Service Delivery assess requests from allied health professionals. For
information on eligibility criteria and process, see Allied health and
non-medical professionals provider number applications and requests.

More than 31 locations

A new provider stem number is automatically created in PDS when a health
professional requires locations in excess of the 31 locations allowed
under each stem.

More than one health discipline

A health professional who has a provider number for:

-   one health profession (for example medical), and
-   has a qualification in a second (or more) health profession (for
    example dental) must be allocated a separate provider stem for each
    health profession they are registered under

The second stem is required to monitor:

-   registration status of the health professional in their respective
    health profession
-   appropriate access to Medicare benefits for each health profession

Structure of a provider number

A provider number consists of:

-   6 numerals referred to as the provider stem, for example 123456
-   an alpha or numeric character that identifies the practice location,
    for example 1234561
-   an alpha check digit, for example 1234561A

Note: the 8 character provider number is calculated using an algorithm.
All 8 characters must be included in written correspondence to the
provider, including any leading zeros.

A provider number can be allocated where the health professional:

-   can access Medicare benefit rebates for their services (subject to
    any legislative restrictions or requirements)
-   can refer or request services for which their patient can claim a
    Medicare rebate
-   has relevant qualifications or eligibility as set out in the Act and
    supporting regulations or related program guidelines

Eligible health professionals are issued a provider number for providing
services included under the Medicare program.

The References page contains a link to the Act.

How to apply for a provider number

A health professional:

-   completes, signs, and dates an application for a provider number
    form for their health profession
-   attaches the documentation as indicated on the form
-   mails or faxes the documentation to the Provider Registration team
    to the postal address or fax number on the application form

Address and fax details are listed on the application form 'Returning
your form'.

From 8 December 2019, a new function in PDS creates Medicare shell
records. It uses a data feed directly from the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Eligible medical interns can use the Digital Provider Number
Registration (DPNR) function in Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS) to complete their Medicare registration. Note: this only applies
to medical interns trained in Australia or New Zealand without
conditions or notations; see Medical Interns. All other health
professionals are required to submit a manual application for their
initial provider number.

For manually submitted applications where a Medicare shell record exists
in PDS Service Officers will use the shell record along with information
provided in the application form to complete the Medicare Provider
Number registration process. The current Medicare provider number
process will continue to apply where a Medicare shell record does not
exist.

The Resources page contains a link to archived provider number history
and to the Application for a provider number form.

Medical Interns

From 8 December 2019, eligible medical interns are able to complete
their initial DPNR process in HPOS. They are also able to apply for
subsequent provider locations and request a prescriber number through
HPOS.

When PDS creates a Medicare shell record, eligible medical interns:

-   receive an email from Services Australia inviting them to complete
    their Provider registration online through HPOS. This includes
    uploading any additional documentation that may be required, such as
    proof of residency

Service Officers only need to action applications:

-   where the medical intern is subject to section 19AB of the Act , and
-   further documentation such as proof of residency needs reviewing

Current restrictions with the DPNR function

The DPNR process is for eligible medical interns during their
internship. Eligible medical interns who have completed their internship
will be required to submit an Application for a Medicare provider number
and, or prescriber number for a medical practitioner (HW019).

Eligible medical interns can use the current DPNR process through HPOS
to:

-   lodge an initial Medicare provider number registration
-   request a prescriber number when completing the DPNR process
-   apply for extra locations

A medical practitioner cannot use DPNR once they:

-   complete an internship, and
-   no longer have provisional registration with Ahpra

All other medical practitioners who need an initial or extra Medicare
provider registration must:

-   complete an Application for a Medicare provider number and, or
    prescriber number for a medical practitioner (HW019), and
-   lodge any supporting documents

Medical practitioners only need to complete the Application for a
Medicare provider number and, or prescriber number for a medical
practitioner (HW019) when:

-   they need to request extra provider numbers, and
-   they are not eligible to create a new provider location in HPOS

Enquiries

Refer all enquiries about eligibility to access Medicare to Medicare
Provider Registration.

Incomplete application for a provider number

An application is incomplete if the:

-   form is not filled out correctly
-   required supporting documentation is not provided

Note: incomplete applications are unable to be processed without the
required supporting documentation being supplied.

The supporting documentation required for a provider number application
depends on the health professional's circumstances. If all required
supporting documentation required to process an application has not been
submitted, the application is deemed incomplete.

Some examples of supporting documentation are:

a current registration certificate or an artefact such as an Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) website screen print,
confirming registration from Ahpra

-   if the provider has not included documentation confirming their
    Ahpra registration, check their registration in the Ahpra window or
    on the Ahpra website. This is required to create a new stem, not
    when we already have an AUS line recorded on PDS

the Process page contains instructions for checking the registration in
the Ahpra window and on the Ahpra website

print the screen showing the registration confirmation upload to the
work item in PaNDA

current passport and visa documentation is required for the initial
application for a provider number for a medical practitioner was not
Australian born

-   current visa is required to be supplied where the visa recorded on
    PDS has expired

permanent residency or citizenship documentation

contract of employment

letter of employment, including term and location of employment and why
a provider number is required

fellowship documents

approved program placement confirmation, sent directly to Services
Australia from the approving body

The Resources page contains a link to the Ahpra website.

Inconsistent Applications

An inconsistent application has enough information to be fully
processed, but the information provided is not consistent with the
application. Even though they technically have the required information,
it is important that providers are not given access they are not
eligible for.

The Process page provides examples of inconsistencies and the action
Service Officers are required to take.

Backdating of provider numbers

Requests to backdate a provider number may be granted in certain
circumstances.

Prior to processing a request to backdate a provider number, the health
professional must:

-   have had current registration, and
-   relevant access to Medicare benefits at the time of the requested
    location start date

A request to backdate may be where:

-   a provider number application is received, requesting a new provider
    number location start date prior to the date of lodgement, or
-   a written request is received, requesting an existing provider
    number location start date be amended prior to existing start date

A written request can be:

-   an email, providing the email is received from the email address
    recorded on the stem in PDS
-   a letter signed by the health professional

If the health professional meets these requirements, the Service Officer
can start/backdate the location as per the application or written
request. National Office approval is not required. There is no
restriction on how far a provider number can be backdated if the health
professional meets these requirements.

Note: due to COVID-19 requests to backdate can be processed via the
phone, under the following conditions:

-   a security check has been performed successfully
-   provider is eligible and is unrestricted from the requested start
    date (add note to stem)

If the health professional does not meet the above requirements, the
start date of the location should be:

-   the date the health professional held current registration, or
-   the date when the relevant access is required

The above process does not apply for locations with 3GA placements or
for medical practitioners subject to section19AB of the Act. Follow
current processing requirements for these health professionals.

For assistance with backdating requests contact a Programme Support
Officer (PSO)

Provider name recorded in Provider Directory

A health professional must only be issued a provider number in the name
in which they are registered with the relevant registration board or
professional body.

Change of provider name

A change of provider name is not actioned unless:

-   evidence of the new name being used by the relevant registration
    body or professional association is provided
-   a link between the provider's previous name and new name is evident
    or confirmed by supporting documentation

The link between the provider's previous name and new name can be
confirmed, for example, when they have the same Medical, Allied Health
or Dental Board registration board number. When in doubt, a Programme
Officer (PO) can request confirmation of name change documentation, such
as a marriage certificate.

Provider name enquiries

In the first instance, enquiries about provider names should be directed
a Programme Support Officer (PSO). If further clarification is required,
the PSO can escalate to a Programme Officer (PO).

Reference Track and Scale project

Fields have been included within PDS as part of the track and scale
project.

The fields appear in the PDS provider stem (View screen) and can be
updated in the Personal tab. The fields are:

-   Residency Details
-   Class Exemption Details

All non-location specific exemptions for:

-   5 Yr All
-   PR Assist
-   World Health Organisation (WHO)

must be recorded using the Class Exemption Details field at provider
stem.

See also: Learning Management System (LMS) in ESSentials and Supporting
Training Materials for Provider Eligibility under My Learning
Communities/HDEL/Training Room/1. Medicare Provider Services

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details for Medicare Programme Support Officers (PSOs)
-   Medicare Provider Registration
-   useful external websites
-   fact sheet on archived provider number history and forms, and
-   examples of inconsistencies in provider number applications

Related links

Provider location details for health professionals in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
