
Osteopaths - provider eligibility and registration 012-18063058

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility and registration requirements for
osteopaths.

On this Page:

Osteopaths

Osteopaths are allied health professionals who focus on how the
skeleton, joints, muscles, nerves, circulation, connective tissue and
internal organs function as a whole.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about registration to the Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra). The Resources page has the
contact details.

Medicare eligibility and registration

An applicant must:

-   have current registration to practise osteopathy with the Osteopathy
    Board of Australia. This is a board supported by the Australian
    Health Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra)

Evidence of registration may be:

-   a copy of the Ahpra registration certificate with an initial
    application for a provider number, and/or
-   where there is an existing 'shell' record in PDS, registration
    details are prepopulated within the 'shell' record, and/or
-   Ahpra Information window (if available)
-   Ahpra website search result

Registration is renewed annually on 30 November.

The Resources page has a link to the Ahpra website.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers raise
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) for assistance. Where required, the enquiry will be escalated to a
Programme Officer (PO) who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility and
Accreditation team in National Office for assistance.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, useful contacts,
and links to external websites.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Osteopathic services for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP)

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory Systems (PDS)

Ahpra Information window

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
