
Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes claiming 012-14010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines background information about the MI schemes
including how to claim.

On this Page:

History of MI cover

Before 1 July 1997, Medical Defence Organisations (MDO) provided MI
cover, on a ‘discretionary’ basis. MDOs retained the discretion to
decide whether to provide indemnity and assistance to the medical
practitioner, and the medical practitioner would have no recourse
against the decision. In practice, MDOs generally exercised this
discretion in favour of the medical practitioner and refusals would
generally only occur in cases involving fraud, criminal activity, sexual
misconduct or drug abuse.

The amount of indemnity provided to medical practitioners was considered
to be unlimited. However, in practice, cover was limited by the capital
available to the MDO.

Since 1997, several Medical Indemnity Insurers (MIIs) have offered (some
exclusively for example, MDA National) claims-made cover. Claims-made
cover allows a medical practitioner to notify the insurer of a claim
within the terms of the current cover, for an incident that occurred
within a recognised period. Before 1 July 1997, this ‘recognised’ period
related to the medical practitioner’s annual membership with the MDO.
After 1 July 1997, this recognised period relates to the policy period
specified in the insurance contract issued to the medical practitioner
by the MII.

In 2002, Australia’s largest MDO, United Medical Protection, was placed
in provisional liquidation.

Since 1 July 2003, MI insurance has been compulsory for Australian
practitioners, by insurers licensed under the Insurance Act 1973. The
Resources page contains a table outlining the major features of MI
insurance pre and post 1 July 2003.

Schemes

High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (HCCS)

HCCS is set out in legislation that commenced on 1 January 2003 to
remedy the upward pressure on MI premiums by reducing the large cost of
claims on Medical Indemnity Insurers (MIIs) and Medical Defence
Organisations (MDOs). The government funds the HCCS, which pays 50% of
out of pocket costs by MIIs and MDOs that are greater than the
applicable HCCS threshold amount, up to the limit of a medical
practitioner’s or allied health professional’s indemnity cover. The
Department of Health and Aged Care provides funding via a sweeping
account arrangement.

In order for a claim to be eligible under the HCCS, it must reach a
threshold that depends on the date the MII or MDO was first notified of
the claim. The 4 thresholds are:

-   $2 million for claims notified between 1 January 2003 and 21 October
    2003
-   $500,000 for claims notified between 22 October 2003 and 31 December
    2003
-   $300,000 for claims notified between 1 January 2004 and 30 June 2018
-   $500,000 for claims notified on or after 1 July 2018

From 1 July 2020 this scheme is limited to medical practitioners.

Allied Health High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (AHHCCS)

AHHCCS is set out in legislation that commenced on 1 July 2020 to
contribute towards the availability of certain allied health services in
Australia by reducing the large cost of MII claims. The government funds
the AHHCCS, which pays 50% of out of pocket MII costs that are greater
than the applicable AHHCCS threshold amount, up to the limit of the
allied health professional’s indemnity cover. The Department of Health
and Aged Care provides funding via a sweeping account arrangement.

For a claim to be eligible under the AHHCCS, it must reach a threshold
dependent on the date the incident occurred. The current threshold is:

-   $500,000 for incidents that occurred on or after 1 July 2020

This scheme will only be initially open to certain insurers providing
professional indemnity insurance to registered medical practitioners (or
their employers).

Run off Cover Indemnity Scheme (ROCS)

ROCS is set out in legislation that commenced on 1 July 2004 to remove
the need for medical practitioners to fund their own run-off cover when
they have left the private medical workforce. It also provides a
guarantee that the cost of MI claims covered by the scheme will be
funded. Under ROCS, the government covers the full cost of eligible
claims (100%) for incidents that were first notified on or after 1 July
2004. In addition, the MIIs and MDOs can claim a handling fee (5%) of
the amount being claimed. ROCS is directly funded through contributions
collected under ROCS Support Payments, which is a payment by MIIs based
on a proportion of each medical practitioner’s insurance premium
collected annually through a contribution year. Prior to ROCS, medical
practitioners needed to purchase death, disablement, and retirement
run-off cover from MDOs when the medical practitioner stopped
practising.

Incurred But Not Reported Indemnity Scheme (IBNR)

IBNR assists an eligible MDO by funding medical insurance payouts in
specified circumstances and covers claims for incidents that took place
before 30 June 2002 and were notified to the MDO on or after 1 July
2002. Under IBNR, the government covers the full costs of eligible
claims (100%) from MDOs that do not have adequate reserves to cover
their liabilities. In addition, MDOs can claim a handling fee (5%) of
the amount being claimed. The Department of Health and Aged Care
provides funding via a sweeping account arrangement.

Under IBNR, an MDO is a participating MDO as defined under section 5 of
the Act. Only 1 MDO (United Medical Protection, now known as Avant
Insurance Limited) is currently determined as being able to participate
in IBNR.

Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (ECS)

ECS is designed to protect medical practitioners against personal
liability for eligible claims that exceed the level of their insurance
cover. The government funds 100% of the cost of eligible claims above
their insurance limit, and equals or exceeds the relevant threshold. The
Department of Health and Aged Care provides funding via a sweeping
account arrangement.

The ECS covers incidents that are notified on or after 1 January 2003. A
claim can be for a single incident or for a series of related incidents.

To determine whether the medical practitioner’s contract limit equals or
exceeds the relevant threshold, the relevant threshold is the date the
MII was first notified of the claim, or of facts that might give rise to
the claim. The thresholds are:

-   $15 million for claims notified on or after 1 January 2003 and
    before 1 July 2003
-   $20 million for claims notified on or after 1 July 2003

From 1 July 2020 this scheme is limited to medical practitioners.

Allied Health Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (AHECS)

AHECS is set out in legislation that commenced on 1 July 2020 and is
designed to protect allied health professionals, registered by the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra), against
personal liability for eligible claims that exceed the level of their
insurance cover. The government funds 100% of the cost of eligible
claims above their insurance limit, and equals or exceeds the relevant
threshold. The AHECS covers incidents that occurred on or after 1 July
2020. A claim can be for a single incident or for a series of related
incidents. The Department of Health and Aged Care provides funding via a
sweeping account arrangement.

To be eligible for the AHECS, the allied health professional’s contract
limit must equal or exceed the relevant threshold, determined by the
date of the incident. The current threshold is:

-   $20 million for incidents that occurred on or after 1 July 2020

This scheme is limited to certain MIIs as set out in the Rules.

Medical Indemnity scheme concepts

Medical Indemnity Insurance

In Australia, it is a mandatory requirement for registered healthcare
practitioners to hold the appropriate medical indemnity insurance for
healthcare practice in Australia.

Medical indemnity insurance plays a vital role within the Australian
health system by working to protect both healthcare practitioners and
patients in the event of an adverse incident arising from medical care.
While Australia’s health system is generally very safe, things
occasionally go wrong and patients may sometimes be harmed in the
process of receiving medical care.

Medical Defence Organisation (MDO)

MDOs were set up by doctors over 100 years ago to deal with legal and
ethical aspects of medical practice, such as negligence. They were
established as friendly societies and mutual funds, which were owned by
their members, and provided indemnity to doctors on a discretionary
basis.

The role of MDOs has grown and changed over the past century. They are
now large organisations, with a high degree of experience in medical and
legal issues.

Medical Indemnity Insurer (MII)

Since July 2003, medical indemnity must be provided via an insurance
contract. Medical Indemnity Insurers (MIIs) are required to meet the
same prudential standards as general insurance companies and are
regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority (APRA). This
provides a high level of security for consumers and doctors.

MIIs are subsidiaries of MDOs.

Claiming

Medical Indemnity Online Claiming (MIOC) system

In July 2020, Services Australia introduced the Medical Indemnity Online
Claiming (MIOC) system.

An eligible MII or MDO can submit an online HCCS, AHHCCS, ROCS or IBNR
payment application along with the relevant supporting documentation via
the MIOC system.

Applications for the ECS and AHECS can be made by MIIs or the person
against whom the claim was made (or someone acting on their behalf), and
must be submitted using the Services Australia approved payment
application form. Staff will need to enter this into MIOC on the
customer’s behalf, as an external interface is not available for these
claim types.

The MIOC system reduces the manual administration tasks required to
process applications. Eligible insurers are required to access the MIOC
system via their PRODA log in and submit an application including
supporting documents. The MIOC system checks eligibility requirements
for HCCS, ROCS and IBNR. Answers provided by the applicant will
determine whether the system allows them to submit their application and
the supporting information required. Once submitted, an application
reference number (ARN) is automatically generated.

The MIOC system has the capacity to automatically assess applications
for approval by the delegate with limited intervention. When certain
criteria are met (based on system specifications), the application will
be marked as requiring quality assurance checks. This means that
assessment of the application is required by a Program Officer to ensure
the claim meets legislative requirements and can be approved by the
delegate.

Subsequent applications are prepopulated with details from the initial
or previous application for that claim ARN. The applicant can change
certain fields in the subsequent application they are submitting,
however they cannot change the insured person details. Subsequent
applications submitted against historical (migrated) applications will
only have limited data prepopulated into the application. These
subsequent applications will show the insured person as ‘null null’ in
the MIOC Approval screen as the information is not available to be
prepopulated. Payment amounts for migrated applications are considered
in the MIOC claim calculations.

The process for assessing a claim is very similar from scheme to scheme.
The scheme specific Assessment Worksheets will walk the Assessing
Officer (AO) through the relevant information required for each scheme.

All applications awaiting finalisation in MIOC will be listed in the
Approvals screen, and can be viewed for assessment. Staff can view
various details about the applications in this screen including their
status. Statuses include:

-   Quality Assurance – the application needs to be assessed, no
    recommendation has been made
-   Approve – the system (in automated mode) or an AO has recommended
    that the application be paid
-   Request further information - an AO has recommended that further
    information is required to finalise assessment of the application
-   Further Information Submitted – further information has been
    submitted by the applicant, in response to a Section 38 letter, and
    the application needs to be re-assessed and a recommendation made
-   Deemed not payable - an AO has recommended that the application is
    not payable

Manual Claiming

In the event the MIOC system is unavailable for a period of time
(determined by the Director), a HCCS, ROCS or IBNR application can be
submitted with the relevant supporting documentation, via post or email.
If needed, manually submitted applications must be monitored via a Work
on Hand spreadsheet and processed manually.

An initial application received via post or email will not be issued
with a claim ARN number, as the ARN is auto generated by the MIOC
system. Manual registration and assessment will need to be completed
without an ARN number. When the system is operational, the application
will then be manually entered into the system and an ARN generated.

Combining of Medical Indemnity claims to a single claim

Combining of claims refers to the situation where a court has formally
joined or agreed to join claims into a single proceeding or action.

Supporting evidence

If an insurer decides to submit a combined claim under the Run-off Cover
Scheme or High Costs Claim Scheme, the insurer must provide appropriate
evidence in support of their claim.

Evidence should include either:

-   a Court Order that shows that 2 or more claims had been joined by
    the Court, or
-   a document produced or accepted by the relevant court evidencing
    that 2 or more matters have been heard together, for example, a
    judgment or settlement document or approved application for joinder

Deemed not payable

The Medical Indemnity Act 2002 (the Act) does not use the term 'reject'
when referring to an application that does not meet the requirements of
a Medical Indemnity Scheme. The Act instead refers to determining
whether an 'indemnity scheme payment is payable'.

A claim for payment may be deemed not payable if:

-   The eligibility requirements set out in the Act are not met
-   Insufficient information is provided to assess the claim against the
    requirements of the Act

Aggregating payments for the same claim

MDOs and MIIs can elect to aggregate amounts paid or payable in respect
of the same claim in accordance with Section 31 of the High Cost Claim
Indemnity Scheme (HCCS) and Section 34ZE of the Run-off Cover Indemnity
Scheme (ROCS) of the Medical Indemnity Act 2002.

For the purposes of ROCS or HCCS, where both an MDO and an MII have
paid, or are liable to pay amounts in relation to the same member or
policy holder in respect of the same claim, they may aggregate those
costs and make a single application for payment.

The MO008 - Medical Indemnity Request to aggregate payments for the same
claim form must be completed and submitted with the MI payment
application. See the Resources page for a link to the MO008 form.

The advice relating to aggregation of MI claims to a single application
does not change the requirement for aggregate payments for the same
claim form.

Payment schedule

The payment schedule for MI is legislated in the Act.

Under section 37 of the Act, payment for eligible MI applications
submitted under HCCS, AHHCCS, ROCS and IBNR must be made to the
applicant before the end of the month immediately following the month in
which the application, or response to our request for further
information under Section 38, was received.

For applications submitted under the ECS or AHECS, payment requirements
are legislated under Section 37B of the Act. See the References page for
a link to the Act.

Review of Decision

If an applicant would like to dispute the delegate’s decision in
relation to an application for payment under the HCCS, AHHCCS, ROCS or
IBNR schemes, Services Australia will take all necessary steps to
resolve the dispute informally with the relevant MDO or MII.

If a satisfactory resolution cannot be reached through an informal
process, the applicant may elect to request a review of decision. The
request must be in writing and should set out the details of the dispute
including any additional supporting documentation.

The internal review is an administrative service that Services Australia
provides to MDOs and MIIs. It is not set out in the Medical Indemnity
Act 2002 or in other legislation. Services Australia will acknowledge
receipt of the request for review within 28 days of the request being
received.

Applicants who would like to dispute the delegate’s decision in relation
to an application for a payment under the ECS or AHECS can request a
review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

Types of cover

Discretionary cover

Discretionary cover generally refers to cover that was available before
1 July 2003. This cover still exists as overarching cover and is
sometimes referred to as umbrella cover.

Prior to 1 July 2003, medical practitioners paid an annual membership to
an MDO which would give them discretionary indemnity cover. The cover
was of differing levels and was generally based on the chosen field of
the medical practitioner and the services they provided.

As protection was discretionary, MDOs had the ability to give or deny
assistance to their members.

See also: Part 3 Division 2 of the Medical Indemnity (Prudential
Supervision and Product Standards) Act 2003.

Contract of insurance

All medical practitioners are required to have a contract of insurance
in order to be registered to practise medicine in Australia.

See also: Contracts of insurance policy.

Claims-made based cover

Claims-made based cover is provided through a contract of insurance and
gives a medical practitioner MI insurance for a specified period in
time. A contract of insurance usually lasts for twelve months, and then
it must be renewed and new premiums are paid. Each new contract voids
any previous contracts.

Claims-made based cover can include retroactive cover for past periods.
The retroactive date is specified on a medical practitioner’s policy
schedule and determines how much of their prior practice is covered
under their policy. To meet the requirements of claims-made based cover
a claim must have occurred and be notified to the insurer during the
period specified in the contract of insurance. Claims-made based cover
is for the period stated in the contract of insurance.

Retroactive cover

Retroactive cover is insurance cover for claims arising from incidents
that took place before the commencement of the current insurance policy.
Retroactive cover must be offered at the time that the MII offers
claims-made based cover.

Where retroactive cover is provided in conjunction with claims-made
based cover, it insures against claims arising out of incidents that
occurred before the commencement of the current claims-made based policy
but which are notified during the term of the current claims-made based
policy. If a medical practitioner does not acquire adequate retroactive
cover and a claim arises from their work prior to the retroactive date,
the medical practitioner will not have cover for that claim. Adequate
cover needs to be evidenced by the most current policy which specifies
the dates of all cover periods.

Incident-occurring based cover

Incident-occurring based cover can also be referred to as discretionary
and retroactive cover. The industry standard is that incident-occurring
based cover is the term used for discretionary cover.

Incident-occurring based cover gives medical practitioners MI insurance
for the incident date. Any claim arising out of an incident that took
place during the term of discretionary cover or insurance policy,
regardless of when the claim was notified, falls under
incident-occurring based cover.

See also: Section 6 of the Medical Indemnity (Prudential Supervision and
Product Standards) Act 2003 and Section 7 of the Medical Indemnity Act
2002 and section 18 of the Medical Indemnity (Prudential Supervision and
Product Standards) Act 2003.

Tail cover

Tail cover is insurance that covers a medical practitioner for any
period that follows an insurance policy, once they are no longer
practising as a private medical practitioner. In most circumstances tail
cover applies to periods before a medical practitioner becomes eligible
for the Run-off Cover Scheme.

The Resources page contains links to the Medical Indemnity Request to
aggregate payments for the same claim (MO008) and the Services Australia
and Department of Health and Aged Care websites.

Contents

High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (HCCS)

Run off Cover Indemnity Scheme (ROCS)

Incurred But Not Reported Indemnity Scheme (IBNR)

Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (ECS)

Allied Health High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (AHCCS)

Allied Health Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (AHECS)

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes finalising assessment

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes refunds and withdrawals

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes delegate approval process

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes registration

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes pay run process

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes administrative process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
