
Process online registration for Healthcare Provider Identifier – Organisation (HPI-O) 012-18071951

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about processing an online
registration of Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O)
record for seed organisation in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service
and My Health Record.

Online registration form

The Application to register a Seed Organisation form (HW018) used to
register an organisation in the HI Service and My Health Record has been
replaced by an online version.

The online form is available in Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS).

If an applicant is unable to apply online, they can request the HW018
and apply manually. Download the HW018 via the intranet and send to the
applicant. See Handle call for request for hard copy forms HW018 and
HW021.

How applicants access the online registration

To access the form, applicants must do the following:

-   log onto Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) using a Provider
    Digital Access (PRODA) account (they cannot use the form if they log
    on using a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate)
-   select My programs from the main menu
-   select Healthcare Identifiers – Register Seed Organisation to open
    the application

How applicants complete the online registration

Applicants need to:

-   read the important information before proceeding
-   enter the organisation’s Australian Business Number (ABN)/Australian
    Company Number (ACN) and select Apply Now
-   complete the required fields in each tab
-   check the information on the confirmation screen
-   update any details if they are incorrect
-   select I agree at the bottom of the confirmation screen
-   select Confirm

An email with the outcome will be sent to the applicant’s Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) mail account after it has been
processed.

Documents tab in the application

The Documents tab allows an applicant to upload evidence of their
authority to act on behalf of the organisation.

The form does an upfront check to see if the applicant is on the
organisation’s Australian Business Register record as a person with
authority to act.

-   If they are, the application does not display the Documents tab as
    they do not need to provide evidence of authority to act
-   If they are not, the Document tab displays so the applicant can
    upload evidence of their authority to act.

An applicant can upload additional documents after they have submitted
the form. They can add a maximum of 10 documents per application, at a
limit of 10MGB.

If a Service Officer sees that the applicant has uploaded a document
that does not meet the requirements, they can contact the applicant to
have them upload another document.

Authority to act documents

Authority to act documents have not changed, and are listed on the
Documents tab of the online application.

Service Officer processing

If an application passes all the system checks, and there is no evidence
of a duplicate record, it will be processed by the system and not
require any Service Officer intervention.

Service Officers are presented with applications through WLM (Workload
Management) if duplicate details are already recorded in EHP (eHealth
Program). For example (but not limited to):

-   contact details
-   addresses
-   names (both organisation and individuals)

Service Officers need to check to see if any issues presented by the
system are duplicate records. Service Officers can override most of the
system issues if there are no duplicate records in EHP.

If an exact match is found for the organisation, then the system will
not allow a Service Officer to override any information, and it will
reject the application.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Business Register
(ABR) and My Health Record websites, the Organisation type reference
guide, and contact details for the My Health Record.

Related links

Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for
network organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifier Service using the
eHealth Program (EHP)

Amend Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Responsible Officer (RO) record in the Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service

Create Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity processing for an individual in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity processing for an organisation in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Apply for a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate

Workload Management

Handle call for request for HI Service hard copy forms

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
