
Acupuncture endorsement for Medicare 012-42020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on acupuncture endorsement for
Medicare.

Acupuncture items

Acupuncture items 193, 195, 197 and 199 in the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) are used by eligible practitioners (as defined in the
Health Insurance Act 1973) who hold endorsement in acupuncture.

Changes to acupuncture recognition from 1 November 2022

From 1 November 2022, changes were introduced under the Health Insurance
Legislation Amendment (2022 Measures No 3) Regulations 2022. This
enables a medical practitioner who holds endorsement of registration for
acupuncture with the Medical Board of Australia (MBA) or is registered
by the Chinese Medicine Board of Australia (CMBA) as an acupuncturist to
be eligible for acupuncture recognition with Services Australia (the
agency).

Eligibility

The Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra)

Ahpra receives and assesses applications from medical practitioners
seeking acupuncture endorsement.

The agency is notified directly by Ahpra where a medical practitioner
has satisfied the requirements for acupuncture endorsement. Medical
practitioners are not required to submit a request for acupuncture
recognition.

The Chinese Medicine Board of Australia (CMBA)

CMBA receives and assesses applications from medical practitioners
seeking acupuncture endorsement.

Medical practitioners who obtain acupuncture endorsement through the
CMBA must apply directly to the agency to have the acupuncture
endorsement recorded to access Acupuncture items 193, 195, 197 and 199
in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

General practitioner

A general practitioner is defined in the Health Insurance Act 1973 and
supporting Regulations as a medical practitioner who:

holds specialist registration in the specialty of General practice with
the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra)

holds general registration as a General practitioner on the Vocational
Register

is in an approved program placement which gives them access to General
Practitioner MBS items, for example, general practice training (GPET)
placement, or

is a medical practitioner registered in an approved 'other medical
practitioner' program at an eligible location, such as:

-   the Rural Other Medical Practitioners program
-   the Outer Metro Other Medical Practitioners program
-   MedicarePlus Other Medical Practitioners program

Specialist and Consultant physicians

A consultant physician is defined in the Health Insurance Act 1973 under
section 3DB or 3E as medical practitioner who:

-   has successfully completed training in their specialty and holds
    Fellowship of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians, Royal
    Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists or the
    Australasian Faculty of Rehabilitation Medicine, or
-   has registered as a specialist with the Medical Board of Australia
    in Psychiatry, Rehabilitation Medicine or one or more of the
    specialties listed against the Royal Australasian College of
    Physicians in Schedule 1 of the Health Insurance Regulations 2018

A specialist is defined in the Health Insurance Act 1973 under section
3D, 3DB or 3E as medical practitioner who:

-   has successfully completed training in their specialty and holds
    Fellowship with the relevant Australasian specialist medical college
    in Schedule 4 of the Health Insurance Regulations, or
-   has registered as a specialist with the Medical Board of Australia
    in one or more of the specialties listed against an Australian
    specialist medical college in Schedule 1 of the Health Insurance
    Regulations 2018

Access to Medicare benefits

Medical practitioners who hold acupuncture endorsement are eligible to
access acupuncture items in the MBS. Further information about the items
and rules is in the MBS.

Payment of Medicare benefits for these services is subject to the
medical practitioner being registered with Ahpra and satisfying any
other legislative provisions that may apply at the date of service.

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online.

See also: Provider registrations in PDS

Recognition of acupuncture accreditation prior to 1 November 2022

Prior to 1 November 2022, notification of acupuncture accreditation was
received from the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
(RACGP) on behalf of the Joint Consultative Committee on Medical
Acupuncture (JCCMA). The JCCMA was a tripartite committee with
representatives from:

-   the Australian Medical Acupuncture College (AMAC)
-   Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP)
-   Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM)

JCCMA’s role in acupuncture accreditation was to receive and assess
applications for acupuncture accreditation. While accreditation was
available to all medical practitioners, only medical practitioners who
were recognised general practitioners were issued with a specialty code
610 and could access MBS items 193, 195, 197 and 199.

Enquiries

Accreditation

Acupuncture endorsement is provided by Ahpra or the CMBA.

The Resources page contains a link to the Ahpra and CMBA websites.

Continuing professional development

Direct enquiries about continuing professional development requirements
Ahpra or CMBA.

The Resources page contains a link to the Ahpra and CMBA websites.

Recording accreditation

Direct enquiries about recording endorsement to the Medicare Provider
Registration team.

The Process page contains instructions on how to process the addition
and removal of acupuncture endorsement on the Provider Directory System
(PDS).

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration, external websites, including Ahpra and MBS
Online.

Related links

Provider registrations in PDS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
