
Chiropractic services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) chiropractic services programme for Veterans’ Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Government intent

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers chiropractic services provided to
entitled persons by registered chiropractors. Chiropractic service is
treatment of the musculo-skeletal system by hands-on techniques such as
deep tactile pressure, stretching and manipulation. This includes x-rays
when performed by a licensed chiropractor.

Chiropractic services must be claimed in accordance with the patient’s
assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

On this Page:

Eligibility to receive DVA chiropractic services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
chiropractic services based on the type of DVA health care card they
hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most chiropractic services necessary to meet a clinical need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds chiropractic services related to the card holder's accepted
disabilities only, and treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is commenced.

Patient Eligibility for VAP has the steps to follow to verify a DVA
health card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting chiropractic
services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their chiropractic service
provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting
treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA chiropractic services

Only a chiropractor who is registered with Services Australia (they have
a Medicare provider number) at the time of the service can provide
services to eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to Notes for chiropractors on the DVA
website. This contains detailed eligibility requirements and information
on chiropractic services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for chiropractic services

The DVA Chiropractors Schedule of Fees contains a range of consultation
items available to eligible DVA health card holders for professional
attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms (called domiciliary
visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged care service or
institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range CH01-CH99.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Chiropractic service providers may be required to seek prior financial
authorisation from DVA before providing certain chiropractic services.
The fee schedules contain information on which items require prior
financial authorisation.

To request financial approval, providers must contact DVA before
administering services to be able to claim payment by completing a
Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form. The Resources page has
a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA chiropractic services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims.

-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient
-   Subsequent consultations are to be claimed for ongoing treatment of
    a musculoskeletal condition
-   Two subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day
-   Treatment in residential aged care services which requires a greater
    level of care and treatment in public hospitals requires prior
    approval (as indicated in the Schedule of Fees)
-   Radiography can be supplied by licensed chiropractors registered
    with DVA using the item range CH20 to CH28
-   Concurrent physiotherapy and chiropractic services for the same
    condition for any entitled patient is not permitted. The system does
    not support these DVA business rules, however health care providers
    are required to deliver treatment and meet the accountability
    requirements as set out in Notes for Allied Health Providers
-   Treatment for white card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    Notes for chiropractors

The Resources page contains links to the Chiropractors Schedule of Fees,
Notes for Allied Health Providers and Notes for chiropractors on the DVA
website.

Claim lodgement information

DVA chiropractic services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources
page contains a link to the Services Australia website for information
on claim choices for health professionals.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder. Service providers should be sure that they
can, from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from
Services Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of
treatment.

Online claiming

Chiropractic service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

Chiropractic service providers are required to lodge a Claim for
Treatment Services (D1217) and Health Practitioner Service Voucher
(D1221) forms. These fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website.
Service providers can use their own invoice forms for submitting
accounts if they can provide the same level of information as required
by the DVA forms. Service providers should post completed forms to
Services Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Claim enquiries

The Resources page contains common enquiries from chiropractic service
providers.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP chiropractic services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers
will help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and DVA
websites, contact details for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP) and
common enquiries from chiropractic service providers.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
