
Accredited practicing dietitian - provider eligibility and registration 012-18061250

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for accredited practicing dietitians.

Accredited practicing dietitians (APDs)

APDs are allied health professionals who contribute to the promotion of
health and the prevention and treatment of illness by optimising the
nutrition of populations, communities and individuals.

Medicare eligibility and registration

Effective 28 May 2020, the Dietitians Association of Australia (DAA)
rebranded to Dietitians Australia (DA). Certificates with Dietitians
Australia branding may be accepted from 28 May 2020. Certificates with
Dietitians Association of Australia branding may be accepted up until 31
December 2021.

An applicant must:

-   be recognised by Dietitians Australia (DA) as an Accredited
    Practicing Dietitian (APD)
-   have an APD registration number

Certification documents are required for initial provider applications
only.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to Dietitians Australia (DA).
The Resources page has contact details.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

A Service Officer trained in all aspects of provider registration will
respond to enquiries to this area. These Service Officers raise complex
enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer (PSO) for
assistance. Where required, the enquiry will be escalated to a Programme
Officer (PO) who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility team in
National Office for assistance.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide and links to useful
contacts and external websites.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Provider speciality codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)



                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
