
Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the roles and responsibilities of staff and
parties within the HI Service. The Healthcare Identifiers Act 2010 (the
Act) outlines the distinct roles and responsibilities for Responsible
Officers (RO) and Organisation Maintenance Officers (OMO), healthcare
providers and other parties involved in the HI Service.

Individual Healthcare Provider

An individual healthcare provider is responsible for providing
healthcare. They are assigned Healthcare Provider Identifier –
Individual (HPI-I).

They are authorised to:

-   access healthcare identifiers via their clinical software to use
    Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) numbers of their patients in
    health related interactions
-   search for and retrieve identifiers and details of other providers
    and organisations through the Health Professional Online Services
    (HPOS) portal to securely transmit discharge summaries, test
    requests, and referrals

Individual healthcare providers need to make sure their information in
the HI Service is up to date.

-   Australia Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) registrants
    update their details with Ahpra
-   Allied health professionals with a membership with a professional
    association update their details in HPOS

See also:

Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Responsible Officer (RO)

A person who is the RO of a healthcare organisation must have the
authority to act on behalf of the seed organisation. For example, they
must:

-   be listed on the organisation’s Australian Business Register record
    as the public officer or trustee
-   hold the position of company director or chief operating officer (or
    equivalent)
-   have been given the authority to act on behalf of the organisation
    by 1 of the positions above

An RO is responsible for:

-   registering their organisation in the HI Service as a seed
    organisation
-   nominating a seed OMO (which can be themselves)
-   requesting the merger or reconfiguration of a seed, including a
    change of ownership
-   requesting the retirement of the seed
-   requesting links to contracted service providers so that they can
    access the HI Service on the organisation's behalf
-   adding or removing links between an RO or an OMO at the seed
    organisation level
-   ensuring that interactions with the HI Service by both the seed's
    and networks' employees comply with the Act and the supporting
    Healthcare Identifiers Regulations 2010

The duties of an RO do not include searching for Individual Healthcare
Identifiers (IHI). However, if the individual in the RO’s role has a HPI
I or an authorised employee, that individual can search for IHIs as part
of those other roles.

There can only be 1 person in the role of RO at any 1 time for an
organisation. The RO covers all network organisations in the hierarchy
if any exist.

See also:

Create Responsible Officer (RO) record in the Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service.

Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)

A person who is a seed OMO of an organisation does not need to hold a
position of authority in the organisation.

A seed OMO is responsible for:

-   creating network organisations
-   nominating additional seed OMOs and OMOs for networks if needed
-   maintaining up to date details about the seed and networks,
    including OMO details
-   creating links with individual healthcare providers working for
    their organisation/s
-   registering authorised employees
-   requesting links to contracted service providers so that they can
    access the HI Service on the organisation’s behalf
-   managing the Healthcare Provider Directory (HPD) entries for the
    seed and networks
-   requesting the merger or reconfiguration of networks
-   requesting the retirement of networks

They can also:

-   organise bulk offline Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) search
    of patients with records in the organisation's software systems
-   Request the HPI-I of healthcare providers who are working at their
    healthcare organisation if the request is for a specific purpose
    (for example, creating a link in the HPD). Note: no details can be
    disclosed for a provider who has not consented to a HPD entry

The duties of an OMO do not include searching for IHI. However, if the
individual in the OMO’s role is also HPI-I or an authorised employee,
that individual can search for IHIs as part of those other roles.

Note: a network OMO's responsibilities are the same as a seed OMO's,
however, they are limited to performing these functions for:

-   networks they are an OMO for
-   networks which are lower in their network hierarchy

There can be as many OMOs as operationally needed at all levels in the
hierarchy.

See also: Create Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Authorised Employee

An authorised employee is a staff member within an organisation who
verifies Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) patient numbers as a
part of their role.

They may:

-   verify patient information, including patient IHI’s
-   search for and retrieve IHIs of new patients
-   notify the HI Service when a patient dies

There can be as many authorised employees as operationally needed at all
levels in the hierarchy.

See also: Manage authorised employee record in Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service.

Individual

Anyone receiving healthcare in Australia can be assigned an Individual
Healthcare Identifier (IHI).

Individuals enrolled in Medicare, or who hold a Department of Veterans’
Affairs treatment card are automatically allocated an IHI. An IHI is
unique to 1 individual only.

Overseas visitors or people who do not have an IHI within Australia can
apply to the HI Service for an IHI using the Request or update an
Individual Healthcare Identifier or request an Individual Healthcare
Identifier card (MS003) form. See the Resources page for a link.

See also: Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

Contracted Service Provider (CSP) officer

A person who is the CSP officer of a healthcare organisation must have
the authority act on behalf of the CSP organisation. For example, they
must:

-   be listed on the organisation’s Australian Business Register record
    as the public officer or trustee
-   hold the position of company director or chief operating officer (or
    equivalent)
-   have been given the authority to act on behalf of the organisation
    by 1 of the positions above

A CSP officer is responsible for:

-   making sure their CSP organisation information is up to date and
    correct in the HI Service
-   registering other CSP officers
-   organising searches for Individual Healthcare Identifiers (IHI) of
    patients of the seed/network organisation they are acting on behalf
    of

There can be a maximum of 3 CSP officers per CSP organisation.

A CSP organisation, once created, will hold a ‘deactivated’ status until
it is linked to a registered seed or network organisation.

See also: Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service organisation types (link
to be available soon).

General Supporting Organisation (GSO) officer

A person who is the GSO officer of a healthcare organisation must have
the authority to act on behalf of the GSO. For example, they must:

-   be listed on the organisation’s Australian Business Register record
    as the public officer or trustee
-   hold the position of company director or chief operating officer (or
    equivalent)
-   have been given the authority to act on behalf of the organisation
    by 1 of the positions above

A GSO officer is responsible for:

-   making sure their GSO information is up to date and correct in the
    HI Service
-   registering other GSO officers
-   organising searches for Individual Healthcare Identifiers (IHI) of
    patients of the seed/network organisation they are acting on behalf
    of

There can be a maximum of 3 GSO officers per GSO.

A GSO, once created, will hold a ‘deactivated’ status until it is linked
to a registered seed or network organisation.

For more information on GSOs, see Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service
organisation types (link to be available soon).

Contents

Manage authorised employee record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Responsible Officer (RO) record in the Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service

Amend Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual (HPI-I) record in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Health Identifiers Provider Directory Service (HI HPD)

Related links

Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
