
Create Responsible Officer (RO) record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role and creation of a Responsible Officer
(RO) record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Definition of the RO

An organisation's RO has the authority over a seed organisation's
relationship with the HI Service. Only one RO can be linked to a seed
organisation at any one time.

An RO:

-   must be created in the HI Service before a seed organisation can be
    created
-   record must always be linked to a seed organisation
-   must declare that they are authorised to act on behalf of the seed
    organisation via a tick box on the Healthcare Identifiers – Register
    Seed Organisation registration form

Individuals who are registering as a RO for the HI Service and have
already provided Services Australia with 100 points of identity, are not
required to do so again.

An individual may be an existing RO and will provide their RO number,
or:

-   have a Medicare provider number
-   have a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate for other
    Medicare purposes (RA number) (individual or site)
-   be listed as the Duly Authorised Officer (DAO) for a PKI site
    certificate
-   be the approved pharmacist for a pharmacy (for Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (PBS) purposes)

100 points of evidence of identity (EOI) is required only where the
individual has not provided EOI to Services Australia previously.

If an individual is a current Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) and
has never provided EOI to Medicare and now wishes to become a RO, that
individual must comply with the 100 point EOI requirements.

Role of the RO

See Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

A RO is not authorised to search for or create an Individual Healthcare
Identifier (IHI) in the HI Service.

Role of the RO within the My Health Record system

Before healthcare professionals and their organisations are able to
access the My Health Record, they must be registered with the HI
Service. The individual who takes on the role as the RO for the
Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) in the HI Service
will be able to use this same role for different purposes in the My
Health Record system.

See: My Health Record - Your Health and My Health Record - Health
Professionals for more information.

Create a RO record

Online seed registration

Information is entered by the applicant. If the application:

-   meets all processing requirements, the RO record is created/updated
    automatically
-   does not meet all processing requirements, the application drops
    into Pend for a Service Officer to resolve. The RO record is
    generally created/updated by the system according to the processing
    outcome

See Process online registration for Healthcare Provider Identifier –
Organisation (HPI-O).

Register a seed organisation form (HW018)

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officer ID details, the details of
the requestor are also recorded.

If processing a manual HW018 form, Service Officers must perform a
search within the HI Service to ensure a RO record does not already
exist.

Where an EHP individual record:

-   exists, Service Officers must amend the existing EHP individual
    record
-   does not exist, Service Officers must create a new RO record

Note: the start date always defaults to the processing date. It cannot
be future or back dated.

Mandatory requirements to create RO record

Unless the RO is a known customer, they must provide evidence of
identity (EOI).

If the individual is a known customer, they must provide their existing:

-   Medicare provider number
-   Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) registration number (RA number)
    (individual or site), or
-   Pharmacy approval number

Note: only one RO can be linked to a seed organisation at any time.

Known customer

A known customer is a RO or an individual healthcare provier who has
already provided Services Australia with 100 points of identity and is
not required to do so again.

This individual might:

-   be an existing RO registered with another organisation in the HI
    Service
-   be a Medicare provider, with an existing Medicare provider number
-   be registered with the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
    Agency (Ahpra)
-   have an individual Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate for
    other Medicare purposes, for example, Medicare claiming
-   be listed as the Duly Authorised Officer (DAO) for a PKI site
    certificate
-   be the approved pharmacist for a pharmacy (for Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (PBS) purposes)

Related links

Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Amend Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Link or unlink Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) to organisation in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
organisation

Process online registration for Healthcare Provider Identifier –
Organisation (HPI-O)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
