
Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) in public hospitals 012-63040010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD)
in reform and non-reform public hospitals.

On this Page:

HSD in public hospitals

To be eligible for payment under this program, public hospital HSDs must
be dispensed by:

-   pharmacists in HSD public hospitals, or
-   an agent on behalf of a non-dispensing HSD public hospital

Note: an exception is items supplied under the Highly Specialised Drugs
Community Access programme. See the Resources page for a diagram showing
the new arrangements.

The agent must not claim for the item on the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) but seek payment from the public hospital who will claim
the item on the PBS.

Public Hospital Complex Authority Required (CAR) HSD and PBS trastuzumab
(Herceptin® - early stage breast cancer) prescriptions can be supplied
and claimed on the PBS by a pharmacist in a community pharmacy or a
public hospital pharmacy.

PBS reform hospital access to HSD

Queensland, Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia, Northern
Territory and Tasmania currently participate in Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) reforms. See also: Public hospitals participating in
pharmaceutical reforms.

Non-dispensing public hospitals

Non-dispensing public hospitals do not have a dispensary (pharmacy) on
site.

A non-dispensing hospital can use an agent for the supply of HSD where
not required to supply a HSD directly to a patient. An agent may be a
community pharmacy or similar.

An arrangement is made between a community pharmacy and the hospital for
supply and payment. This arrangement does not involve Services
Australia.

The claim must be lodged by the HSD approved public hospital, not the
pharmacy supplying the item.

Note: public hospitals that wish to claim HSD under the above
arrangements must obtain Section 100 approval under the National Health
Act 1953, which allows claiming for HSD via Online Claiming for
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Currently subsection 94 (5) of the National Health Act 1953 requires
that the dispensing of drugs and medicinal preparations be performed at
the hospital applying for approval under Section 94 of the Act.
Non-dispensing public hospitals are therefore unable to be granted
Section 94 approval.

To allow HSD to be claimed by non-dispensing hospitals, special
arrangements are available under Section 100 of the National Health Act
1953. Approval under Section 100 allows non-dispensing hospitals to
claim HSD via Online Claiming for PBS.

Non-dispensing hospitals are treated as if they were approved under
Section 94, for the purposes of claiming under this initiative.
Non-dispensing hospitals receive an approval number in the same format
as a Section 94 approval number.

Non-PBS reform hospital access to HSD

States not participating in the reforms include New South Wales and
Australian Capital Territory. See also: Public hospitals participating
in pharmaceutical reforms.

Non-Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) reform public hospitals only
have access to prescribe and claim for HSD listed under this initiative.
Doctors in non-PBS reform hospitals are not able to prescribe other PBS
items.

Non-reform hospitals and their pharmacies must:

-   apply to participate through their State or Territory Health
    Department and the Department of Health and Aged Care
-   arrange Online Claiming for PBS (PBSOL) system installation and
    access

Non-PBS reform public hospitals prescribing and supplying

Under Section 100 Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program,
non-Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) reform public hospitals can
only obtain approval to prescribe and supply HSD on the PBS. Non-PBS
reform public hospitals are not entitled to other pharmaceutical
benefits listed in the PBS Schedule.

Internal prescription stationery or medication charts can be used by
public hospitals for the purposes of prescribing and supplying HSD up to
the maximum quantities and repeats listed in the PBS Schedule for
Authority required (STREAMLINED) listings. Public hospitals do not need
to submit paper claims for these items. It is the responsibility of the
hospital to ensure that section 40 requirements in the National Health
(Pharmaceutical Benefits) Regulation 2017 are met for all prescriptions
and 45 requirements are met for medication charts.

Increased quantities and/or increased repeats of HSD, Complex Authority
Required (CAR) HSD and PBS trastuzumab (Herceptin®) require prior
Authority approval from Services Australia.

Non-PBS reform hospital Section 94 or Section 100 approval

To enable a non-Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) reform public
hospital to submit a claim for HSD online, the non PBS reform public
hospital must obtain Section 94 or Section 100 approval under the
National Health Act 1953. The Department of Health and Aged Care is
responsible for approving hospital authorities to supply PBS subsidised
items.

Forms

Non-PBS reform public hospitals approved to supply HSD on the PBS need
to contact the Camerons Group to access the following forms:

-   PBS/RPBS Authority prescription – Non PBS reform public hospital
    form (number 4603)
-   Pharmaceutical Benefits – PBS/RPBS repeat authorisation form (number
    4010)
-   Claim for Payment – Payment reconciliation form (number 4000)
-   PBS Safety Net public hospital Prescription Record Form (PRF)
    (number 4014)

All expenses associated with access to the above forms for supplying HSD
and PBS trastuzumab (Herceptin®) only will be billed to the relevant
State and Territory health departments.

See Camerons Group – PBS stationery supplier.

HSD listing in PBS Schedule

Listings for public hospital HSDs have new item codes assigned which
are:

-   presented in a separate section in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical
    Benefits (the PBS Schedule).
-   displayed on the Item Identification (RPIS). These listings are
    identified by HSD-PUB.

A number of items are dual listed in the General Schedule (Section 85)
and Section 100 of the PBS Schedule.

Note: Service Officers recording an Authority application must take
sufficient time to select the correct item. Service Officers must first
identify how many listings are available for the strength and form
requested (public hospital HSD, private hospital HSD or Section 85) then
ask the approved prescriber which listing is required.

Streamlined authority codes

Public Hospital HSD listings are Authority required (STREAMLINED), with
the exception of Complex Authority Required (CAR) items which require
written Authority.

Note: CAR drugs and PBS trastuzumab (Herceptin®) require prior written
approval from Services Australia Hobart office before dispensing. See
Written Authority Required Drugs.

The Department of Health and Aged Care has listed quantities and repeats
on HSD, under recommendation from the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory
Committee (PBAC), to allow for the use of streamlined Authority codes.

Rules for HSD in public hospitals

-   Regulation 49 (previously regulation 24) applies
-   Regulation 51 (previously regulation 25) (4/20 DR) provisions do not
    apply
-   Deferred items are allowed, except for Written Authority Required
    Drugs
-   Same day prescribing is not allowed
-   Same day dispensing is not allowed

All items eligible can accrue towards a customer's PBS Safety Net
threshold.

Prescribing HSD in public hospitals

Public hospital prescribers:

-   are not required to contact Services Australia for Authority
    approval to prescribe an Authority required (STREAMLINED) HSD for
    the listed quantities and repeats or less
-   must contact Services Australia for Authority approval (online,
    written or phone) to prescribe increased quantities and/ or repeats
    for Authority required (STREAMLINED) HSD prior to dispensing. See
    Handle request for increased quantity and/or repeats for
    unrestricted, restricted and Authority benefit
-   must submit a written Authority application for Complex Authority
    Required (CAR) drugs and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
    trastuzumab (Herceptin®), or seek phone approval where this is
    allowed. See Written Authority Required Drugs
-   must provide all PBS Authority information, including the approved
    public hospital provider number

An item approved as a Section 100 HSD is identified by:

-   an Authority approval number prefix of HSD. See Authority approval
    processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   a public hospital indicator on the item file. If indicator is Y,
    this item can be supplied within a public hospital
-   a 4 digit streamlined Authority code for listed quantities and
    repeats or less of an Authority required (STREAMLINED) HSD

Note: Services Australia undertakes education for and liaison with HSD
public hospitals. Prescribers from previously non-participating public
hospitals may not be familiar with PBS prescribing and supplying
requirements. Service Officers may need to guide prescribers through the
Authority approval process.

See also: Process telephone Authority approval application.

Supplying HSD

Public hospital HSD may be supplied through either:

-   a public hospital pharmacy
-   a community pharmacy or similar, acting as an agent to supply items
    for a non-dispensing public hospital. These are claimed through the
    public hospital overseeing the supply

Complex Authority Required (CAR) HSD can be supplied and claimed by a
community pharmacy or a public hospital pharmacy.

Note: an exception is items supplied under the Highly Specialised Drugs
Community Access. See the Resources page for a diagram showing the new
arrangements.

Community pharmacy

Prescriptions for HSD in public hospitals cannot be supplied and claimed
through a community pharmacy with the exception of CAR HSD and HSD CA.
The public hospital item codes are available to public hospitals only
and are not accessible by community pharmacies or private hospitals.

Scenarios:

-   Where a public hospital HSD prescription is keyed under the private
    hospital item, a rejection 732 or 734 as well as warning code 162 or
    163 is returned
-   Where a pharmacist calls to check validity of approval, direct
    patient to return to the hospital pharmacy for supply of the item

The original medication chart or prescription must be:

-   sighted by the pharmacist who dispenses the medicine to the patient
    as per the approved prescriber's instructions
-   signed and dated by the patient or patient's agent or correctly
    certified as supplied by the pharmacist

Note: the supply of public hospital HSD can count towards the patient's
PBS Safety Net threshold.

Claiming HSD

Under the Electronic Claiming for Highly Specialised Drugs in Public
Hospitals program, Services Australia accepts HSD claims from public
hospitals via the following channels:

-   Online. On 1 July 2010 Services Australia began providing an online
    paperless electronic claiming and payment process for all approved
    public hospitals supplying HSDs. This online process provides a
    simple, secure, electronic claiming option for public hospitals when
    claiming for PBS HSDs. See Process online claims for Highly
    Specialised Drugs (HSD) prescriptions by participating public
    hospitals.

Payments for HSD claims

Payments for HSD public hospital claims are paid:

-   in accordance with Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) payment
    timeframes
-   to the HSD public hospital's nominated bank account as identified to
    Services Australia

Complex Authority Required (CAR) HSD and PBS trastuzumab (Herceptin®)
dispensed under the Electronic Claiming for Highly Specialised Drugs in
Public Hospitals do not have mark-ups applied.

A community pharmacy acting as an agent dispensing HSD under this
initiative must seek reimbursement from the claiming public hospital and
can be reimbursed at the public hospital rate, as in no mark-up or
dispensing fees. CAR HSD and PBS trastuzumab (Herceptin®) dispensed by a
community pharmacy has standard community mark ups.

All drugs under the Electronic Claiming for Highly Specialised Drugs in
Public Hospitals program are reimbursed for the drug cost only, less the
patient co-payment. Note: no other fees will apply, for example
controlled drug or broken pack fees.

Where a quantity of a drug claimed is not equal to the quantity
contained in the manufacturer's pack, claim payments are calculated as
follows:

-   Cost of drugs multiplied by the percentage of quantity supplied to
    the quantity contained in the manufacturer's pack, less patient
    co-payments

See also: Pricing and fees for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Record keeping requirements

Records of paperless claims must be kept by the public hospital pharmacy
for a minimum of 2 years from the date of dispensing.

Note: the approved prescriber records the medication required by the
patient and the quantity to be given in the patient medication chart or
prescription. The medication chart or prescription becomes the legal
prescription.

NDRD caution

Restriction type on the National Drug Reference Database (NDRD) shows
Private H for private and Public H for public hospital HSD.

The Resources page contains a link to Department of Health and Aged Care
website, information about the improved community access arrangements,
details of prescriptions forms used in public hospitals, and scenarios
for prescriber or community pharmacy claiming HSD.

Related links

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
