
Supply and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Claiming from a Medication Chart in Residential Aged Care Facilities (RACF) 012-65010050

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about supply and Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) claiming from a Medication Chart in Residential
Aged Care Facilities (RACF).

On this Page:

About supply and PBS claiming from Medication Chart in RACF

The National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) and compliant
equivalents may now be used in all Australian states and territories.
Claims from approved pharmacists in all jurisdictions are now valid.
Under this initiative, prescribers are able to use the NRMC to prescribe
most PBS medicines to patients in Residential Aged Care Facilities
(RACFs), instead of a traditional PBS prescription. Pharmacists are also
able to use a copy of the NRMC to supply and claim most PBS
/Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) medicines.

Standardisation of charts was designed to improve resident safety, and
reduce the administrative burden for pharmacists and pharmacy staff. The
NRMC was developed by the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in
Health Care, in consultation with the aged care sector, medical
practitioners, pharmacists and other stakeholders.

Approved PBS prescribers no longer need to complete a traditional
PBS/RPBS prescription form for most PBS/RPBS items ordered for residents
when using the medication chart.

History of NRMC

The National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) is used as a medication
order and a prescription for most medicines. It initiates supply and
claiming of most PBS /Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS)
medicines directly from the chart without the additional need for a
written prescription. It is also intended to improve safety throughout
standard fields, layout and an intuitive design.

As at 31 October 2014, all states and territories had enacted
legislation to enable the prescribing, supply and PBS claiming from a
national residential medication chart (NRMC) in a residential aged care
facility. The NRMC was initially trialled in 22 RACFs across NSW.

Implementation

The National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) complies with PBS, and
state based legislation and may be used by a RACF for PBS/RPBS
prescribing, supply and claiming purposes.

Electronic NRMC

From 1 October 2019, legislative amendments introduced electronic
prescribing which includes from the NRMC. The electronic NRMC is a fully
digital medication chart to consider as an alternative to a paper-one.

Services Australia are able to receive and assess PBS reimbursement
claims for prescriptions prescribed and dispensed from the electronic
NRMC.

Eligible prescribers for PBS purposes

All approved prescribers (for example, doctors, dentists, optometrists,
midwives and nurse practitioners) under the National Health Act 1953 are
eligible to use the PBS hospital medication charts (HMC) for PBS
purposes.

Eligible pharmaceutical benefits

Items listed on the PBS and Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(RPBS) can be:

-   prescribed
-   supplied, and
-   claimed from the National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) with
    some exceptions.

Exceptions for the paper NRMC

-   All items available under special arrangements (Section 100)
    including Highly Specialised Drugs,
-   Schedule 8 items (that is, 'Dangerous Drugs' or 'Controlled Drugs')
-   Emergency Drug (Prescriber Bag) Supply items
-   Written and Telephone authority required items

Exceptions for the electronic NRMC

-   All items available under special arrangements (Section 100)
    including Highly Specialised Drugs, and
-   Emergency Drug (Prescriber Bag) Supply items

Note: the electronic NRMC will allow Schedule 8 items (that is,
‘Dangerous Drugs’ or ‘controlled Drugs).

Authority Required (STREAMLINED) items are eligible for supply and PBS
claiming from both:

-   electronic, and
-   paper NRMC if the prescriber includes the PBS Streamlined Authority
    Code in the appropriate area of the NRMC for each relevant medicine

From 1 June 2021, Authority required items (Telephone and Written) are
eligible for supply and PBS claiming from the electronic NRMC only.
Authority required items (Telephone and Written) are no longer eligible
for claiming via paper NRMC.

The NRMC can also list over-the-counter, complementary and private
prescription medicines, which are not claimable as part of the PBS/RPBS.
These items must still be written on the medication chart to administer
them to RACF patients.

Using the NRMC

The National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) has been designed and
tested for use in residential aged care facilities only. Managers of
residential aged care facilities who wish to consider changing from
their present medication charts to an NRMC or a compliant equivalent
chart, will need to consider a range of processes, including:

-   Change management processes for facility staff
-   Securing commitment from residents' general practitioners regarding
    new medication ordering systems
-   Liaison with supplying pharmacy about new systems to order,
    reconcile, and manage medicine usage in the facility; and
-   Working with aged care groups or peak bodies for support during the
    process.

Neither the Aged Care Act 1997, under which Commonwealth subsidies are
paid for providing aged care services, nor the National Health Act 1953,
which governs the operation of the PBS, requires operators of
residential aged care services to use the NRMC in their services.
However, there are benefits in doing so. Some of these are outlined
below.

Standardised national medication chart prescriptions

A key feature of the National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) is
that 'prescriptions' and the record of medicine administration are
co-located on the NRMC. The resident's details, including their
photograph and known adverse drug reactions, are visible from each page
of the NRMC to enable correct identification when prescribing, supplying
and administering medicines. Faxed, photocopied and emailed scanned
images of the NRMC will also contain this information to assist
pharmacists in identifying the correct resident and their medication
orders.

Relevant pathology (such as results to support warfarin dosing, and
blood glucose levels), medical practitioners' instructions, and special
considerations applying to the administration of medicines to a
resident, are all included in the NRMC. The layout supports informed
prescribing, accurate medicines dispensing and administration, and
improved clinical monitoring of residents.

The Resources page contains a list of fields to be completed by the
prescriber and the fields located on the resident demographic section on
the standardised national medication chart.

Pharmacist endorsement

Pharmacists dispensing a medicine must endorse the required particulars
on the copy of the National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) which
has been provided to the pharmacy. The pharmacist must retain the
endorsed copy and make it immediately accessible for reference in the
pharmacy. It is illegal for a pharmacist to supply on a prescription
which is missing any of the above details required by the prescriber.

Duration/length of the NRMC and supply of medicines

The NRMC 'charting cycle' is a maximum of 4 months for paper and 6
months for electronic. As the NRMC nears its expiry date, there is a
reminder in the administration area of the NRMC for RACF staff to
contact the medical practitioner to review the resident and re-chart
their medicines. If the medicines are not re-charted, all orders on the
NRMC cease to be valid for supply and administration after the chart
expiry date. Unlike the existing process for supplying medicines from
prescriptions, the amount of each medicine supplied by the pharmacy will
not be determined by a maximum quantity and 'repeats'. For each medicine
order, the medical practitioner must specify a period of time that a
medicine is to be administered and supplied, thereby removing the
requirement for PBS repeat authorisation forms.

More information can be found in the User guide for pharmacists. The
Resources page contains a link to this document.

Continuous supply from the standardised NRMC without repeats

Approved pharmacists can use the National Residential Medication Chart
(NRMC) to provide a continuous supply of a patient's regular PBS
/Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) items without using
repeats.

Each time a patient needs a supply of a PBS/RPBS item from the
standardised NRMC, the approved pharmacist must:

get the most recent copy of the patient's standardised NRMC from the
residential aged care facility (RACF)

identify the medication chart entry for the PBS/RPBS item

dispense a single supply of the item at the maximum PBS quantity (or
less if prescribed)* and

endorse supply of the PBS/RPBS item on a copy of the standardised
national medication chart with:

-   approved pharmacist name
-   approved pharmacist number
-   PBS prescription identifying number
-   date on which the pharmaceutical benefit was supplied

Approved pharmacists may use a prescription duplicate sticker and coding
sticker to endorse each supply of an item from the standardised NRMC.

As each supply of an item is made at the PBS maximum quantity,
prescribers don't need to write the quantity on the standardised NRMC,
unless where different PBS maximum quantities exist for the medicine or
where less than the PBS maximum quantity is specifically required.

This process is repeated for each subsequent supply of the item up until
either the chart expiry date or stop date (whichever is indicated by the
prescriber).

Note:

-   Where the 'ongoing' or 'stop date' fields have not been filled by
    the prescriber, the approved pharmacist is authorised to supply only
    one PBS maximum quantity for the item in total
-   The same date of prescribing can be used each time a supply is made
    using the same medication chart entry of the standardised NRMC

To make sure there is a continuous supply of the item for the patient,
prescribers must write a new standardised NRMC before the chart expiry
date.

Paperless Claiming from a standardised national medication chart

Paperless claiming does not require pharmacists to provide a copy of the
National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) to Medicare as evidence of
supply. However claiming from the NRMC is only available to pharmacies
using PBS Online. When dispensing from the NRMC, you will enter the RACF
ID and indicate that this is a supply from a medication chart. The
pharmacy dispensing software system will allocate serial numbers to
supplies marked in this way which are in a different batch to other
prescriptions, with serial numbers from 10000 to 10999 (for example,
C10000 to C10256). This will prevent gaps in regular prescription
bundles.

A supply certification, generated by the pharmacy dispensing software
system, will indicate the range of serial numbers supplied as paperless
claims from the NRMC.

Reason Codes

Approved pharmacists who have updated their software may receive reason
codes when they supply and claim under the initiative. To view the list
of reason codes, their type, and their reason text. See Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) reason codes for online claiming for PBS
pharmacies.

NRMC information on the Prescription Details Screen and UCP (under co-payment) Prescription Details Screen

Operators have the ability to see the following on the Prescription
Details/UCP Prescription Details screen relevant to claiming the NRMC:

-   a field displaying the 'RACF Id' also known as the Residential Aged
    Care Service Identification number (RACS Id), which uniquely
    identifies the RACF to which the item has been supplied
-   a patient category code (R) to identify claims for Residential Aged
    Care Facility Patient (Medication Chart Prescription)

Note: patient category (N) identifies claims for a Nursing Home Patient
(Non-Medication Chart Prescription).

Pharmacy dispensing software allows approved pharmacists to transmit the
RACS ID/RACF and R patient category in their claim to Services
Australia - these details are displayed in the prescription details
screen.

Owing prescriptions

The standardised NRMC can't be used for reconciling any owing
prescriptions for residential aged care facility (RACF) patients. The
prescriber must provide PBS /Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(RPBS) prescription form(s) to the approved pharmacist to reconcile any
owing prescriptions.

As long as the prescriber recharts the item before the chart expiry
date, a RACF patient's chronic medications can continue to be supplied
from the standardised NRMC. This will reduce the need for approved
pharmacists to generate owing prescriptions.

Urgent supply arrangements are permitted.

PBS Safety Net

The standardised NRMC prescriptions will still count towards a patient's
PBS Safety Net threshold as they are dispensed/supplied.

Reconciling standardised national medication chart prescriptions

Services Australia provides extra information in the electronic PBS
reconciliation statement for approved pharmacists. Standardised National
Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) prescriptions are clearly identified
by 'R' patient category on the reconciliation statement information.

Endorsement of supply

In line with current practice, approved pharmacists must include the
following information when endorsing supply on the standardised National
Residential Medication Chart (NRMC):

-   approved pharmacist name
-   approved pharmacist number
-   PBS prescription identifying number
-   date on which the pharmaceutical benefit was supplied

Retention of the standardised national medication chart

Legislation requires approved pharmacists to keep a copy of the
standardised National Residential Medication Chart (NRMC) they have
supplied and claimed from, for a period of 2 years.

How a RACF can obtain copies of the paper NRMC

A Residential Aged Care Facility (RACF) will need to organise their own
printing and supply channels for National Residential Medication Chart
(NRMC) charts, or use commercial suppliers of medical charts. While high
resolution printer files for the NRMC (link to PDFs) are available free
of charge from the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health
Care, neither the Commission nor the Department of Health and Aged Care
coordinates NRMC printing and logistics. Aged care peak bodies may also
be able to advise on some aspects of chart supplies.

Compliant equivalent charts

'Compliant charts' in this context are those that comply with relevant
state legislation, and the Commonwealth National Health (Residential
Medication Chart) Determination 2012, as amended. For residential aged
care service operators who wish to take advantage of the NRMC, but use a
commercial version of the chart, it is important to ensure that any
commercial products used are compliant with both state and Commonwealth
legislation. Use of a non-compliant chart may prevent, for example,
pharmacists being able to make PBS claims for medicines supplied
directly from the medicine order on the chart.

It is the responsibility of aged care facility operators to obtain
relevant advice on the compliance, or otherwise, of a medication chart
before considering introducing it in their facilities. Chart producers
should be asked to provide written confirmation of their products'
compliance with applicable legislation.

Helpful Resources

The Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care has
developed separate NRMC guidance material for prescribers, aged care
service staff, and pharmacists. These can be assessed on the National
Residential Medication Chart. The Resources page contains a link to the
Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care website.

More information on this initiative

-   Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Healthcare website
-   Department of Health and Aged Care website
-   General PBS enquiries: 132 290 (Call charges apply)
-   User guide for pharmacists. The Resources page contains a link to
    this document.

The Resources page contains a list of fields to be completed by the
prescriber and the fields located on the resident demographic section on
the standardised national medication chart.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
