
Occupational therapy services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020100

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) occupational therapy services for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

Occupational therapy

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers occupational therapy services provided to
entitled persons by registered occupational therapists. Occupational
therapy helps to restore patients' physical, vocational and social
functions, which have been disrupted through accident or illness or
congenital conditions. Treatment involves the selective use of remedial,
recreational and daily living activities and the prescription of
rehabilitation appliances and home modifications focussing on reaching
the best possible functional outcome.

Occupational therapy services must be claimed in accordance with the
patient’s assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this program.

Eligibility to receive DVA occupational therapy services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
occupational therapy services based on the type of DVA health care card
they hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

-   DVA funds most occupational therapy services necessary to meet a
    clinical need

DVA White Card holders

-   DVA funds occupational therapy services related to the card holder's
    accepted disabilities only, and treatment may require prior
    financial authorisation before it is started
-   DVA health card holders with White Card eligibility code TMN
    (treatment for malignant neoplasia) are entitled to payment for
    treatment of cancer regardless of the type of cancer. The cancer
    related condition does not need to be advised to Services Australia

The DVA health card holder's eligibility must be verified before paying
or rejecting occupational therapy services when the system returns a
2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their occupational therapist
service provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before
starting treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA occupational therapy services

Only an occupational therapist who is registered with Services Australia
(they have a Medicare provider number) at the time of the service can
provide services to eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement, which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

Lymphoedema treatment item OT26 is only payable to occupational
therapists with appropriate training in the treatment of lymphoedema,
which is recognised by DVA by the application of specialty code C71 226.
See Provider Registration for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) for
more information.

The Resources page contains a link to Notes for occupational therapists
on the DVA website. This contains detailed eligibility requirements and
information on occupational therapy services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for occupational therapy services

The DVA Occupational Therapists Schedule of Fees contains a range of
consultation items available to eligible DVA health card holders for
professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care service or institution and for consumables and small medical aids
and appliances they supply to veterans.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range OT01-OT99

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Occupational therapy service providers may be required to seek prior
financial authorisation from DVA before providing certain occupational
therapy services. The fee schedules contain information on which items
require prior financial authorisation. For more information on prior
financial authorisation, see Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS
Approval) for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

To request financial approval, providers must contact DVA before
administering services to be able to claim payment by completing a
Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form. The Resources page has
a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA occupational therapy services business rules

Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an initial
consultation for the same patient

2 subsequent consultations cannot be claimed for the same patient on the
same day

Only 1 special consultation or aids assessment item per patient can be
claimed each day and cannot be claimed on the same day as an initial or
subsequent consultation

Services cannot be claimed on the same day as occupational therapy
mental health items US31-37, US96 and US91

Lymphoedema treatment (item OT26) is limited to 20 services for a
patient per calendar year

Treatment for lymphoedema cannot be provided to patients already
receiving lymphoedema treatment from a physiotherapist

Remote Area Allowance (item OT80) is payable to occupational therapists
who travel distances over a 50 km radius from their normal place of
business

The Remote Area Allowance can be paid as well as the normal travel
allowance (KMs)

Treatment in high care residential aged care facilities (RACF) and
public hospitals requires prior approval

Treatment for White card holders must be related to an accepted
disability

Occupational therapy report items OT50 and OT51 can only be claimed in
association with specific consultation items as follows:

-   OT50 payable only with a consultation from OT20-OT24, or OT30-OT34
-   OT51 payable only with either OT40 or OT41

Occupational therapy Treatment Cycle Report item number OT90 is payable
when the provider claims 1 initial and subsequent consultation

Remote area allowance limit of 2 in 1 day (forward journey and return
journey)

If travel is required to an island with the post codes 4183, 4184, 4875
and 4819 (note: the postcode list is subject to change) OT81 and OT82
can be used to claim the cost of transportation and waiting time. OT81
and OT82 can only be claimed in association with specific consultation
items as follows:

-   OT81 payable only with either OT02, OT08, OT20, OT30, OT35, OT40 or
    OT41
-   OT82 payable only with OT81 and is rounded to the nearest 15 minute
    increment and capped at a maximum of 2 hours

Small medical aids and appliances postage/freight (OT98) is claimable in
association with small medical aids and appliances (OT75) claimed on the
same day

Consultation or Assessment specifically requested by DVA (OT99) is
inclusive of the kilometre allowance and remote area allowance (KM and
OT80) which are not to be claimed in addition to the fee for OT99

Claim lodgement information

DVA occupational therapist services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The
Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information on claim choices for health professionals.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder. Service providers should be sure that they
can, from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from
Services Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of
treatment.

Online claiming

Occupational therapy service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

Occupational therapy service providers are required to lodge a Claim for
Treatment Services (D1217) and Health Practitioner Service Voucher
(D1221) forms. Information on how to order health care forms and
vouchers is available on the DVA website. Service providers can use
their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can provide the
same level of information as required by the DVA forms. Service
providers should post completed forms to Services Australia for
processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Claim enquiries

The Resources page contains common enquiries from occupational therapy
service providers.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP occupational therapy services enquiries. VAP trained Service
Officers will help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate
department for resolution.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and DVA
websites, contact details for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP) and
common enquiries from occupational therapy service providers.

The Resources page contains common questions and answers, links the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) and Services Australia websites
and Veterans’ Affairs processing contact details.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP)

Mental health services for Veteran's Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
