
Email triage for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-20052734

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of email communication including the
Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) Mail Centre.

Email Triage

Email triage is the process of assessing each new message and deciding
what action to take.

It includes managing the volume of emails through the external email
boxes and the HPOS Mail Centres.

HPOS Mail Centre

HPOS Mail Centre is a secure electronic messaging system only accessible
by HPOS account holders and people they nominate.

Only an owner or authorised contact person who registers with PIP/WIP –
Practice Stream can request practice specific details. The RA number
identifies the sender.

The HPOS Mail Centre shows:

-   incoming mail to action
-   archived mail
-   the latest message in the mail thread

The HPOS Mail Centres are:

-   PIP, PIP Mail Centre
-   WIP – Practice Stream, WIP – Practice Stream Mail Centre

See HPOS Support Mail Centre – managing emails from health professionals
for more information.

External email boxes

A customer can send an email to the external email boxes to communicate
electronically.

The Resources pages contains a list of the external email boxes.

Roles and Responsibilities

There are two levels of email triage:

Tier 1, triage by Service Officers. They are responsible for:

-   responding immediately where a template response is available
-   escalating to Tier 2 where necessary
-   forwarding work items to KOFAX
-   forwarding to individual staff members
-   forwarding to other programs
-   filing to appropriate folders once complete
-   deleting non work related emails

Tier 2, triage by Subject Matter Experts (SMEs). They are responsible
for:

-   assisting Tier 1 Service Officers to find a template response or
    respond to a query
-   actioning Tier 2 emails
-   responding where a template response is not available
-   escalating to the Program Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives
    Escalation Database for advice/determinations
-   managing the HPOS Mail Centre

An ‘owner’ of an email box grants the access. See a Team Leader for more
information.

Common email enquiries

Common enquiries include:

-   Forms
-   Payment enquiries
-   General enquiries about the Incentive programs
-   HPOS enquiries, RA number updates and notifications
-   Duplicate statement requests
-   eHealth – Shared Health Summary (SHS) and compliance enquiries
-   PIP eHealth audit enquiries
-   WIP – Practice Stream health professional detail amendments

Template responses

These are standard responses to common enquiries. They ensure consistent
messaging to all customers.

Template responses include:

-   Document not in PDF format
-   Confirm postal address for duplicate statement request
-   eHealth Compliance
-   Request for forms

The Resources page has a list of template responses.

HPOS notifications

HPOS notifications occur when a practice makes updates to their practice
profile through HPOS.

PIP NO REPLY PRD

When a practice:

-   updates a relocation through HPOS
-   notifies of a change of practice ownership through HPOS

Tier 1 Service Officers triage these HPOS notifications.

PIP <NO REPLY>

When a new message is from a HPOS user in the HPOS Mail Centre.

Tier 2 SMEs triage these HPOS notifications.

Online services for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream has more information
about practice updates via HPOS.

The Resources page contains contact details, templates, useful links and
guidelines used for resolving email enquiries.

Related links

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

HPOS Support Mail Centre – managing emails from Health Professionals

Authorised contact person changes for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
