
Practice accreditation for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) – Practice Stream 012-10010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the accreditation requirements for practices.

The National General Practice Accreditation (NGPA) Scheme

The Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care (the
Commission), in collaboration with the Royal Australian College of
General Practitioners (RACGP), developed the NGPA Scheme, which
commenced on 1 January 2017.

Under the NGPA Scheme, general practices accessing the PIP and/or the
WIP – Practice Stream must be assessed by an approved accrediting
agency. The approved agencies are:

-   Australian General Practice Accreditation Ltd (AGPAL)
-   Quality Practice Accreditation Pty Ltd (QPA) – formerly General
    Practice Accreditation Plus (GPA)
-   The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards (ACHS)

Advisories for the NGPA Scheme

An advisory is a formal communication from the Commission to accrediting
agencies to provide guidance and direction on the interpretation and/or
assessment of the RACGP Standards for general practices. Advisories are
periodically reviewed to ensure they remain current.

More information is available on the Commission’s website.

Eligibility and maintaining accreditation

Practices participating in the PIP and/or WIP – Practice Stream must be
accredited or registered for accreditation to be eligible.

Registered for accreditation – a practice is registered for
accreditation with an accrediting agency and working to meet the
requirements of the RACGP Standards for general practices. The practice
must achieve accreditation within 12 months since approved to
participate in PIP/WIP– Practice Stream to remain eligible for payments.

Accredited - independent recognition that a practice meets the
requirements of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
(RACGP) Standards for general practices.

Accreditation must:

-   meet the RACGP Standards for general practices
-   be provided by an approved accrediting agency approved under the
    National General Practice Accreditation Scheme

Once accreditation is achieved, practices must maintain accreditation to
be eligible to participate in the PIP and/or the WIP – Practice Stream.

Other types of practice accreditation, such as Medical Deputising
Services (MDS) and After Hours Medical Services, are not eligible.

Practices must be accredited for the entire payment quarter to get
payments. This includes the point-in-time date. The point-in-time date
is the last day of the month before the quarterly payment.

For example:

A practice was approved for the PIP on 29 January 2019. The practice
must achieve accreditation within 12 months (29 January 2020) but they
did not achieve accreditation until 10 February 2020.

The practice is not eligible for the February 2020 or May 2020 quarterly
payments.

This is because the:

-   reference period for the February 2019 payment quarter is 1 November
    2018 to 31 January 2019. The practice was not accredited during this
    period
-   reference period for the May 2019 payment quarter is 1 February 2019
    to 30 April 2019. Although the practice achieved accreditation on 10
    February 2019, it was not accredited for the entire payment quarter

Evidence of accreditation

An approved accrediting agency will provide a certificate to the
practice certifying it is either:

-   registered for accreditation as a general practice, or
-   accredited as a general practice

The Resources page has a link to a list of approved accrediting
agencies.

Practices must provide their accreditation certificate or registered for
accreditation certificate to Services Australia when they apply and when
the practice has relocated or changed ownership.

Certificates must include, but are not limited to, the following
information:

the name of an approved accreditation agency under the NGPA Scheme

accreditation type (accredited or registered for accreditation)

practice, trading or company name

physical practice location

accreditation number (the unique identifier issued by the accrediting
agency)

the set of standards used to assess the practice's accreditation status:

-   For example: RACGP Standards for general practice standards 5th
    Edition)

the date the period of accreditation begins (start/certified date)

the date the period of accreditation ends (end/expiry date)

Note: the accreditation standard for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream must
be for general practice.

Practices do not need to provide evidence of ongoing accreditation
unless the agency requests it.

Accreditation data from accrediting agencies will automatically upload
into the PIP and the WIP – Practice Stream systems on a monthly basis.
This upload does not include registered for accreditation data. The
registered for accreditation data is only entered when the practice
applies for the program(s).

Practices cannot update their accreditation through Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS).

Practices must keep records of their accreditation for a minimum of 6
years for compliance purposes.

Failure to be accredited within the 12 month period

Practices that do not achieve accreditation within 12-months from
joining the program(s), are not eligible for payments. This is
regardless of whether an extension to the registration period has been
granted by the accrediting agency. Practice payments will be
automatically held and the three quarter rule will apply.

If a practice achieves accreditation after the 12-month period:

-   they are not eligible for quarterly payments where they were not
    accredited for the entire quarter
-   payments will re-start from the next payment quarter where the
    practice is accredited for the entire quarter

Accreditation requirements for additional practice branches

Additional practice branches that provide more than 3,000 Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) services per annum must:

-   be accredited or be registered for accreditation in their own right
    to be eligible to participate in the PIP and/or the WIP – Practice
    Stream
-   achieve accreditation within 12 months after they reach 3,000 MBS
    services per annum

It is the practice’s responsibility to monitor their own MBS services
and comply with eligibility requirements. The number of MBS services for
each additional practice branch is available on each PIP payment advice.

Accreditation and practice relocation

If a practice relocates, it will need to submit an accreditation
certificate that includes the new practice address.

The practice must provide a copy of their new accreditation certificate
to the agency within 6 months of relocating. Practice payments are
placed on hold until the certificate is provided and the three quarter
rule will apply.

Program management will monitor this and take the appropriate action.

When a relocated practice provides a new accreditation certificate and
payments are on hold because of the relocation, remove the payment hold
then escalate to the Program Support Officer (PSO) via the PaNDA to
release any held payments. To be eligible for withheld payments, the new
accreditation certificate must begin from the date of relocation. For
more information about accreditation requirements for a practice
relocation, see The National General Practice Accreditation Scheme.

Accreditation and change of practice name

The practice name on an accreditation certificate must match either the
registered practice name, company name or trading name. If the practice
name changes where a sale of the practice has occurred (without a
relocation), it will need a new accreditation certificate with the new
practice name.

The practice must provide a copy of their new accreditation certificate
to the agency within 6 months of the date of sale. Practice payments are
placed on hold until the certificate is provided and the three quarter
rule will apply.

Program management will monitor this and take the appropriate action.

Extensions to accreditation

Registered for accreditation

When a practice that is registered for accreditation requests an
extension to the 12-month period to achieve accreditation since joining
the program(s):

Advise the practice to send an email outlining the reason for the
request, providing any supporting documentation

-   Supporting documentation could include information from their
    accrediting agency (for example, an email confirming a cancelled
    assessment)
-   Do not advise the practice to seek additional information from their
    accrediting agency

Escalate the request to the PSO via PaNDA

-   Include the email request from the practice and any supporting
    documents
-   Program Management will work with to the Department of Health and
    Aged Care to consider these requests on a case by case basis

Do not upload extended registered for accreditation details

Add a comment to the practice profile

Extensions to registration details that are not recorded by Program
Management should be removed and escalated to the PSO via PaNDA for
further assessment.

Program Management will:

-   co-ordinate the approval process with Department of Health and Aged
    Care
-   if approved, arrange for any held payments to be released
-   record approved extension to registration dates and add comments to
    the practice profile.

Eligible practices were granted a 12 month extension to their
accreditation in response to the 2020 pandemic. Quality Practice
Accreditation (QPA) certificates issued or reissued for relocations will
not reflect this extended expiry date.

QPA sends the practice a letter confirming the extended accreditation.
The letter:

-   is addressed to the practice
-   includes the practice name as a reference, and
-   shows the new expiry date 12 months from the certificate date

Enter the accreditation expiry date from the letter into the relevant
system.

If the end date is unclear, escalate to a Programme Support Officer
(PSO). Program Management will:

-   check the accreditation data received, or
-   make contact with QPA, if needed

Accredited

Practices can only get extensions to their accreditation in extenuating
circumstances. The Resources page has a link to the Commission’s
webpage. This contains information about the NGPA Scheme and the latest
advisory for extensions to accreditation.

Practices seeking extensions must contact their accrediting agency and
provide evidence of their extenuating circumstances for assessment.
Accrediting agencies must refer all requests for extensions to the
Commission. The agency does not have the authority to grant extensions.

Practices that have not allowed sufficient time to finalise
administration of accreditation decisions will not be given an extension
to their accreditation. Accrediting agencies cannot backdate or change
the date of commencement for the new cycle to maintain continuous
accreditation.

If practices are granted an extension to their accreditation, their new
accreditation details will be uploaded in the monthly data exchange.

Gaps in accreditation

Gaps in accreditation:

-   are not automatically identified by the PIP and WIP - Practice
    Stream Online systems
-   are only be identified by a Service Officer (during usual work
    processes) or the Program Management team (during the monthly
    accreditation data upload)

If the start date on the new certificate is the next day after the
expiry date of the old certificate, this is acceptable.

For example:

A practice provides a certificate with a start date of 2 November 2021
and the old certificate had an end date of 1 November 2021. This is
continuous accreditation.

If gaps in accreditation (where accreditation is not continuous) are
identified, escalate to the PSO via PaNDA for further investigation.

Program Management will place the practice payments on hold and contact
the practice about their eligibility. Program Management will ask
Incentive Programs Delivery to initiate payment recovery if required.
Related correspondence and comments will be added to the practice
profile.

Practices can apply for an exemption through their accrediting agency as
soon as they become aware that there may be a gap in accreditation.
Supporting evidence must be provided with their application. Exemptions
cannot be backdated. See the Resources page for frequently asked
questions about accreditation.

Practices will get reminders to renew their accreditation from their
accrediting agency.

Changes to accreditation status

Practices are not eligible for payments if their accreditation status
changes from accredited to registered for accreditation. The Service
Officer must place the practice payments on hold and the three quarter
rule will apply.

For example, this may occur if the practice relocates or changes
accrediting agencies.

If a practice then achieves accreditation and remains approved in PIP
and/or WIP - Practice Stream:

-   the practice is not eligible for quarterly payments where they were
    not accredited for the entire quarter
-   payments will recommence from the next payment quarter where the
    practice is accredited for the entire quarter

Escalate changes to a practice’s accreditation status to the PSO via
PaNDA for further investigation. Program Management will advise Service
Officers what the next steps are, such as contact with the practice or
recovery of payments.

Remove accreditation details

Service Officers can remove an accreditation record for various reasons,
including practice relocation, amalgamation or an incorrect
accreditation update by another Service Officer.

The Resources page contains additional information including FAQs,
payment holds and releases and links to external websites and letters.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Practice application for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Enquiry Management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Forms and letters for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Link WIP - Practice Stream non-consenting practices with PIP

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
