-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Positron Emission Tomography
(PET) services for eligible medical practitioners.

Eligibility for Medicare Benefits

Payment of Medicare benefits for PET services is limited to services
performed by or under the personal supervision of a medical professional
who is a:

-   credentialed specialist' or
-   medical practitioner who meets the requirements in clause
    2.4.3 (1) (b) of the Health Insurance (Diagnostic Imaging Services
    Table) Regulations (No. 2) 2020 Diagnostic Imaging Services Table
    (DIST)

PET services must also be performed in a comprehensive facility using
equipment that meets the Requirements for PET Accreditation
(Instrumentation & Radiation Safety) 3rd Edition (2017), to be eligible
for Medicare benefits.

See References for the legislation.

Access to Medicare benefits for PET services

The JNMCAC secretariat advises Services Australia when a medical
practitioner’s name has been added to the Register of Nuclear Medicine
and/or Positron Emission Tomography Credentialed Specialists.

Services Australia updates the medical practitioner’s provider number
record and advises the medical practitioner of their credentialing
status in writing. The Positron Emission Tomography Statutory
Declaration form (HW064) is included with this letter.

The medical practitioner must complete this form and send to the
Medicare Provider Registration team for assessment.

Note: this form and supporting documentation can be submitted via HPOS.
Forms received via HPOS will have:

-   all correspondence delivered via HPOS
-   HPOS in their title. For example YYYYMMDD.HPOS12345678_
    WorkID.WorkType

See also Health Professional Online Services Support Mail Centre –
Managing emails from health professionals.

The Resources page contains links to MBS Online, HPOS and the Positron
Emission Tomography Statutory Declaration form (HW064).

Credentialing enquiries

Enquiries about:

-   PET credentialing should be directed to the JNMCAC Secretariat. The
    Resources page contains a link to the Secretariat contact details on
    the Australasian Association of Nuclear Medicine Specialists website
-   recording credentialing details should be directed to a Programme
    Support Officer (PSO)
-   processing the statutory declaration can be emailed to the
    Diagnostic Imaging and Pathology team

The Resources page contains links to:

-   Positron Emission Tomography Statutory Declaration form (HW064)
-   Medicare Health Programme Support Officers (PSO)
-   Medicare Provider Registration
-   Australasian Association of Nuclear Medicine Specialists
-   Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Online
-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)
-   Provider and Third Party Letters

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
