-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about different types of call
enquiries in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

On this Page:

General enquiries

General enquiries include:

-   routine queries that Service Officers should be able to answer or
    refer to other areas of Services Australia
-   policy related queries, as opposed to enquiries requiring clinical
    intervention

Pharmacist enquiries about an authority on the PBS Authorities line

Pharmacists can enquire on an authority by calling the PBS General
Enquires line or the PBS Authorities line.

Resolving enquiries from approved suppliers

All approved suppliers can call the single line for PBS. Health Services
Delivery staff provide first tier support to these callers.

PBS calls should be directed and escalated using the Single Number for
PBS Services chart. The Resources page contains a link to the chart. See
also the PBS General Enquires line.

If a Service Officer cannot answer an enquiry or needs more information
to complete the enquiry, they need to refer to second tier escalation,
Program Support Officer (PSO) or Team Coach (whichever is applicable for
that state).

If a PBS Online Pharmacy calls regarding a payment enquiry, transfer the
call to the PBS PSO line to answer the query.

The Resources page contains a link to information about main general
enquiry types and the usual callers from which those enquiries are
received, the main Authority enquiry types categorised into new and
existing listings, and contact details.

Contents

Roles and responsibilities of Health Services Delivery Network staff in
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Perform pharmacy security check

Escalate calls in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Handle emergencies and complaints on Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) Authority line

Claim period enquiries from approved suppliers in Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Prescription enquiries from approved suppliers in Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Payment enquiries from approved suppliers in Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS)

Handle enquiries for supply after death reason codes in Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
