
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and processes for Provisional
Payments for the Practice Incentives Program (PIP).

Provisional Payments for the PIP

Provisional Payments allow greater flexibility for Services Australia to
quickly deliver one off payments in response to requests from the
Department of Health and Aged Care and Government.

Provisional Payments for PIP can be for:

-   temporary measures with one-off payments to PIP practices
-   short term initiatives or additional payments to existing incentives

Provisional Payments for PIP are not adjustment payments for existing
incentives.

Internal users can view Provisional Payment records through the
Provisional Payments tab of PIP Online. External users can view
Provisional Payments data via a Provisional Payments link in their HPOS
PIP Online home screen.

The Process page contains the steps to view the provisional payments for
a practice.

Active Provisional Payments for the PIP

Currently there are no active provisional payments.

See the Resources page for more information.

Inactive Provisional Payments for the PIP

Payments that are only activated for an emergency response.

General Practitioner Led Respiratory Clinic (GPRC)

GPRC is an initiative introduced by government to support practices in a
possible future health emergency.

GPRC is a ‘stand-up, stand-down’ program that can be activated during a
health emergency where there is potential for health system overwhelm

Under GPRC, up to 150 primary care practices will be chosen by an open
selection process. These practices need to:

-   maintain fit for purpose infrastructure, and
-   ensure availability of trained staff to meet a potential surge

During activation, participants will have access to a new Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) item number. They can use this to make claims
for providing 10 minute face-to-face consultations. They will also be
eligible to claim a PIP incentive payment. This is equal to their PIP
Quality Improvement payment for each activation, with a maximum of one
payment per quarter.

The Department of Health and Aged Care will advise Services Australia,
if/when the GPRC is activated

The GPRC measure is currently in place until 30 June 2026

See the Process page for GPRC payment information.

Historical Provisional Payments for the Practice Incentives Program (PIP)

Historical Provisional Payments for PIP are:

-   COVID-19 In Reach Vaccination Payment

See the Resources page for more information

The Resources page contains information about historical provisional
payments and incentives, contact details, links to forms guidelines and
external websites.

Related links

Payments for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive
Program (WIP) - Practice Stream

Failed Payments (GDES) for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and
Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
