
Juvenile arthropathies Program in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-18051123

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the PBS subsidised biologic agents for patients
with juvenile arthropathies.

Juvenile arthropathies and listing dates

Juvenile Arthropathies covers juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and
systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA).

Listing dates:

-   etanercept - 1 July 2003 (JIA)
-   adalimumab - 1 November 2010
-   tocilizumab I.V. formulation - 1 May 2012 (sJIA)
-   tocilizumab I.V. formulation - 1 April 2014 (JIA)
-   tocilizumab S.C. formulation - 1 August 2019 (JIA)
-   tocilizumab S.C. formulation - 1 August 2020 (sJIA)

See Written Authority Required Drugs for more information.

Treatment specifics

Tocilizumab (Actemra®) is presented as:

-   80 mg per 4 mL intravenous solution
-   200 mg per 10 mL intravenous solution
-   400 mg per 20 mL intravenous solution
-   162mg/0.9mL injection (4x0.9mL) pen devices for subcutaneous
    administration
-   162mg/0.9mL injection (4x0.9mL) syringes for subcutaneous
    administration

For juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) the recommended doses:

Intravenous dosing regimen:

-   <30 kg is 10 mg per kg every 4 weeks
-   ≥30 kg is 8 mg per kg every 4 weeks

Subcutaneous dosing regimen:

-   162 mg once every 3 weeks for patients below 30 kg
-   162 mg once every 2 weeks for patients ≥ 30 kg

If the patient is treated with tocilizumab I.V. formulation, prescribers
should request the appropriate quantity of vials of appropriate
strength, based on the weight of the patient, to provide for 1 month's
supply. A separate authority prescription is required for each strength.
The most cost-effective combination of vials should be prescribed.

If the patient is treated with tocilizumab S.C. formulation, prescribers
should request the appropriate quantity of pens/syringes based on the
weight of the patient to provide for 1 month’s supply.

For systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) the recommended doses:

Intravenous dosing regimen:

-   <30 kg is 12 mg per kg every 2 weeks
-   ≥30 kg is 8 mg per kg every 2 weeks

Subcutaneous dosing regimen:

-   162 mg once every 2 weeks for patients below 30 kg
-   162 mg once every week for patients ≥ 30 kg

If the patient is treated with tocilizumab I.V. formulation, prescribers
should request the appropriate quantity of vials of appropriate
strength, based on the weight of the patient, to provide for 1 month's
supply. A separate authority prescription is required for each strength.
The most cost-effective combination of vials should be prescribed.

If the patient is treated with tocilizumab S.C. formulation, prescribers
should request the appropriate quantity of pens/syringes based on the
weight of the patient to provide for 1 month’s supply.

When a patient qualifies for treatment they will have a defined level of
disease activity. This level, once measured, becomes the patient’s
baselines. Future applications for treatment must be measured against
the baselines to determine response or failure to current treatment. A
patient who fails treatment with one agent may wish to use this flare of
disease to set a new baseline for future treatment to measure against.

JIA patients under the age of 18 are measured on the number of joints
that are tender and swollen.

JIA patients over the age of 18 are measured on the number of joints
that are tender and swollen as well as inflammatory and blood markers.
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) and C-Reactive Protein (CRP) are
blood markers that provide a guideline on inflammation. One of them must
be elevated at baseline (or a reason provided it is supressed).
Continuing treatment must be assessed against the markers provided at
baseline.

Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) patients are either
'polyarticular course disease' and monitored on affected joints or
'refractory systemic disease' and monitored on absence of fever,
elevated CRP, or steroid treatment.

sJIA vs JIA treatment

Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) is a type of juvenile
idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Tocilizumab is listed for sJIA refractory
and polyarticular patients (covered in same restriction). Tocilizumab
was later listed for all JIA patients however the initial requirements
are different so both restrictions are still in effect.

Adults and JIA

A patient who commences juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) treatment
before they turn 18 is treated as a JIA <18 even when they become an
adult.

Only a patient who starts as an 'adult patient with onset prior to 18'
is treated as a JIA >18.

A systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) patient must be under 18
when they apply for initial treatment. If approved they are eligible to
continue treatment once they turn 18.

Enquiries

Transfer enquiries about prescription arrangements to the PBS Complex
Drugs Programs team and choose the team relevant to the condition
treated.

The Resources page contains links to application forms, calculation
sheets, contact details, restriction and item codes, and the PBS and
Services Australia websites.

Related links

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process Telephone Authority Approval Application

Processing Written Authority Approval Requests

Processing Written Authority Required Listings

Written Authority Required Drugs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
