
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) Officers
check the Goods and Services Tax (GST) registrations of providers and
prepare documentation to process GST back payments.

GST adjustments

If the providers Australian Business Number (ABN) and Recipient Created
Tax Invoice (RCTI) agreement are:

-   Recorded by Services Australia (the agency) and the claim being
    assessed has GST applicable items, GST will be automatically added
    to the applicable items claimed
-   Not recorded by the agency, GST will not be calculated for the claim
    even if the claim contains GST applicable items

Reasons for GST adjustments

GST adjustments may be necessary because:

-   A provider’s GST status has changed from being GST registered to not
    being GST registered since the claim was paid
-   An incorrect provider has been paid and one of the providers is GST
    registered but the other is not
-   Norfolk Island is GST exempt, an incorrect provider number was used
    with a Norfolk Island location
-   An incorrect item was paid, for example GST exempt item to a GST
    applicable item
-   An incorrect date of service was keyed, for example the item was not
    GST applicable on the date the service was provided so the GST
    amount may have increased and/or decreased
-   An incorrect veteran was paid
-   An incorrect charge was entered
-   A duplicate payment was made for same provider
-   A duplicate payment was made for different provider
-   The adjustment was calculated incorrectly

GST adjustments to claims already paid

Although a provider's RCTI agreement form has been registered, GST back
payments are not processed automatically. Requests by providers for GST
back-payments must be in writing including the provider number and
relevant claim numbers.

When an overpayment of a claim has occurred, there is no online method
of processing the adjustment required. Adjustments relating to GST
applicable items must be calculated manually. File fixes are made to
adjust the claim and the veteran's history on the Mainframe system.

Backdating of GST adjustments

Department of Veteran’s Affairs Policy limits the period that backdated
adjustments can be claimed by providers. In alignment with the agency’s
processing standards, GST payments provide a 60 day adjustment period
from the date the GST registration details were entered. That is, the
date of notification of RCTI agreement by the provider has been entered
in to ABSTUDY Activity Agreement (ABAA).

Department of Veteran’s Affairs Policy has directed this must be
established as the date of notification of a GST status to YES, as
entered into ABAA. Providers will be unable to claim any backdated
adjustments before this 60 day period.

All provider queries about the 60 day policy must be directed to the
Department of Veteran’s Affairs. See Useful Contacts for Department of
Veteran’s Affairs contacts.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, relevant letters
and forms and a link to the Australian Business Register website.

Related links

Goods and Services Tax (GST) processing

Registration for payments subject to Goods and Services Tax (GST) for
eServices

Request a file fix for claims in Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
