
Payment pay group link for Medicare benefit cheques 012-40010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the payment pay group link for
Medicare benefit cheques.

On this page:

Purpose of a pay group link

A pay group link directs payment of Medicare benefit cheques, which are
issued payable to the eligible health professional at the location
address, to a:

-   different location (including a postal address), or
-   third party

Pay group links only apply to cheque payments, and only operate at the
location level. They do not apply to Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT)
payments. EFT payment details are captured separately and recorded in
the Provider Directory System, and override any existing or subsequent
pay group link applications.

Request for a pay group link

An eligible health professional may request a pay group link by
completing the Request for Pay Group Link application form. The
Resources page contains a link to the Request for Pay Group Link
application form.

A health professional may use a pay group link:

-   When employed by a third party (such as another health professional,
    a private hospital, or a company) or, in private practice and
    receiving a salary for that employment. Medicare benefit cheques for
    services they provide can be made payable to the third party
-   To direct any Medicare benefit cheques for services they provide to
    be made payable to their company name or sent to a specific mailing
    address for example, a Post Office Box address

Pay group link for third parties

Where a health professional requests:

-   a new pay group link for cheques to be made payable to a third
    party, or
-   amendments to a pay group link which involves a third party

both the payee (or a person authorised in the case of a company or other
entity) and the health professional must sign the request.

Benefit cheques and statements of benefit are sent to the payee. The
payee must be a person or body associated with the practice. Statements
contain personal information and there are privacy considerations
involved in sending statements of benefit to a third party.

Privacy

The information held about a health professional belongs to that person.
The provision of any of this information to a third party may be an
offence under section 130 of the Health Insurance Act 1973. While some
disclosure of information may be permissible under the Privacy Act 1988,
disclosure may still be prohibited by section 130 of the Health
Insurance Act 1973.

See also Release of information for Medicare for more information.

Terminating a pay group link

Pay group link arrangements can only be terminated by written request
from the health professional. Services Australia will inform the health
professional and the payee of the termination. The pay group link payee
has no authority to make a change to the pay group details without the
written consent of the health professional.

Effective date of a pay group link

A pay group link can only commence from the date of processing or a date
in the future. System restraints do not allow the pay group link to be
backdated.

Change of name or address on an existing pay group link takes effect
from the date of processing.

Enquiries

Enquiries from Service Officers must be directed to the Programme
Support Officer (PSO).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
