
Health professional weekly hours in the Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-11070020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for changing health professional
details.

Payment calculations

A WIP - Practice Stream payment is calculated using the:

-   Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent (SWPE) value
-   type of eligible health professional employed or engaged, and
-   average weekly contracted hours the health professional works at the
    practice (including additional practice branches) over the payment
    quarter

SWPE value

Most of the incentive payments are calculated based on the size of the
practice. This is known as the SWPE.

The SWPE is based on the Medicare and the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) services a practitioner gives to patients at the practice.

For more information about the SWPE, see Payments for PIP and WIP -
Practice Stream.

Types of eligible health professionals

A practice must employ or retain the services of:

-   a nurse practitioner
-   a registered nurse
-   an enrolled nurse. They must work under the direct or indirect
    supervision of a nurse practitioner or registered nurse in
    accordance with the requirements in the Nursing and Midwifery Board
    of Australia’s Enrolled Nurse Standards for Practice. See Resources
    for a link to the standards
-   an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Worker
-   an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioner
-   an eligible allied health professional

See Resources for a link to the WIP guidelines for a list of eligible
allied health professionals

Average weekly contracted hours

A practice needs to calculate the average weekly hours worked per
quarter for each eligible health professional.

The average weekly hours is the sum of the total hours worked by the
health professional for the entire payment quarter divided by 13 weeks.

Employing an enrolled nurse

An enrolled nurse (EN) must work under the direct or indirect
supervision of a nurse practitioner or registered nurse (RN). This is a
requirement of the Nursing and Midwifery Board Enrolled nurse standards
for practice.

Direct supervision is when the supervising nurse practitioner or RN is
actually present and personally observes, works with, guides and directs
the EN

Indirect supervision is when the supervising nurse practitioner or RN:

-   works in the same facility or organisation as the EN being
    supervised, but does not constantly observe their activities
-   is available for 'reasonable access' - reasonable depends on the
    context, the needs of the person receiving care, and the needs of
    the EN being supervised
-   usually has the same employer as the EN

If a nurse practitioner or RN and EN work for the same employer at
different locations, they must have:

-   a structured indirect supervisory arrangement, and
-   regular communication

If a nurse practitioner or RN and EN work for different employers at the
same location, then:

employers must clearly document the arrangements, including:

-   details of the supervision arrangements (including insurance), and
-   how the nurse practitioner and RN will be available for 'reasonable
    access'

nurse practitioner or RN and EN must support the arrangements

When a nurse practitioner or RN directly/indirectly supervises an EN
during the quarter, the practice should:

-   calculate the average time over the entire quarter, even for as
    little as 30 minutes, and
-   claim the actual average weekly hours in the Quarterly Confirmation
    Statement (QCS)

Practice payments may be withheld if:

-   a nurse practitioner or RN does not supervise an EN, or
-   the practice does not claim the hours for a supervising nurse
    practitioner or RN

The Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia’s Enrolled Nurse Standards
for Practice has more information. The Resources page has a link.

Amending health professional details

A practice can amend their previously recorded health professional
details through one of the below:

Practice Incentives Individual general practitioner, nurse practitioner
or health professional details (IP003) form

Health Professional Online Services for the current payment quarter only

Letter or email which must include:

-   practice ID
-   practice name
-   practice address
-   eligible health professional details (health professional or allied
    health professional type and actual average weekly hours)
-   previous payment quarter the hours were complete

A revised Quarterly Confirmation Statement (QCS)

A practice may need to amend these details because:

-   they claimed incorrect hours in a previous QCS
-   the practice became PIP Consenting and did not receive a QCS
-   a newly approved practice needs to change the details provided in
    their WIP - Practice Stream application

Do not amend the health professional details if there is an outstanding
QCS.

If the amended hours are:

less than the previously confirmed hours:

-   Escalate to the Program Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives
    Escalation Database to see if a payment recovery is needed
-   Program management (payments team) will confirm the recovery amount
    with the PSO

more than the previously confirmed hours, escalate to the PSO via the
Incentives Escalation Database to see if an extra payment is needed

The Resources page contains a table for converting decimal hours to
minutes.

Evidence of nursing hours

A practice must provide evidence of the hours worked by all of the
eligible health professionals. This includes.

-   contracted hours records
-   payment summaries (pay slips)
-   rostered hours records (formal rosters)
-   time sheets
-   other supporting documents that may be considered on a case by case
    basis

A practice must keep the evidence for a minimum of 6 years for audit
purposes.

Services Australia and/or the Department of Health may conduct audits.

The Resources page contains tables for converting decimal hours to
minutes and reported hours to weekly hours. It also has links to
guidelines, contact details, letters and forms.

Related links

Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Payment recovery for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Quarterly Confirmation Statement (QCS) in WIP - Practice Stream

Link WIP - Practice Stream non-consenting practices with PIP

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
