
Paraplegic and Quadriplegic (ParaQuad) Program 012-18112722

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Paraplegic and Quadriplegic
(ParaQuad) program. The program provides certain medicines free of
charge to members of authorised associations.

On this Page:

Administration of ParaQuad

The Department of Health and Aged Care is responsible for the
legislative arrangement for the Paraplegic and Quadriplegic Program
including the approval of authorised associations and listing of drugs
and medicinal preparations. Services Australia has responsibility for
the registration of authorised associations and the processing and
payment of claims lodged by the authorised associations.

Authorised (ParaQuad) associations are permitted to supply certain
pharmaceutical items listed in Schedule 1 of Special Arrangement which
are also on the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits to their members.
Currently 3 associations are listed in the Special Arrangement, 2 of
which participate in the :

-   Paraplegic and Quadriplegic Association of NSW, and
-   Independence Australia (previously known as The Paraplegic
    Association of Victoria (ParaQuad Victoria))

The Resources page provides contact details for the associations.

Program overview

The ParaQuad Program provides access to certain medicines (enemas and
aperients) on the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits free of charge to
members of Authorised associations.

Under the program, a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) prescription
is not required and there is no patient co-payment. The medication
supply is for a maximum per month that is slightly higher than that
permitted for general supply on the PBS.

Authorised associations purchase medications directly from manufacturers
and distribute to their members mostly by post. Authorised associations
submit claims to Services Australia for the cost of the medicine. A
2.75% handling fee is paid on the total value of the claim. GST is not
payable on any items listed on the ParaQuad schedule. GST is only
payable on the 2.75% handling fee.

Legislation

The Paraplegic and Quadriplegic Program is legislated under a special
arrangement made under subsection 100(1) of the National Health Act
1953 - National Health (Paraplegic and Quadriplegic Program) Special
Arrangements 2010. See the References page for a link.

Eligible persons

A person is eligible to receive a pharmaceutical benefit from an
authorised association if the person:

-   is an eligible person within the meaning of the Health Insurance Act
    1973; and
-   has paraplegia or quadriplegia; and
-   is a member of the association

ParaQuad claims processing

Processing of ParaQuad and Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS) claims are the
same. The ParaQuad program uses the same application forms as SAS and
can be ordered from The Camerons Group. The Resources page provides a
link.

For information on processing Stoma Appliance Scheme claims see Stoma
Appliance Scheme (SAS).

The Resources page contains links external websites and contact details.

Contents

Enquiries regarding STOMA or Paraquad claims

Financial delegation checking of a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

Loading and registering a STOMA or Paraquad claim

Processing a STOMA or Paraquad claim

Related links

Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
