
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net 012-21052025

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PBS Safety Net

The PBS Safety Net reduces the cost of PBS prescription medicines for
individuals and families once the applicable PBS Safety Net threshold
has been reached in a calendar year. Anyone eligible for PBS subsidised
medicines is eligible for the PBS Safety Net. Patients and their
families need to keep track of their PBS expenditure using Prescription
Record Form(s).

PBS Safety Net thresholds

There are 2 PBS Safety Net thresholds - General and Concession.
Thresholds are updated and published on the Services Australia and the
Department of Health and Aged Care websites on 1 January each year.

General threshold

Patients who have a Medicare number but no concessional entitlement are
considered general patients and pay the general co-payment for their
prescriptions. Once the general threshold is reached in a calendar year,
the pharmacy can issue a PBS Safety Net Concession Card (CN card). All
eligible prescriptions for the remainder of the calendar year will be
dispensed at the concession rate.

Concession threshold

Patients who hold a Centrelink or Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA)
concession entitlement are considered concession patients and pay the
concession co-payment for their prescriptions. Once the concession
threshold is reached in a calendar year, the pharmacy can issue a PBS
Safety Net Entitlement Card (SN card). All eligible prescriptions for
the remainder of the calendar year will be dispensed free of charge.

Additional charges

There are additional charges that do not count towards the PBS Safety
Net threshold and must be paid by the patient even after the threshold
has been reached and a PBS Safety Net card has been issued. Additional
charges that may occur include brand premiums and allowable additional
patient charges.

Issuing PBS Safety Net cards and submitting claims

When satisfied that an individual or family has reached the applicable
threshold and is entitled to the PBS Safety Net, the pharmacist should
issue the appropriate PBS Safety Net card.

The pharmacist should include the following information on the PBS
Safety Net card issued to the patient/family:

The name and address of the card holder

The names of the eligible family members covered and the relationship
code that indicates their relationship to the cardholder:

-   CH - cardholder or applicant
-   SP - spouse
-   DC - dependent child under 16 years
-   DS - dependent full-time student under 25 years

The pharmacist needs to submit the following documents to Services
Australia for processing within one month of issuing the Safety Net
card:

-   PBS Safety Net Claim for Payment form (PB241) or previous version of
    this form (PB017) which is still accepted for claiming purposes
-   PBS Safety Net Prescription Record Form(s) (PRF) – all current and
    previous versions and any combination of PRFs are accepted

Contents

PBS Safety Net Claims system (SNCS)

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and enquiries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
