
Escalate calls in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-60130030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the escalation process for staff taking authority
calls for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Service Officer role in the escalation process

The Service Officer is the first point of customer contact and plays a
central role in the escalation or transfer of calls to other staff. This
allows for authority assessments and approvals to be performed at the
lowest appropriate level of delegation.

In the escalation of authority calls, the Service Officer interacts with
Programme Support Officers (PSO), Pharmaceutical Advisers (PA) and Team
Leaders (TL).

The Service Officer can also perform a referral role by redirecting
calls to other departments, or areas within Services Australia, for
example Medicare public enquiries and PBS pharmacy approvals.

Refer to Operational Blueprint

Service Officers must refer to Operational Blueprint for information in
the first instance. If unable to identify the issue or locate the
required information, staff must then proceed with the escalation
process.

Call transfer protocols (warm and cold transfer)

Warm transfer

A warm transfer is when the Service Officer talks to the transfer
recipient before redirecting the call.

Warm transfer all calls to:

-   Programme Support Officers (PSO)
-   Pharmaceutical Advisers (PA)
-   Team Leaders (TL)

Cold transfer

A cold transfer occurs when the Service Officer transfers a call without
first speaking to the recipient of the call. Cold transfer is only
appropriate when the caller has called the wrong number. Prior to
transferring the call, the Service Officer must inform the caller they
have called the wrong number for their query and that you will be
transferring them to the appropriate area. For example:

-   Improved Monitoring of Entitlement (IME) to Medicare
-   General PBS to Medicare
-   General PBS to Complex Drugs
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Other call transfer protocols

The Service Officer will receive certain calls where it is acceptable to
do either a warm or a cold transfer. This will depend on the nature of
the enquiry and how much information the caller provides:

-   IME to General PBS
-   any calls to eBusiness

Complex drugs phone Interactive Voice Response (IVR) options

See Dosage calculators and charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) > Complex Drugs - IVR option, for a list of conditions and IVR
options for transferring calls. The medical condition treated determines
who manages the item.

Hints for determining items handled by the Complex Drugs team

-   Key 'TAS' and space before searching the item in Online PBS
    Authorities (OPA)
-   view the item in the National Drug Reference Database (NDRD)
-   the restriction/note of the items will have Complex Drugs contact
    details
-   check the patient Comments field for additional notes

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide to escalation
scenarios for Service Officers and links to contact details.

Related links

Pharmaceutical Advisers (PA) in Services Australia

Perform pharmacy security check

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
