
Amend Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation
Maintenance Officer (OMO) can request to amend personal and/or
demographic details in an active record in the Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service.

Amend RO or OMO record

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officer ID details, the details of
the requestor are also recorded.

An:

-   OMO or RO record can be amended to include provider details. This
    allows the record to be recorded as both a RO or OMO and a provider
    individual
-   OMO can update another OMO record for a Healthcare Provider
    Identifier – Organisation (HPI-O) that falls under the network
    hierarchy that they manage

Before a Service Officer can update the records, the below information
must be provided:

a completed Application to amend an organisation officer's personal
details form (HW042)

original certified copies of documents to support corrections to:

-   name details
-   date of birth
-   sex

A RO or OMO can request to amend personal and/or demographic details in
an active record in the HI Service via a Service Officer.

Change RO for a seed organisation online

[] If a RO for a seed organisation is replaced, the new RO must complete
the Healthcare Identifiers – Change Responsible Officer application
process in HPOS.

See Process organisation change of ownership in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service for details.

RO or OMO retired or unlinked from organisation

If RO or OMO is retired then links to all associated organisations are
end-dated with the current date and time stamp. If RO or OMO is unlinked
from a seed or network organisation then the link is end-dated with the
current date and time stamp.

If necessary, relevant information is sent to the Certificate Issuance
and Management System (CIMS) to create, revoke or amend HI Service
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate permissions.

Amend RO or OMO via B2B

This function is available via Business to Business (B2B) if a RO or OMO
has authenticated access to the HI Service.

Records can only be amended via B2B if:

-   the identifier is supplied
-   the record is 'active'

Note: an amendment is not allowed if the change made would cause the
record to exactly match an existing record.

Only address details or electronic communication details can be amended
via B2B.

Identifying details must be amended via a Service Officer and a
completed amendment form with associated documentation.

A record will require manual follow up by a Service Officer where a date
of death has been applied through the B2B channel.

Note: this record is not automatically retired.

If necessary after any updates, relevant information will be sent to the
Certificate Issuance and Management System (CIMS) to create, revoke or
amend HI Service Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate
permissions.

Ahpra registrants

If the RO or OMO to be amended has been registered by the Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra), RO or OMO details cannot
be changed. New details must be added. Each tab has an add new details
button.

Note: Ahpra is shown in the TDS code field on all tabs. Ahpra is a
registration agency for several medical professions. If an Ahpra
registrant is also a RO or OMO for a healthcare organisation, add new
details to their existing record.

If the applicant is requesting original Ahpra data to be amended, the
applicant must contact Ahpra. Service Officers can only amend details
previously entered by a Service Officer and add new details.

The Resources page includes a link to contact details for HI Service.

Related links

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
organisation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
