-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on sonographer accreditation for
Medicare.

Sonographers

Some ultrasound services in the Medicare Benefits Schedule must be
performed by a:

-   medical practitioner, or
-   registered sonographer on behalf of a medical practitioner

A registered sonographer is defined by the Health Insurance (Diagnostic
Imaging Services Table) Regulations 2020 as a person whose name is
entered on the Register of Sonographers kept by the Chief Executive
Medicare.

Sonographer accreditation

An application for accreditation must be made to the Australian
Sonographer Accreditation Registry (ASAR). The ASAR advises Services
Australia of:

-   accredited sonographers
-   when sonographers are removed from the register
-   accreditation de-activations
-   accreditation re-activations after temporary de-activation
-   all returns to the register

Services Australia does not enter into any communication with the
sonographer.

The accreditation process ensures all sonographers are appropriately
trained and participating in a continuing professional development
program recognised by the ASAR.

Appealing non-accreditation

Services Australia is not involved in the appeal process of sonographer
accreditation.

For information about appeals, refer to the Australian Sonographer
Accreditation Registry (ASAR) website. The Resources page contains a
link to the website.

Enquiries

Direct further enquiries about sonographer accreditation or about the
Register of Accredited Medical Sonographers to the Australasian
Sonographer Accreditation Registry (ASAR). The Resources page contains a
link to the ASAR website.

Direct enquiries from the ASAR about registration advice to Medicare
Provider Registration Support.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details for Medicare Provider Registration, and
-   the Australasian Sonographer Accreditation Registry (ASAR) website

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
