
Telehealth Program for Medicare 012-41050000

-   Background
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Telehealth Program for Medicare.

Overview of Telehealth

The Telehealth Program was introduced as part of the Government's 2010
election commitment, 'Connecting Health Services with the Future:
Modernising Medicare by Providing Rebates for Online Consultations'. The
Government made a commitment to ensure all Australians, in particular
those in outer metropolitan, rural and regional areas, residents of
residential aged care services and patients of Aboriginal Medical
Services/Aboriginal Controlled Community Health Services have access to
high quality health services. From 1 July 2011, Medicare introduced a
new program called the Telehealth Program to address this commitment.
The Telehealth Program provides patients in eligible areas with easier
access to specialist medical services without the time and expense
involved in travelling to major cities.

The following additional information was available from 1 June 2011:

Telehealth Program Guidelines

Telehealth information on the Services Australia website

Questions and answers for:

-   patient and members of the public
-   health professionals and residential aged care facilities

The Resources page contains links to this additional information.

Telehealth geographic eligibility

Eligibility for specialist and patient-end support telehealth services
is determined according to the Australian Standard Geographical
Classification Remoteness Area (ASGC-RA) classifications. MBS benefits
will now only be available for services provided to patients who are
located outside RA1 - Major Cities.

Note: some patients and supporting practitioners who are located in an
outer metropolitan area and were eligible under the old boundaries may
no longer be eligible to receive Medicare benefits for Telehealth
services under this measure.

Eligibility for psychology telehealth services is determined according
to the Modified Monash Model (MMM) classifications. Telehealth Eligible
Areas are those areas that are within MMM classifications 4 to 7.

Residential Aged Care Facility and Aboriginal Medicare Services

Care recipients at a Residential Aged Care Facility and patients of
eligible Aboriginal Medical Services are exempt from this new
requirement and will continue to be eligible regardless of their
location.

Specialists

Specialists will still be able to provide a video consultation from
anywhere in Australia.

Components of the Telehealth Program

For practitioners

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) item numbers for eligible practitioners
to undertake a video consultation (called a Telehealth consultation)
with patients located in an eligible area.

Residential aged care services - hosting facilities

Residential aged care services can provide an appropriate room and IT
equipment to allow their residents to undertake a consultation with a
specialist/consultant physician/consultant psychiatrist via video-link
(called a Telehealth consultation).

Telehealth MBS items

Specialist services

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) includes 11 items for video
consultations provided by specialists, consultant physicians and
psychiatrists. These items allow 55 existing MBS attendance items across
these medical specialties to be undertaken by video conference.

Patient-end support services by health professionals

Where clinical assistance at the patient-end is required, medical
practitioners, nurse practitioners, midwives, Aboriginal Health Workers,
and practice nurses have access to 23 MBS items to provide clinically
relevant assistance. These items are located in Category 1, Group A30
and Group A7, Subgroup 12.

Psychological therapy and focussed strategies services

For more information on Allied Mental Health MBS video consultations,
see Better Access Initiative under Medicare.

The Resources page contains instructions for directing enquiries about
Telehealth, scripts and a link to MBS Online for Telehealth questions
and answers.

Contents

Telehealth consultations in Medicare

Claims for Telehealth video consultations in Medicare

Derived fee items for Telehealth claims in Medicare

Codes and return messages for Telehealth claims in Medicare

Telehealth bulk bill claims in Medicare

Related links

Better Access Initiative under Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
