
Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number applications and requests 012-19052715

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the business rules and processes for assessing
and processing an application for a provider number form and other
requests for allied health and non-medical health professionals.

Provider number applications

Initial (first) application for a provider number:

Required before an allied health professional can bill, refer or request
(where eligible) services for Medicare benefits

Applicants use the appropriate Services Australia application form, see
Resources for links to forms

Attach registration certificate, accreditation certificate, membership
certificate or qualification as evidence of registration

-   Where certification is not supplied for an Ahpra registered health
    professional - access the Ahpra window if a shell record is present
    or go to the Ahpra website to confirm registration
-   Where certification is not supplied for a non-Ahpra health
    profession, the application must be returned

Subsequent (additional) application for a provider number:

Additional provider numbers can be created via Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS) portal on the Add a new location screen
(encourage eligible health professionals to register if they don’t
already have access to HPOS)

-   Nurse practitioners, midwives and health professionals with a
    registration status as Limited or Provisional cannot open subsequent
    locations on HPOS

Health professionals wishing to apply manually can use the appropriate
Services Australia form. They select the Subsequent option on the form.
See Resources for links to forms

Note:

-   Applications are processed in order of date received. It is
    important health professionals lodge their application several weeks
    before the number is required
-   Peak processing period is from December to April

Provider number locations

Provider location address

Service Officers must read this page in conjunction with the provider
location address information on Provider number for health professionals
for information, including:

-   use of a home address as the provider number location address
-   requests from health professionals to use an alternative provider
    location addresses (such as a PO Box)
-   medical or non-medical practitioner requests to use alternative
    location address
-   allied health professional requests to use alternative location
    address

Allied health professional alternative location address requests

Medicare Service Delivery staff can approve and record an alternative
address (such as PO Box), for an allied health professional who meets
the conditions below:

the request is in writing. See Provider location address for details
that must be included in the written request

the allied health professional is working from home

home is the only place of consultation, and the health professional is:

-   providing telehealth services, or
-   mobile consultations

there are no face-to-face consultations at the home address

there are legitimate reasons to recode an alternate address. For
example, safety concerns and no commercial premises to provide
consultations

An allied health professional is not eligible to use an alternative
location address where:

-   an existing provider number location has a home address recorded and
    they currently see patients face-to-face at that location
-   they are applying for an initial or subsequent provider number and
    they are planning on seeing patients face-to-face at that location
    at some point.

Second provider number at same location

Health professionals must have a separate provider number for every
location they provide services. A provider number is not transferrable.

Requests for a second provider number at the same location must only be
approved and issued when there is:

-   a discernible difference in location (for example different level,
    suite, room etc.), or
-   a different business operating at the same location (must be using a
    different ABN)

Acceptable scenarios:

Second provider number location

-   Existing location: Level 1, 2 Smith Street, Smithtown ABN 123456789
-   New Application: Level 10, 2 Smith Street, Smithtown ABN 123456789

Second provider number ABN

-   Existing location: 2 Smith Street, Smithtown, My Practice ABN
    123456789
-   New location: 2 Smith Street, Smithtown, Our Practice ABN 987654321

Change of location address

If there is no change to the physical location, for example the council
changes the suburb name, a new provider number is not issued and the
address is updated in PDS.

Documentary evidence such as a council notice must be provided. If no
evidence is supplied, or if uncertain about validity of request,
escalate to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) for a determination.

Provider number location start and end dates

Applicants are required to nominate a start date when opening a new
provider number location. If a start date not supplied it will default
to the date the application was received.

A request for a start date for a location prior to the date Services
Australia received the application is considered a request to backdate.

A location end date is not mandatory but must be recorded when provided.

Backdating a location start date

This is when the applicant requests the start date of a location is
before the date the application was received.

Assess the request prior to processing. Ensure the health professional
had current registration enabling them to access Medicare entitlements
at the date requested.

See Provider number for health professionals in Medicare for information
on backdating provider number requests.

For help with backdating requests, contact a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) in the first instance. Complex matters may need to a Programme
Officer (PO) who may escalate to National Office.

Closure of a provider number and/or location

Closure of provider number stem

Closing a health professional's stem means the health professional is no
longer an eligible Medicare health professional, at any location, from
the closure date.

Closure can be notified to Services Australia via:

-   email (only) from the health professional's accrediting body
-   a signed written request from the health professional
-   phone call from the health professional, or their authorised
    representative. Perform a security check with the health
    professional or authorised representative
-   phone or written request from a representative of an estate where
    health professional is deceased. Escalate to a Programme Support
    Officer (PSO) for action. The PSO will escalate to a Programme
    officer (PO) if further investigation is required

Closure of location/s only

Health Professionals should close (end-date) any locations they no
longer work at. Closure of an individual location means the health
professional is no longer able to claim Medicare benefits for services,
or refer and/or request, at that location from the closure date. This
also prevents fraudulent use of the provider number.

Location closure can be notified via:

-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS), the preferred option
-   a signed written request from the health professional
-   a phone call from the health professional or an authorised
    representative. Perform a security check with the health
    professional or authorised representative

Closure requests from any other source are re-categorised in PaNDA to a
PSO. The Process page has further information for closing stems and
locations.

Inconsistent or incomplete applications

An application is inconsistent when:

-   the outcome differs from what was requested
-   health professional not registered with relevant registration body

For example, a requested start date cannot be granted because the
applicant was not registered with the Board at that time.

An application is incomplete when the form:

-   has not been completed correctly
-   is missing mandatory information

For example, no bank details provided where intending to claim Medicare
benefits or incorrect qualifications.

The Resources page contains links to letters and forms, information
about obtaining business structure details, troubleshooting address
problems, a provider number quick reference guide and processing source
office codes.

Related links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registration for
Medicare

PDS field codes for allied health and non-medical health professionals

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioner - provider
eligibility and registration

Aboriginal Health Worker - provider eligibility and registration

Accredited exercise physiologist - provider eligibility and registration

Accredited practicing dietitian - provider eligibility and registration

Audiologist - provider eligibility and registration

Chiropractor – provider eligibility and registration

Dental practitioners - provider eligibility and registration

Diabetes educator - provider eligibility and registration

Focussed psychological strategies (FPS) - Allied Health

Mental health nurse - provider eligibility and registration

Midwives - provider eligibility and registration

Nurse practitioner - provider eligibility and registration

Occupational therapist - provider eligibility and registration

Optometrist - provider eligibility and registration

Orthoptist - provider eligibility and registration

Osteopath - provider eligibility and registration

Physiotherapist – provider eligibility and registration

Podiatrist – provider eligibility and registration

Psychologist - provider eligibility and registration

Speech Pathologist - provider eligibility and registration

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
