
Eye Programs in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-18032900

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about PBS-subsidised aflibercept,
brolucizumab, dexamethasone implant and ranibizumab for patients with
subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation (CNV), diabetic macular oedema
(DMO) and retinal vein occlusion (RVO).

CNV and listing dates

Subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation (CNV) is a major cause of vision
loss. It can be due to a number of conditions including age-related
macular degeneration (AMD), pathologic myopia and other rare causes.

Listing dates are:

-   ranibizumab - 1 August 2007 (AMD only)
-   aflibercept - 1 December 2012
-   brolucizumab – 01 October 2021 (AMD only)

DMO and listing dates

Diabetic macular oedema (DMO) is an accumulation of fluid in the eye due
to leaking blood vessels. Diabetic retinopathy causes vessel damage.

Listing dates are:

-   ranibizumab - 1 July 2015
-   aflibercept - 1 October 2015
-   dexamethasone implant - 1 November 2016

RVO and listing dates

A retinal vein occlusion (RVO) is a blockage of one of the veins in the
retina. There is central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) and branched
retinal vein occlusion (BRVO).

Listing dates are:

-   ranibizumab - 1 July 2015
-   aflibercept - 1 October 2015
-   dexamethasone implant - 1 November 2018

For more information, see Written Authority Required Drugs.

Enquiries

Transfer enquiries about prescription arrangements to the PBS Complex
Drugs Programs team and choose the option relevant to the condition
treated.

The Resources page contains links to application forms, contact details,
item and restriction codes, the PBS schedule and Services Australia
website.

Related links

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process telephone Authority approval application

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Processing Written Authority Required Listings

Written Authority Required Drugs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
