
3GA placements pre 1 January 2019 012-18060700

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to register, extend or remove pre 1 January
2019 3GA placements for a medical practitioner subject to section 19AA
of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act).

Section 3GA of the Health Insurance Act 1973

The purpose of section 3GA of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) is
to provide for registration of certain medical practitioners in approved
training or workforce placements.

Section 19AA of the Act states a medical practitioner who first became a
medical practitioner on or after 1 November 1996 must be a general
practitioner, specialist or consultant physician before a Medicare
benefit can be payable. Section 3GA of the Act allows a medical
practitioner to satisfy section 19AA of the Act where an approved 3GA
program placement has been received and processed.

Section 3GA of the Health Insurance Act 1973 Purpose

A medical practitioner enrolled in a section 3GA training program can
access a Medicare benefit while undertaking training towards their
chosen post-graduate qualification.

Important changes to 3GA placement programs from 1 January 2019

Changes to the 3GA General Practitioner (GP) College Fellowship pathways
came into effect 1 January 2019. Under these arrangements, placements
received from 1 January 2019 are registered under 1 of 3 pathways:

-   Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) 3GA
    pathway
-   Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM) 3GA pathway
-   More Doctors for Rural Australia Program (MDRAP) 3GA pathway

Medical practitioners registered on existing programs before 1 January
2019 can continue on that pathway until 30 June 2023. Existing programs
include:

-   Approved Medical Deputising Service (AMDS) - issued by the
    Department of Health and Aged Care
-   Approved Private Emergency Department (APED) - issued by the
    Department of Health and Aged Care
-   Australian General Practice Training (AGPT) - issued by the
    Department of Health and Aged Care
-   Queensland Country Relieving Program (QCRP) - issued by Queensland
    Health
-   Remote Vocational Training Scheme (RVTS) - issued by Remote
    Vocational Training Scheme Ltd
-   Rural Locum Relief Program (RLRP) - issued by state based
    organisations (for a list of state based RLRP agency names, see the
    Resources page)
-   Special Approved Placement Program (SAPP) - issued by the Department
    of Health and Aged Care
-   Specialist College Trainee Placement - issued by various Specialist
    Colleges
-   Temporary Resident Other Medical Practitioner (TROMP) - issued by
    the Department of Health and Aged Care

Note: medical practitioner’s may be registered on both pre and post 1
January 2019 pathway arrangements. 3GA Placements post 1 January 2019
contains a diagram detailing how to assess applications.

For more information about the 1 January 2019 3GA pathway arrangements
see 3GA Placements post 1 January 2019.

Approved Medical Deputising Service (AMDS)

AMDS placements are issued to medical practitioners working in an
after-hours medical deputising service. Medical Deputising Services
provide urgent, after-hours primary health care to patients at home and
in aged care facilities, on behalf of the patient's regular GP.

AMDS placements allow access to the A2 category items in the Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Approved Private Emergency Department Program (APED)

APED placements are issued to advanced medical practitioner specialist
trainees undertaking emergency medicine training to work under
supervision in an accredited private hospital emergency departments.
There are 8 accredited private hospital emergency departments where an
APED placement may be issued.

APED placements allow access to the A2 category items in the MBS.

Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM) Independent Pathway

Approved ACRRM placements are issued to medical practitioners
undertaking a specialist general practitioner training and education
program.

ACRRM placements allow access to the A1 category items in the MBS
Schedule.

Australian General Practice Training (AGPT)

AGPT placements are issued to medical practitioners undertaking
vocational training to specialise in general practice. Training is
provided in urban, regional and rural locations and is delivered through
regional training providers.

AGPT placements allow access to the A1 category items in the MBS.

Queensland Country Relieving Program (QCRP)

The QCRP provides locum services to Queensland Health's rural medical
practitioners by drawing on a pool of junior medical staff employed
within the State's public hospitals. Approved QCRP placements are issued
to medical practitioners undertaking locum positions only.

QCRP placements allow access to the A2 category items in the MBS.

Remote Vocational Training Scheme (RVTS)

The RVTS was introduced to address health service needs in Australia's
remote communities.

The Scheme allows registrars on an approved RVTS placement to remain in
one location for the period of their training, supported by distance
education and remote supervision. The RVTS provides an alternative route
to vocational recognition for remote practitioners who are in solo
doctor towns or where their departure would otherwise have a detrimental
impact on the local community.

Rural Locum Relief Program (RLRP)

RLRP placements are issued to medical practitioners undertaking
placements in a rural or remote setting. The Resources page contains a
table of the state based Rural Locum Relief Program (RLRP) agency names.

RLRP placements allow access to the A2 category items in the MBS.

Special Approved Placement Program (SAPP)

SAPP placements are issued to medical practitioners working in
metropolitan areas. The medical practitioners must demonstrate
exceptional circumstances that make them unable to participate on any
other workforce or training program.

SAPP placements allow access to the A2 category items in the MBS.

Specialist College Trainee Placement

Specialist College Trainee Placements are issued to medical
practitioners undertaking a structured training program with the aim of
working towards recognition of a specialist medical college.

Colleges approved to issue a Specialist College Trainee Placement are:

-   Australasian College of Dermatologists (ACD)
-   Australasian College of Emergency Medicine (ACEM)
-   Australasian College of Sport and Exercise Physicians (ACSEP)
-   Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists (ANZCA)
-   Royal Australasian College of Medical Administrators (RACMA)
-   Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP)
-   Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS)
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and
    Gynaecologists (RANZCOG)
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists
    (RANZCO)
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists (RANZCP)
-   Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists (RANZCR)
-   Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA)

Specialist College Trainee Placements allow access to the A2 category
items in the MBS.

Temporary Resident Other Medical Practitioner (TROMP)

The TROMP program was introduced to overcome an unintended consequence
of amendments to the 1996 Medicare provider number legislation. The
amendments would have resulted in a number of long-term temporary
resident medical practitioners losing access to Medicare benefits. This
affected temporary resident medical practitioners who had entered
medical practice in Australia prior to 1 January 1997 and who were not
vocationally recognised. The program was established to allow indefinite
access to Medicare benefits for eligible medical practitioners.

Medical practitioners do not need to apply for an assessment to be
conducted. Services Australia assess the practitioner against the
eligibility criteria and notify the Provider Eligibility team in
National office. The medical practitioner is advised of their
eligibility by Services Australia. A TROMP placement is:

-   non-location specific
-   issued once, and
-   recognition is added at stem level only

Eligibility requirements

A medical practitioner must:

-   have been licenced or registered as a medical practitioner in an
    Australian state or territory prior to 1 January 1997
-   have been either a temporary resident or resident of New Zealand on
    18 October 2001, and
-   be subject to Medicare provider number restrictions under sections
    19AA or 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973

A TROMP placement allows access to the A2 category items in the MBS.

Removal from section 3GA placement

Section 3GB of the Health Insurance Act 1973 states a medical
practitioner may be removed from the Register of Approved Placements
(the Register) if the:

-   medical practitioner requests
-   Department of Health and Aged Care or Registered Training
    Organisation (RTO) gives written notice to remove the medical
    practitioner
-   regulations require that the medical practitioner’s name be removed
    from the Register

Before removing the medical practitioner’s name from the Register,
Services Australia must give the medical practitioner written notice
that their name is to be removed. Removal from Register of Approved
Placements cannot be less than 14 days after the date in which
notification was given.

Notification of removal from an approved 3GA placement may be in the
form of:

-   receipt of an additional approved 3GA placement where a medical
    practitioner is on an existing approved 3GA placement at the same
    location at the same location
-   receipt of removal from the Department of Health and Aged Care or a
    Registered Training Organisation (RTO)
-   signed letter requesting to close the 3GA placement recorded against
    a provider number
-   phone call from the medical practitioner requesting to close the 3GA
    placement recorded against a provider number

Note: a request to close a provider number location does not remove an
approved 3GA placement from that location.

Regulation 61(2)(b)

Regulation 61(2)(b):

-   is a provision within Division 6 in the Health Insurance Regulations
    2018 that allows Medicare benefits to be paid for a specified period
    beyond a 3GA placement
-   is to be used to extend an existing 3GA placement
-   cannot be used to backdate a new 3GA placement
-   requests to apply the regulation must be escalated to a Programme
    Officer for approval prior to processing
-   Regulation 61(2)(b)(i) can be applied up to 2 weeks after the end
    date of the existing 3GA placement and requires APS5 delegate
    approval
-   Regulation 61(2)(b)(ii) can be applied up to 6 weeks after the end
    date of the existing 3GA placement and requires EL1 delegate
    approval

The Resources page contains forms, letters, contact details, a link to
the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency website and a list
of state based Rural Locum Relief Program (RLRP) agency names.

Related links

Provider registration Coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Other Medical Practitioners programs for Medicare

3GA Placements post 1 January 2019

Section 19(2) and 19(5) directions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
