
3GA placements post 1 January 2019 012-18120515

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about 3GA placement programs from 1
January 2019, including the Royal Australian College of general
Practitioners (RACGP) – Practice Experience Program (PEP), the
Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACCRM) – Independent
Pathway (IP) and the More Doctors for Rural Australia Program (MDRAP).
It also includes information about processing Placement notifications in
the Provider Directory System (PDS).

3GA placement program pathways from 1 January 2019

New arrangements to the 3GA College Fellowship pathways came into effect
1 January 2019. Under these arrangements, placements are registered
under one of three pathways:

-   Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) 3GA
    pathway
-   Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM) 3GA pathway
-   More Doctors for Rural Australia Program (MDRAP) 3GA pathway

The streams that are associated with each of the pathways above are:

-   Australian General Practice Training (AGPT) – RACGP
-   Remote Training – RACGP
-   Practice Experience Program - RACGP
-   Australian General Practice Training (AGPT) – ACRRM
-   Remote Training – ACRRM
-   Independent Pathway – ACRRM
-   Rural – MDRAP
-   After-hours – MDRAP

The Resources page contains a diagram showing the different pathways and
streams.

19AB Class Exemption for post 1 January 2019 3GA placement program pathways

There is a 3GA class exemption to cover applicants who have an approved
placement under the post 1 January 2019 3GA college training pathways.
The class exemption requires the placement to be in a location within a
Distribution Priority Area (DPA) (formerly known as a District of
Workforce Shortage). See 19AB class exemptions for medical practitioners
in Medicare for information on how to process these placements.

Changes to pre-1 January 2019 3GA placement program pathways

Practitioners registered on existing 3GA program placements before 1
January 2019 can continue on that pathway until 30 June 2023. See 3GA
placements pre 1 January 2019 for pre-budget measure processes.

Once a practitioner has moved to the post 1 January 2019 pathway
arrangements, they should not be registered on a pre 1 January 2019
program pathway.

Note: placements under the pre-1 January 2019 arrangements can still be
registered from 1 January 2019. The Resources contains information about
how to identify placements and a diagram showing the different pathways
and streams.

Overview of GP college pathway 3GA placement programs

3GA Placement Programs provide a pathway for non-vocationally recognised
medical practitioners to work towards fellowship with either the RACGP
or ACRRM.

The Resources page contains a flow chart showing the different 3GA
Placement Program pathways.

Overview of More Doctors for Rural Australia Program (MDRAP)

The MDRAP is one pathway under a broader group of 3GA Placement Programs
provides non-vocationally recognised medical practitioners with access
to the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) while working in approved
locations.

Medical practitioners participating in the MDRAP program will be
registered under one of the two distinct streams under MDRAP:

-   a rural stream
-   an after-hours stream

The Resources page contains a link to the MDRAP website for more
information about the program.

Eligibility to receive Medicare benefits – RACGP and ACRRM Pathways

Eligibility to participate in a 3GA college pathway program is
determined by the RACGP or ACRRM. For a period of time, the Department
of Health and Aged Care may approve and forward these placements
directly to Services Australia.

Medical practitioners wishing to access the higher Medicare benefit
amount (100 per cent of the schedule fee) for General Practitioner
(Group A1) attendance items in the MBS can be either:

-   registered as a Specialist General Practitioner or as a Specialist,
    or
-   enrolled in an approved college training pathway placement program
    under section 3GA of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act)

Medicare benefits will only be paid where the practitioner is registered
with the Medical Board of Australia and satisfies any other legislative
provisions that may apply at the date of service.

Some program participants may be subject to the restrictions on
accessing Medicare benefits under Section 19AB of the Health Insurance
Act 1973. Participants must therefore have a valid section 19AB
exemption for the location and period of the placement to access
Medicare benefits, in addition to the approved 3GA program placement.

See Provider number applications for medical practitioners and their
requirements under the Health Insurance Act 1973 for more information.

The References page contains links to the legislation and determination.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule

Eligibility to receive Medicare benefits – MDRAP Pathway

Eligibility to participate in the MDRAP 3GA Program is determined by the
Department of Health and Aged Care.

Registration on the MDRAP pathway provides medical practitioners access
to a range of MBS items. The benefits for MBS items paid under the MDRAP
pathway attract a benefit rate of 80 per cent of the schedule fee.

Medicare benefits will only be paid where the practitioner is registered
with the Medical Board of Australia and satisfies any other legislative
provisions that may apply at the date of service.

Some program participants may be subject to the restrictions on
accessing Medicare benefits under Section 19AB of the Health Insurance
Act 1973. Participants must therefore have a valid section 19AB
exemption for the location and period of the placement to access
Medicare benefits, in addition to the approved placement.

See Provider number applications for medical practitioners and their
requirements under the Health Insurance Act 1973 for more information.

The References page contains links to the legislation and determination.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule

Applying to be registered in a 3GA Program- ACGP, ACRRM or MDRAP

Medical practitioners must apply directly to the Department of Health
and Aged Care, the RACGP or ACRRM to be included in a post 1 January
2019 3GA or MDRAP placement.

The agency will only accept notifications from the relevant organisation
and update the Medicare record on the PDS as required.

The Resources page contains a flow chart showing the 3GA placement
program pathway.

The Resources page contains a flow chart showing the 3GA placement
program pathway, a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule, the Specialty
code descriptions in PDS for ACRRM, RACGP, MDRAP and other Department of
Health and Aged Care and Pre 1 January 2019 3GA placement pathway
arrangement, the approving bodies for each placement program and a link
to the MDRAP website.

Related links

Other Medical Practitioners programs for Medicare

19AB class exemptions for medical practitioners in Medicare

Applying for and processing a section 19AB(3) exemption with the
department of Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
