
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Confirmation Statement process.

Annual Confirmation Statement

At the start of May each year, practices are sent an Annual Confirmation
Statement (ACS). This will not be sent to practices approved for the PIP
in the preceding 6 months.

An ACS will show all information on the practice profile.

A practice must review the information on each page of the ACS and
confirm their practice details. This includes their eligibility for the:

-   PIP, and
-   individual incentives

The below individual incentives do not show on the ACS and therefore
practices do not need to confirm their eligibility for the:

-   General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (ACAI)
-   Rural Loading payment
-   Teaching Incentive

A practice receives and confirms their ACS via:

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

-   if the practice’s online subscriptions is set to ‘access online’
-   most changes made through HPOS are effective immediately. They can
    be made up to and on 31 July

mail

-   if the practice’s online subscriptions is set to ‘receive printed
    copy via mail’
-   must be submitted at least 7 days before the relevant point-in-time
    date

On receipt of the ACS, the practice must:

-   check that all the details on the ACS are correct
-   submit the ACS via HPOS or sign the declaration page and return by
    fax / email

Only the declaration page needs to be submitted. If there are changes to
practice details, the practice must also submit the relevant page.

The practice payments will be automatically put on hold if a practice
does not confirm their ACS by the 31 July. The practice can still submit
their ACS after this date. When the ACS has been submitted and
confirmed, the practice payments will be released in a fortnightly
payment run. See Payments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Changes to the practice details

A practice can make changes to the details on the Annual Confirmation
Statement (ACS).

The Resources page has a list of acceptable changes.

The Resources page contains

-   Acceptable changes on the ACS
-   Scenarios if the ACS is not processed by 31 July
-   Exceptional circumstances
-   Letters
-   Contacts
-   Guidelines
-   Relevant Services Australia website links

Related links

Forms and letters for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Online Services for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
