
Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies 043-22022208

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides details of the Boosting Apprenticeship
Commencements (BAC) and Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC)
wage subsidies.

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC)

The Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) wage subsidy supports
businesses and Group Training Organisations (employers) that engage an
eligible apprentice or trainee between 5 October 2020 and 30 June 2022.
Employers may receive a subsidy of 50 per cent of gross wages paid to a
new or recommencing apprentice or trainee for the 12-month period from
the date of commencement. The maximum amount is $7,000 per quarter per
apprentice and capped at $28,000 for the 12 month period.

See the BAC and CAC subsidies table on the Resources page.

Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC)

After 12 months of BAC, employers may be eligible for the Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidy for the second and third
year of an apprenticeship. Under the CAC, eligible employers will
receive per apprentice:

-   10% wage subsidy for the second year up to $1,500 per quarter, and
-   5% wage subsidy for the third year, up to $750 per quarter

The CAC subsidy is only available to employers who have already
registered for the BAC subsidy.

See the BAC and CAC subsidies table on the Resources page.

Claiming BAC and CAC

Before claiming a BAC or CAC wage subsidy, eligible employers must
complete the BAC registration form with an Australian Apprenticeship
Support Network Provider (AASN). BAC registrations close on 30 June
2022. The relevant State Training Authority must approve the training
contract before the employer is eligible to claim BAC or CAC.

BAC and CAC wage subsidies are claimed in arrears on a quarterly basis.

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) will advise
eligible employers to lodge their claim in the Apprenticeship Data
Management System (ADMS) portal. Claims for BAC and CAC can be lodged
after the wage period being claimed concludes (the effect date).
Employers will receive notification from DEWR when a claim has been
created for them to review and submit. This may be up to 15 days after
the wage period ends. For example, although an employer can lodge a
claim from 1 July, the effect date where they are claiming the wage
subsidy for wages paid 1 April to 30 June of that year, a claim may not
be created in ADMS for their completion until 15 July. The employer will
receive an email from DEWR notifying them when the claim is ready for
their action.

Employers must:

-   provide evidence of wages paid to the apprentice or trainee to
    support their claim
-   submit evidence that training has commenced for the apprentice.
    Evidence that 'training has commenced' relates to the formal
    training component of an apprenticeship or traineeship. For example,
    through a TAFE or other Registered Training Organisation. Employers
    generally provide this evidence to support their first BAC claim

Note: wage evidence must be provided to support all BAC and CAC claims,
however commencement of training evidence is required only once, unless
the apprentice's workplace is based in an exempt state or territory.

Time limits for BAC for CAC claims

Employers have time limits to lodge their claims for each claim period.

See the Resources page for the BAC and CAC processing arrangements,
effect dates and claiming time limits table.

Apprenticeship Data Management System (ADMS)

Employers use Apprenticeship Data Management System (ADMS) to lodge BAC
and CAC claims. Services Australia staff use DEWR logons to access and
verify evidence for BAC and CAC claims in ADMS.

Processing Arrangements

From 11 April 2022, Services Australia on behalf of the DEWR, started
verifying evidence for BAC and CAC claims lodged on or after 9 April
2022, for wages paid from 1 January 2022 onwards.

Australian Apprenticeship Support Network Provider (AASN) providers
process BAC and CAC claims for wages paid from 5 October 2020 to 31
December 2021.

See the Resources page for the BAC and CAC processing arrangements,
effect dates and claiming time limits table.

Staff roles and responsibilities

Services Australia staff are not responsible for:

-   determining eligibility for the BAC and CAC wage subsidies
-   providing advice or assistance on the myGov ID registration process
-   providing IT or ADMS navigation support
-   claims for wages paid from 5 October 2020 to 31 December 2021
-   reassessment of rejected claims
-   appeals, complaints, compliance or debt actions

Australian Apprenticeship Support Network (AASN) Providers determine
eligibility for BAC and CAC. Refer employers enquiring about eligibility
to their AASN provider.

Services Australia staff are responsible for:

-   verifying BAC and CAC claim evidence where a claim cannot be
    finalised through automation, and
-   providing a telephony service for employer enquiries about their BAC
    or CAC claim

Note: ADMS will determine and pay the subsidy amount.

See the Australian Apprenticeships Incentives Program – Program
Guidelines on the References page.

The Resources page contains details on BAC and CAC subsidies, processing
arrangements, effect dates and claiming time limits.

Contents

Verifying evidence for Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Employer enquiries about Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
