
Review of a Special Disability Trust (SDT) 043-04070070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Special Disability Trusts (SDT) are subject
to annual reviews to ensure they are conforming to the legislative
requirements to maintain their concessional status.

Trustee's reviews and beneficiaries

The SDT is reviewed annually to ensure it continues to meet the
legislative requirements of an SDT. The beneficiary's compliance is not
reviewed. Once a person with a disability is assessed as meeting the
requirements of an SDT they are considered to meet the requirements on a
permanent basis and only the trust itself is reviewed.

SDT annual reviews

When an SDT is first approved, the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) will
set a review for 1  January of the following year to allow time for the
trustee or contact to provide the required documents by 31 March.
Note: if the trust had been set up prior to approval and has already
been in existence past a financial year, the CAO will need to request
the full financial statements, trust tax return (if lodged) and
statutory declarations (with a review for their return).

When the annual review matures, a letter issues to the nominated contact
of the SDT requesting financial statements, income tax return (if
lodged), trustee(s) statutory declaration(s) and donor
register/contribution updates (if applicable).

If the documentation is not supplied by 31 March and there is no
entitlement to a waiver, the trust may lose its concessional status as
an SDT. If this happens, the income and assets of the trust will be
subject to the normal private trusts and company rules and any gifts to
the trust may be subject to the deprivation provisions.

Audit

An audit of an SDT:

-   is only to be requested by Services Australia if there is an
    indication that trust funds have been used inappropriately or
    outside the SDT regulations, or during the review of a decision.
    This would be paid for by the trust
-   can be requested by the Principal Beneficiary, an Immediate Family
    Member, a legal guardian or financial administrator of the Principal
    Beneficiary (under Commonwealth, State or Territory law) or a person
    acting as guardian for the Principal Beneficiary on a long-term
    basis

If an audit is requested, a copy of the audit report must be provided to
Services Australia as delegate of the Secretary.

The minimum period an audit can be requested for is a single financial
year, with the maximum period being 5 financial years.

The Resources page contains the current and historical discretionary
spending limits and a link to information about the Trustee’s Statutory
Declaration that includes the required content for the Statutory
Declaration Reasons.

Related links

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - Initial contact

Assessing a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Special Disability Trust (SDT) beneficiary assessment process

Cessation of a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Gifting concessions to a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Coding a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Trusts

Assessing house and curtilage

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
