
Share traders 043-03040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify if a customer or the business in
which they are involved, is a share trader, and how to assess the income
and assets for share traders.

Determining who is a share trader

In deciding whether a person is a share trader the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) takes into account:

-   the frequency of buying and selling investments
-   the objective of buying and selling investments

Share traders generally buy and sell listed securities. A listed
security includes shares and other products traded on a stock exchange,
either in Australia or overseas. In determining whether a person is a
share trader, the definition of investment also includes all types of
tradable securities and investments, not only investments traded on a
stock exchange. Therefore, in addition to company shares, a share trader
may deal in other products that are regarded as financial investments.

If a person or business is a share trader they will be trading (buying
and selling) investments more frequently than a person or business
entity which is merely an investor in the same product. In addition, the
objective in buying and selling investments is to make a profit from
this trading, whereas an investor holds the investment for the return
that the investment itself will provide. It is not relevant whether the
investments are traded within Australia or overseas or on a stock
exchange.

If the customer is involved in a sole trader or partnership business
structure which is considered to be undertaking business as a share
trader, then the customer is regarded as a person who carries on a
business, and the profit earned from this activity is regarded as
business income.

Generally, it will be accepted that a customer is a share trader, if
their personal and business income tax returns (ITRs) specify investment
trading as the main activity undertaken by the business.

Assessment of income

A customer who is considered to be a share trader is regarded as a
person who carries on a business and the deeming provisions in section
1075(2) of the Social Security Act 1991 do not apply to the assessment
of income from investments held by the business. The profit of the
enterprise is assessed under the rules relating to assessment of
business income, including section 1075 of the Social Security Act which
deals with permissible reductions of business income. This means that
expenses such as brokerage fees, bank fees and charges, are allowable as
deductions as they are costs directly related to the income generated by
the business.

Where the business receives a small amount of income from activities
other than investment trading, the usual rules regarding offsetting
losses against profits from other business activities apply.

Assessment of assets

-   The balance sheet value of the portfolio of investments held as
    assets of a share trader is assessed for Assets Test purposes
-   Taking into account the nature of the activities undertaken by a
    share trader, this balance sheet value is considered to provide a
    reasonably accurate indication of the current market value of
    investments held by a share trader
-   Where the business has assets other than investments, these are
    assessed at current market value and included when determining the
    overall value of the business

If a person or business is not considered to be a share trader, that is,
they are an investor; the normal means testing rules for financial
investments apply. Investments of a sole trader or partnership business
are assessed as financial assets of the owner(s) of the business, and
the income assessments are determined through application of the deeming
provisions. Other procedures cover the assessment of income and assets
of financial assets of businesses that are not considered share traders.

Notifying the customer of the assessment

Once the assessable income and assets in respect of a business operating
as a share trader has been determined, the customer should be advised in
writing of the assessment and how the determination was reached. The
advice should also inform the customer of their obligations to notify of
any increase in the income or asset position of the business.

The customer should also be advised of the requirement to provide the
annual business income tax return (ITR), financial statements and
customer's (and partner's if applicable) personal ITR.

Assessment of gainful work for the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

If a person or family company is trading in shares (securities or
investments) owned by themselves or their family this would not
considered to be gainful work for the purpose of passing the work test
for the PBS.

Related links

Factors to determine self-employment

Steps to making an assessment of a business

Assessing sole trader income

Assessing sole trader assets

Assessing partnership income

Assessing partnership assets

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Deeming provisions

Complex Assessment Officers (CAO)

Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
