-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to assess interim profit and loss
statements for customers involved in a business.

Source of assessment

Customers will often provide their business income statement (profit and
loss statement), or fortnightly/3 monthly income and expense statements
to Centrelink. If the business has assets, a balance sheet may also be
required.

Service Officers and Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) are not expected
to fulfil the role of accountants for customers and should not attempt
to undertake the calculation of the net profit of a business from the
books of accounts. In these situations, the customer must provide a
completed Profit and Loss Statement (SU580) for the relevant period.

Use these documents to calculate the current annual rate of income
earned by the customer from a business. The underlying basic principle
is annualising the assessed current annual rate of business net income
using the interim profit and loss from an immediate past period. For
example, annualised income from the last 3 months.

There will be some instances where an interim profit and loss from an
immediate past period is not used. These include where a business has
just commenced trading, or where the interim profit and loss from an
immediate past period does not represent a true picture of the current
annual rate of business net income.

Newly commenced business

When a business has just commenced trading, a customer may make an
estimate of the likely future net business income until an interim
profit and loss from an immediate past period is available.

Where the past period profit and loss statement is not representative of
the true financial position of the business, an estimate of business net
income should be obtained and used until an annual financial statement
is available. For example, a farmer purchases a farm in May, claims an
income support payment in August but will possibly not receive any farm
income until the following March.

Downturn in business

The principle is to use the current rate of income earned by a customer
from a business. The usual approach is to base the assessment of a
business upon the most recently available financial statements and
taxation return.

Where there is a change in circumstances and the previous financial
statements no longer provide an accurate indication of the current rate
of income, make a reassessment based on available evidence. A revised or
interim profit and loss statement incorporating the change to the
business and reflecting the current income and expenses of the business
is required. Where a customer has difficulty in providing this
information, suggest they seek assistance from their accountant. If the
business is a private trust or private company, Service Officers must
refer the case to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).

Where the customer has indicated there has been a downturn in business,
see Unexpected downturn of a business.

Calculating assessable net business income

When calculating the assessable net business income from an interim
profit and loss statement, Service Officers and CAOs must:

check:

-   type of business structure customer is involved in
-   income cut-off points for the customer's payment
-   figures on the profit and loss statement are reasonable
-   for any non-allowable deductions
-   for any one-off income or expenses (unlikely to be repeated)

apportion expenses over the same period as the income

assess any:

-   investments held by the business
-   other income customer receives from the business

annualise the net business income:

-   for sole traders and partnerships, use 364 days. Social Security Act
    1991, section 1073
-   for private trusts and private companies, use 365 days. Social
    Security Act 1991, section 1207Y

Service Officers and CAOs must use the correct date of event for
business income and assets.

The Resources page contains links to the Profit and Loss Statement
(SU580) and interim profit and loss calculators.

Related links

Allowance income and assets tests

Assessing partnership income

Assessing sole trader income

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Business structures and assessment

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Complex Assessment Officers (CAOs)

Income and expenses of a business

Pensions income and assets tests

Raising social security debts due to self-employment or business income

Seasonal business activity has ceased completely

The profit and loss statement

Unexpected downturn of a business

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
