
Completing the Private Trust details in the MOD PT 043-04020030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete the private trust details in a
Module Private Trust (MOD PT). A MOD PT is used where a customer has
indicated they (or their partner) are, or in the last 5 years prior to
claiming income support were, involved in a private trust.

On this Page:

Purpose of MOD PT

The information collected in conjunction with the MOD PT enables
Services Australia to assess income and assets from a private trust.

The MOD PT provides the following details:

-   all parties acting as appointers and trustees
-   all unit holders and the nature and extent of their unit holding
-   contributors and the extent of their contribution
-   genuine investors and the extent of their investment (equity
    contribution)
-   customer's loans to the trust and the extent of those loans (loan
    contribution)
-   customers who have made gifts and the extent of their gifts (gift
    contribution)
-   the relationship of the parties to each other
-   percentage of income from personal exertion for Work Bonus eligible
    customers

All private trusts require the completion of a MOD PT

Assistance in completing the MOD PT

As much of the information required on the MOD PT is only available from
those who know the details of the trust, staff will not be able to help
the customer complete the form. Services Australia suggests the customer
talks to the trust tax agent or accountant and considers having them
complete the form on their behalf. However, it is still the
responsibility of the customer to ensure the form is completed and
returned. If a customer (or their partner) requires an accountant or tax
agent to assist in completing the form, the department will not
reimburse any fees charged.

Documentation required

The MOD PT requires customers (and/or their partners) to attach
documents such as taxation returns, profit and loss statements, balance
sheets, depreciation schedules, trust deeds, etc. When the MOD PT is
returned, Service Officers (SO) should ensure that all questions on the
form have been completed and that the appropriate documents have been
attached. See Documents required to assess a private trust for guidance.
The SO should first scan all the documents provided and then run the CAO
referral script or CAO Referral Guided Procedure. This will initiate the
referral to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) to complete the
assessment.

If the customer (or their partner) is involved in more than one private
trust a separate MOD PT is required for each private trust. Customers
(or their partners) who indicate they are involved in a business as a
sole trader or are a member of a partnership need to complete a Module F
(Business). If they are involved in a private company, they will need to
complete a Module PC (Private Company).

The Resources page contains a link to the Private Trust form (MOD PT).

Related links

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships Mod F

Trusts and companies assessment

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
