-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
SDT's income is exempt from the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt
from the assets test as long as the assets are not over the concessional
asset limit. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines an overview of attribution percentage for
individuals who control private trusts and private companies.

Multiple attributable stakeholders

Many private trusts and private companies may appear to have multiple
attributable stakeholders. However, by examining the Private Company
(Mod PC) or Private Trust (Mod PT) forms and other documents available,
it often becomes clear that one person or a group of people have overall
control.

For example, a private company may have issued one share each to four
people, a father, a mother and two adult children. As the parents
control 50 per cent of the voting shares, the assessment would generally
be 100 per cent attribution of the private company's income and assets
to the parents, zero per cent attribution to the children.

Factors considered in determining the attribution percentages

The disallowable instrument Social Security (Attributable Stakeholders
and Attribution Percentages) Principles 2000 outlines a number of
factors to be considered when determining the appropriate attribution
percentage, including:

-   Formal control - see Formal control of a trust and Formal control of
    a company for more information
-   Who makes the day to day decisions regarding the business of the
    entity
-   Contributions to the entity as a portion of the assets of the entity
-   Past benefit
-   Current benefit
-   Future benefit

In most cases the person or people with the formal control will be
involved with the decisions of the entity, receive income, etc.
Therefore, the attribution percentage will be proportionally split
between the formal controllers.

However the legislation and disallowable instrument compel the CAO to
reconsider all the factors in determining both the income and asset
attribution percentages. The person, or people, with the formal control
may have a higher or lower effective control, and this may differ in
relation to income and assets.

For example, the customer may be the sole person with formal control,
but has contributed no more than the other beneficiaries of the entity
and receives only a proportional benefit. In those cases, the
attribution percentage may be reduced from 100 per cent.

For example, a company may have three major shareholders with 26, 28 and
30 per cent respectively. The other 16 per cent of the shares are held
by another 20 unrelated parties, with no more than 1 per cent each. The
minority shareholders are determined not to be attributable stakeholders
due to their lack of influence. The three major shareholders are
attributed one third each. Regardless of their differing shareholding
percentages, they each have equal influence upon one another to exercise
a majority vote.

Pre-existing attributions

Although a CAO may be doing an assessment for only one Centrelink
customer involved in a private trust or private company, it is important
to understand the impact of this assessment on all parties involved in
that trust or company, regardless of whether they are customers or not.
Other parties involved in the trust or company may be current Centrelink
or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers, or potential
customers.

Centrelink and DVA are able to exchange information. Services Australia
Certificate of Disclosure of information to other Commonwealth
Departments or authorities allows the release of information to DVA. If
it is required to confirm if a pre-existing attribution exists, email
the DVA income support payments team.

If DVA have assessed a veteran as having 100 per cent income and asset
attribution, it would not be appropriate to also assess a Centrelink
customer involved in the same company as having a 100 per cent income
and asset attribution, without considering the basis of the DVA
assessment.

The Resources page contains information on confirming contributions to
companies and trusts and an example of the impact of the attribution
assessment on all parties involved in the private trust or private
company. It also has links to the Private Companies form (MOD PC) and
Private Trust form (MOD PT).

Related links

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
