
Business has been sold 043-03130110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of income and assets following the
sale of a business in which a customer has an interest.

Cessation of a business

A business has ceased when:

-   The customer and/or partner has sold the business and there are no
    more assets and no further income will be received, or
-   The business has permanently stopped trading and there are no more
    business assets to assess and no further income will be received

The business may still exist, and therefore hold assets, even if it has
ceased trading. The income earned prior to a customer claiming an income
support payment is not relevant to the assessment of a customer's
entitlement under the Income Test when a business has been sold. A copy
of the contract of sale should be obtained to verify the amount received
for the business, for example, stock, goodwill, licences, or lease.

Where the business activity was undertaken by a sole trader or
partnership, the customer's share of the proceeds received after
repayment of any outstanding loans is an assessable asset. Details are
required of the disbursement of the sale proceeds (for example,
investments made). Any assets not sold should continue to be maintained
and the income and assets of the customer reassessed.

A reassessment of the current rate of income and the assessable value of
the business should be conducted if the sale proceeds are applied toward
either of the following:

-   The commencement of a new business
-   The acquisition of an established enterprise to be conducted as an
    ongoing business

Lump sum payment

A lump sum (one off, irregular or non-periodical) payment of a
remunerative nature (for example, salary, wages, commissions, fees)
received from a private trust or company after claim, will be treated as
income for a period of up to 52 weeks from the date the customer is
entitled to receive the payment.

Distributions or dividends paid from a private trust or company to a
non-controller, will continue to be assessed as income for 52 weeks even
if a business has been sold or has ceased.

Sale of a business operated through a private trust or private company

If a business run via a private trust or private company (an entity) is
sold, the case will need to be referred to a Complex Assessment Officer
(CAO). In this case, the CAO will conduct a full review of the entity.

The updated balance sheet of the entity should be obtained, reflecting
what has happened to the sale proceeds of the business and whether these
have been distributed to shareholders or beneficiaries or reinvested by
the entity.

Related links

Income and expenses of a business

Assets and liabilities of a business

The balance sheet

Sole traders

Partnerships

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships Mod F

Complex Assessment Officers (CAO)

Treatment of lump sums

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
