
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify when a customer is involved in a
partnership, and examines the documents required to make this
identification.

On this Page:

Definition of a partnership

A partnership must involve a minimum of 2 people who have a view to make
a profit. The individuals within the partnership each own a share of the
assets of the business and are entitled to a share of the profits made
by the business. Every member of a partnership business is jointly
liable for all the debts of the business.

Identifying existence of a partnership

The following factors may identify the existence of a partnership:

-   Partnership income tax return - which is completed in addition to
    the individual income tax return (ITR)
-   a 'Statement of Distribution' - which will generally be attached to
    the Partnership income tax return and indicates the share of the
    profit and loss applicable to each member of the partnership
-   only the individual partner's portion of the net profit of a
    partnership is declared on the individual ITR
-   business balance sheets which refer to either 'Partner Capital
    Account' or 'Partners Current Account'
-   a partnership agreement exists
-   customer advises they are in a partnership on the Business Details
    (MOD F)

If the business structure is not clearly identifiable, contact the
accountant listed on the MOD F for confirmation.

Features of a partnership

Features of a partnership can include that:

-   The business may be run in the owners' names or under a registered
    business name
-   Each partner owns a share of the business assets and receives a
    share of the profits. Profits and losses are shared equally unless
    agreed otherwise
-   Each partner is 'jointly and severally' liable for all business
    debts. This means if one partner defaults, the others are liable for
    all the business debts
-   A partnership agreement may have been made. This can be oral,
    written or inferred
-   Upon windup of a partnership, the partnership assets are divided
    proportionally as per partnership agreement after payment of debts
    and the return of capital contributed by each member of the
    partnership unless agreed otherwise
-   A partnership usually winds up at the resignation or death of one of
    the partners. However the partnership may continue to operate where
    an agreement has been made for this to occur and the continuing
    members purchase the interest of the retiring or deceased partner

Partnership agreements

A partnership agreement set outs the rights and interest of each member
of the partnership. A partnership agreement can either be written, oral
or inferred by the conduct of the members involved.

The terms of a written agreement can be varied with the consent of all
the partners. This consent may either be written, oral or inferred.

Where a written agreement exists it may specify:

-   the amount of the business that is held for each partner
-   the interest of a partner in relation to a particular asset
-   the method of distribution of capital upon the winding up of the
    partnership

Partnership agreements may vary considerably from very concise details
to a broad statement of the interest of the partners.

Where there is no partnership agreement, state partnership acts contain
provisions outlining the rights and interest of each member of the
partnership.

Taxation and the partnership

Partnerships must lodge a partnership ITR each financial year. These are
used by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for information and cross
referencing purposes.

As part of the partnership ITR, the statement of distribution indicates
the share of the profit or loss for each member of the partnership.

Where a partnership operates at a loss, this loss can be distributed
among the partners. The ATO allows such a loss to be claimed as a
deduction by each member of the partnership on their personal ITRs
against other sources of income. While offsetting of business losses is
allowed for tax purposes, it is not allowed for Centrelink income test
purposes.

State partnership acts

Each state has a Partnership Act. These acts set out that if there is no
agreement to the contrary between the partners, that profits and losses
are to be divided evenly and that the capital of the partnership is held
equally for all the partners.

These acts also specify that upon dissolution of the business, the
assets are to be applied to liabilities and then distributed to partners
in a particular order.

Assessments of partnerships are done by a Service Officer or referred to
a Complex Assessment Officer.

The Resources page contains a link to the online Business Details (MOD
F).

Related links

Assessing partnership income

Assessing partnership assets

Documents required to assess a partnership

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
