
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about revenue received by businesses
and income received by customers from their involvement in a business.
Customers can have an interest in one or more businesses operating as a
sole trader, partnership, private company, private trust or cooperative.

Definition of income under the Social Security Act 1991

Section 8 of the Social Security Act 1991 defines income (in relation to
a person) as:

-   an income amount earned, derived or received by the person for the
    person's own use or benefit
-   a periodical payment by way of gift or allowance
-   a periodical benefit by way of gift or allowance

This section further defines an income amount as an amount earned,
derived or received by a person, whether of a capital nature or not, in
the form of:

-   valuable consideration
-   personal earnings
-   moneys
-   profits

Accordingly, money or profits received by a customer from a business
fall within the section 8 definition of income amount and therefore also
income. Money includes salary, wages, commissions, fees, honoraria, or
interest received by a customer from a business. Profits are a
customer's share of the net profit of a business.

Sole traders and partnerships

For sole traders and partnerships, it is the customer's share of the net
profit earned by the business which is assessable as income.

Private trusts and private companies

For private trusts and private companies, profit includes:

-   dividends or distributions of profit made to shareholders and
    beneficiaries
-   income from rent or lease of an asset, and
-   income amounts attributed to a customer who is an attributable
    stakeholder

The assessable business income attributable to the customer will depend
on the attribution assessment of who controls the entity. Although
distributions are made to shareholders or beneficiaries (from current
and sometimes prior year profits) they are assessed separately from the
business income of the entity.

Sole trader and partnership businesses

The owners of sole trader and partnership businesses have a legal
entitlement to the profits generated by their business. This is in
contrast to profits made by a private company or private trust, which
belong to the private company or private trust until distributed.

Exceptions to rule regarding assessment of gross income

Sections 1075 and 1208B of the Social Security Act 1991 provide an
exception to the general rule of assessing gross income. These relate to
assessment of income where a person or entity carries on a business.
Under these sections, ordinary income from the business is to be reduced
by some losses and outgoings (expenses) which relate to the business and
which are allowable deductions under specific sections of the Income Tax
Assessment Act (ITAA) 1936 and the Income Tax Assessment Act (ITAA)
1997.

The phrase 'carries on a business', used in these sections, has the same
meaning as the term 'carrying on a business' in section 51 of the ITAA
1936 and section 8-1 of the ITAA 1997 (two of the specific sections of
the ITAA referred to in sections 1075 and 1208B of the Social Act 1991).

A business is defined in section 6(1) of the ITAA 1936 as including 'any
profession, trade, employment, vocation or calling', but specifically
excludes 'occupation as an employee', The same definition also applies
to the term used in section 1075 of the Social Security Act 1991, and
accordingly a person working as an employee cannot be regarded as person
who 'carries on a business'.

Consequently, section 1075 cannot apply to a person who is an employee,
and therefore only apply to income arising from business activities.
Generally, a person is regarded as carrying on a business for the
purposes of section 1075 of the Social Security Act 1991 when they are
the owner of a sole trader or partnership business enterprise.

Most common revenue sources

Businesses can receive revenue from many different sources, but the more
common are:

-   trading - provision of goods or services
-   investments - interest, dividends and distributions
-   sale of business assets - apart from stock, which would be included
    in the normal trading figures
-   grants or other assistance - from government and other organisations

Business entity accounting convention

Generally Centrelink uses the business entity accounting convention.
Assets and investments not considered to be related to the principal
function of the business are removed and assessed separately.

Business profit for accounting purposes, taxation purposes and social
security purposes are not the same thing. Accounting profit is
calculated in accordance with various accounting standards. However,
profit for taxation and social security purposes is calculated in
accordance with various legislative provisions. Small businesses with an
annual turnover less than $2 million may be able to access a range of
tax concessions under the small business entity concessions.

Verification of income

The primary source of verification of income should be the latest
available Income Tax Return and associated financial statements, such as
the profit and loss statement. It is important that the Notice of
Assessment is also sighted, when available, to confirm the authenticity
of the return if doubt exists about the taxation return and financial
statements.

Tax return(s) should be sighted and all pages copied to determine which
deductions are not allowable for social security purposes. If the
accountant has used electronic transfer, a full copy of the electronic
return should be sighted and copied to verify all income and its source.
If the customer has completed their own return using a Tax Pack, it will
be necessary to also copy each page in the Tax Pack corresponding with
information provided in response to a question in the Tax Pack, as well
as any accompanying schedules (for example, Tax Pack Supplement or the
Business and Professional Items Schedule).

Rental income

A person who obtains income from rent, letting or leasing an asset will
generally not be regarded as operating a business, but will be regarded
as deriving income from a profit making transaction.

Income from rental is assessed under the general definitions of income
and income amount in section 8 of the Social Security Act 1991, that is,
the net profit earned from rental is assessable as income.

Accordingly, a deduction from gross rental income is allowed in respect
of expenses necessarily incurred in earning the rental income.

Related links

Business deductions

The profit and loss statement

Balancing adjustment on sale of business assets

Livestock trading account

Income tax returns (ITRs) and the taxation notice of assessment (NOA)

Offsetting profit and loss between businesses

How the Goods and Services Tax (GST) affects business income

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Assessing income and assets from cooperatives

Assessing income from seasonal work

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing income and assets for ministers of religion

Sole traders

Partnerships

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies pre 1 January
2002

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies post 1 January
2002

Share traders

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
