
Companies 043-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about companies and the assessment of
income and assets in respect of private companies.

Public or private companies

Companies are categorised into 2 main types when determining entitlement
to income support payments and concessions under the Social Security Act
1991 and the Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986:

-   public companies
-   private companies

Customers can hold investments in public companies. For example, shares,
futures, options, warrants and derivatives. Shares in listed and
unlisted public companies are treated as financial investments.

A private company is a legal entity registered under Corporations Law,
set up to hold property or investments, or to run a business. Overseas
companies not registered under Australian Corporations Law may still be
assessed under Trust and Company rules if they are considered to be
designated and controlled private companies. Private companies are owned
by shareholders and managed by the directors who are elected by the
shareholders.

See the Process page for information on the life of a company and
information for Complex Assessment Officers on how to assess a company
in receivership or liquidation.

Features of a company

-   A company is a separate legal entity from its shareholders and may
    exercise the same powers as a natural person. For example, a company
    can hold assets in its own name and borrow funds
-   The directors control the running of the company on behalf of the
    shareholders
-   The directors are elected by the shareholders at the company's
    annual general meeting
-   A shareholder's liability for the debts of the company is limited to
    the amount of the nominal value of their shares that remains unpaid
-   A company will continue to exist in the events of death or
    bankruptcy of shareholders, or sale of shares by a shareholder
-   Private companies are not allowed to raise capital from public
    subscriptions

Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) role and delegation

CAOs provide specialist advice about a customer's qualification for an
income support payment or other benefit when the customer is involved in
a private company.

The delegation of a customer's qualification for an income support
payment or other benefit is with a Service Officer however CAOs have the
delegation to determine the income and assets to be maintained from a
customer's involvement in a private company. The attribution decision is
made by the CAO based on information provided on the Private Company
(MOD PC) and accompanying documents.

The Resources page contains a link to the Private Company (MOD PC).

Contents

How to identify a private company

Documents required to assess a private company

Completing the Private Company MOD PC

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Roles within a private company

Designated private companies

Controlled private companies

Attributable stakeholders for private companies

Related links

Customer contact regarding trusts and companies program review

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Important screens for private trusts and private companies

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Income and expenses of a business

Assets and liabilities of a business

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Adding shares and securities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
