
Assessment of liabilities for trust and companies 043-04090010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines information on the assessment of liabilities in
regards to private trusts and private companies including secured
liabilities, liabilities secured against exempt assets and loan
acknowledgements.

On this Page:

Reporting on balance sheets

General information about liabilities shown on the balance sheet of a
business is not covered in this procedure. It is covered in the
procedure, Business liabilities.

Some liabilities on the balance sheet are not allowable liabilities for
social security purposes even though they may be allowable as
liabilities for accounting and taxation purposes. This decision will be
made by Complex Assessment Officers (CAO).

Unsecured liabilities, or liabilities secured by a floating charge over
all trust and company assets, are generally allowed, unless they are
loans from controllers or other third parties. In these cases, the
liability will be allowed provided that the entity balance sheet records
the liability and in the case of third parties, the liability is also
evidenced by a written acknowledgement.

Secured liabilities

Non-primary production liabilities secured against assets not owned by
the trust or company are not allowed. The amount allowed in respect of a
liability secured against non-primary production asset(s) is limited to
the value of the secured assets. The liability may reduce the value of
the assessable asset that it is secured against where the asset is owned
by a part or full controller under their personal Assets Test. If the
asset is owned by the 100 per cent controller of an entity then all of
the liability will reduce the value of the assessable asset. If the
asset is owned by a part controller then only a portion of the liability
(which equates to the attribution percentage) would reduce the value of
the assessable asset.

Because of the principles of primary production aggregation, the full
amount of any liabilities borrowed by the trust or company for the
purposes of operating a primary production business may be allowed in
respect of primary production assets. An entity primary production
liability may be secured against assets not owned by that entity. These
assets may be primary or non-primary production related. Where this
occurs, the total value of the entity primary production liability is to
be recorded on the entity record and documented.

This means that the total balance of the entity primary production
liability is to be recorded on the entity record and documented.
Provided that the entity liability is coded with a primary production
percentage on the Trust/Company Liabilities (TRLD) screen, and the other
non-entity asset types are recorded correctly on the customer record,
aggregation should automatically occur for all primary production
assets.

A liability may be wholly secured against the principal residence of an
entity controller. In these circumstances the controller would be a home
owner and therefore the principal residence and any liabilities secured
against the principal residence would be disregarded. This applies
whether the property is in the name of the customer or the entity.

A liability may be secured against trust and company asset(s) which
consist of a mix of exempt and assessable assets, for example, a
liability might be secured against a farm on which the principal
residence of an entity controller is situated. In this situation the
amount of the liability allowed will need to be apportioned. However, if
the purpose of the loan was to operate a primary production business of
the trust or company (rather than to purchase the property including the
principal residence), primary production aggregation will apply and the
loan will not need to be apportioned.

Liabilities can arise when trust and company income is documented as
having been distributed to stakeholders who subsequently loan the funds
back. In a number of cases the stakeholder may be unaware of the 'loan'
owed to them by the entity, as the distribution did not result in the
actual receipt of money by the stakeholder, even though it appears on
their individual income tax return. Documentation will be required to
confirm that all persons and organisations owed funds by trusts and
companies, particularly family members and other close associates, are
aware of the existence of the liability.

Provision accounts

Provision accounts are listed on a business balance sheet to account for
future amounts that a business will be liable to pay out to employees,
shareholders and/or other parties.

Provisions such as income tax, dividends payable and annual leave are an
allowable liability where a business is legally committed to paying out
the designated amount at a future date.

There will be no liability allowed where the entity has no legal
liability to pay out the amounts, for example, long service leave in
respect of employees who have not been employed for 7 years, and bad
debts.

There are six possible assessment regimes involving liabilities.
Liabilities may be assessed as recognised or not recognised, depending
on to whom the amount is owed.

Financial institutions, banks and finance companies

Liabilities in relation to financial institutions, banks and finance
companies are to be allowed and will be considered adequately documented
provided that the liability appears on the balance sheet. Further
documentation such as a loan agreement or loan statement should only be
requested to confirm the security of the loan or the name the loan is
in.

Associates who are over 18 years of age

Liabilities, such as borrowings from entity associates and debts owed to
entity associates, will be allowed as a liability of the entity provided
the entity balance sheet records the liability and it is evidenced by a
written acknowledgement. A controller, a trustee or a public officer can
sign the acknowledgement on behalf of the trust or company.

Sole (100%) controllers

Liabilities in respect of a customer who is the 100 per cent controller
of the trust or company, or in respect of a partnered couple who have
100 per cent control in total, (for example 50/50 per cent or 100/0 per
cent), will be allowed provided the entity balance sheet records the
liability.

There is no need for documentation such as a loan acknowledgement. It is
accepted that a 100 per cent controller, or both of a partnered couple
with 100 per cent control in total, would be aware of the existence of
the liability. The effect of allowing a liability in respect of the
trust or company will be offset against the assessment of the liability
as a personal asset of the controller.

Part controllers

Liabilities in respect of part (less than 100 per cent) controllers can
be treated in a manner identical to liabilities in respect of associates
except for the rules about signatories to the liability acknowledgement.
If a partnered couple have 100 per cent control in total then they are
considered to be sole controllers.

In situations involving liabilities to part controllers, the part
controller cannot sign an agreement on behalf of the trust or company.
Another person who is a controller, trustee or public officer must sign
instead.

Minors

Loans from minors and debts owed to minors will not be accepted as
liabilities of a trust or company, but will be assessed as personal
assets of the minors. Customers under the age of 18 years are generally
minors (unless they are aged at least 16 and are engaged in a full-time
occupation or receiving a social security income support payment).
Minors are under a legal disadvantage because they cannot generally give
a discharge for money paid to them.

Other trusts and companies

Liabilities can include loans that have been made to the trust or
company by another entity, or debts owed by the entity to another
entity.

For liabilities in respect of another entity controlled by a genuine
third party such as a private investor, the rules for third parties
should be applied, that is, the liability will be considered to be
adequately documented provided the liability appears on the balance
sheet and a loan agreement is provided.

Liabilities in respect of another entity which is controlled by an
associate or a part controller will be allowed provided the entity
balance sheet records the liability and provided it is evidenced by a
written acknowledgement.

Where a part (less than 100 per cent) controller is involved they cannot
be the sole signatory to a liability acknowledgement, that is, they
cannot sign on behalf of both the lender organisation and the
organisation that owes the liability. Another controller, trustee or a
public officer must sign the acknowledgement on behalf of the lender
trust or company.

Liabilities in respect of another trust or company which is also
controlled by the same 100 per cent controller or by a partnered couple
who have 100 per cent control in total, (either 50 per cent each or one
partner with 100 per cent), will be allowed as a liability of the entity
provided the two entity balance sheets record the amount as an asset and
a liability respectively.

Liabilities in respect of another trust or company which is controlled
by a minor will not be accepted as a liability of the entity (unless
they are aged at least 16 and are engaged in a full-time occupation or
receiving a social security income support payment).

The Resources page contains scenarios showing how the Income and Assets
Tests are applied according to each type of liability and a table with a
summary of how the liabilities of trusts and companies are treated.

Related links

Assessing income from private companies pre 1 January 2002

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

Business deductions

Business liabilities

Primary production aggregation

Trusts and companies - recording liabilities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
