
How to identify a private company 043-04010010

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document details the features of private companies and how to
identify a private company if a customer is involved in one. If the
company is listed on the Managed Investment System (MIN) or Securities
and Investment System (SIN), then the company is not a private company
(for example, it is a public company)

How to identify a company

The business structure in which the customer is involved is a company
when:

-   the name of the structure is suffixed by the word 'Limited' or the
    abbreviation 'Ltd'
-   the claim form or Mod PC completed by the customer or their
    representative may indicate an involvement in a company structure
-   among the documents provided by the customer or their accountant,
    there is a Company Constitution (or Memorandum and Articles of
    Association)
-   the tax return provided by the customer or their representative may
    indicate an involvement in a company
-   the Balance Sheet provided shows 'Authorised capital', 'issued and
    paid up capital' or the terms 'shareholder loan accounts'

How to identify a private company

The business structure in which the customer is involved is a private
company when:

-   The name of the company includes a suffix of 'Proprietary Limited',
    or the abbreviations 'Pty Ltd' or 'P/L'. Under corporations law, a
    company name must indicate the company's legal status. A proprietary
    company must include the word 'Proprietary' or the abbreviation
    'Pty' in its name.
-   The company has between 1 and 50 shareholders. If there are more
    than 50 shareholders the company is likely to be public. For
    example, if the customer and/or their partner are the sole
    shareholder(s) and director(s) of the company it is certainly a
    private company. Similarly, if the only shareholders are members of
    a family, although this alone is not sufficient to indicate a
    company is a private company.
-   A company tax return has been provided and shows the status as
    private.
-   Overseas companies not registered under Australian corporations law
    may still be assessed under the trust and companies rules if they
    are designated and controlled private companies.

Related links

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Customer contact regarding trusts and companies program review

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Adding shares and securities

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
