-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the documents a Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO) needs to determine attribution and to assess the income
and assets from a private company. Information is also provided on why
these documents are required by Services Australia.

Post 1 January 2002 treatment of private companies

On 1 January 2002, the way private companies are treated under the
income and assets tests changed. This procedure applies to both pre and
post 1 January 2002 assessments as most of the documents that were
required for the pre 1 January 2002 assessment rules are also required
for post January 2002 assessments. A determination of whether or not the
company is assessed under post 1 January rules can only be made by
examining the documents.

Issuing and completion of the Module PC

Service Officers are responsible for issuing customers with the Private
Company form (MOD PC) if a new claim or a review form triggers the need
to issue another. This form must be completed by the customer or their
representative. For example, a nominee or an accountant. The Service
Officer will also obtain from the customer all the relevant
documentation as detailed in the checklist of the MOD PC. If the company
owns more than one property, the company real estate details of the MOD
PC will need to be completed for each additional property held by the
company including the home of the customer and their partner.

If the Private Company is deregistered, see Identifying and making
suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).

Note: if the customer is involved in more than one private company they
will need to complete a MOD PC for each company and provide the
documents in the checklist for each company. If the company is a
corporate trustee, a Private Trust form (MOD PT) and the documents in
that module will be required.

These documents may be used to determine payability of an income support
payment under the Social Security Act 1991 and Veterans' Entitlement Act
(VEA) or initial or ongoing entitlement to a Health Care Card. The
income details may be required to be provided to the Department of
Social Services (DSS) if a customer is a resident in an aged care home.

Services Australia requires the originals of the modules completed and
the written agreements for any loans made by company associates or other
third parties to the company. Copies are required of the other documents
such as the company tax returns and financial statements. Various other
documents may be required depending on the particular circumstances of a
customer or company.

Documents and financial statements required for assessment

Following is a list of the type of documents and financial statements
that may be needed to assess a private company.

Note: all of the documents and financial statements listed may not be
needed, only those that are applicable for the company that the customer
is involved in.

-   Module PC - Private Company form (MOD PC)
-   Module PT - Private Trust form (MOD PT), if the company is a
    corporate trustee
-   Company Real Estate Details section of the MOD PC for each property
    held by the company including the home of the customer and their
    partner
-   Written agreements concerning loans to the company by the customer,
    company associates and third parties (except recognised financial
    institutions)
-   The latest individual tax return for the customer
-   The latest individual tax return for the customer's partner
-   The latest tax return for the private company in which the customer
    or their partner is involved (including the complete financial
    statements)
-   Trading account details (part of the profit and loss account)
-   Profit and loss statement (for each business of the company)
-   Depreciation schedule
-   Balance sheet
-   Shareholder loan account details
-   Notes to and forming part of the accounts
-   Council rates notice for each property held by the company
-   Additional information the customer would like Services Australia to
    consider

Documents that may be requested by the CAO

The following documents may be requested by the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO) at a later stage, if required:

-   the Constitution, or Memorandum and Articles of Association
-   last return to the Australian Securities and Investment Commission
    (ASIC)
-   minutes of directors' meetings
-   certificate of title for each property held by the company
-   certificates for share investments held by the company
-   certificates for managed investments held by the company
-   loan agreement for each liability of the company

If several customers are involved in the same company, some of the
documents required may already have been provided to Services Australia.
For example, the latest financial statements of the company.

The Resources page contains links to the modules used in the assessment
of private companies.

Related links

Trusts and companies assessment

Companies

Companies pre 1 January 2002

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Common financial statements

Trusts

Trusts pre 1 January 2002

Income tax returns (ITRs) and the taxation notice of assessment (NOA)

Livestock trading account

The profit and loss statement

The depreciation schedule

The balance sheet

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
