
Add or update TFES southbound goods and suppliers 043-17021407

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to add or update Tasmanian Freight
Equalisation Scheme (TFES) goods and suppliers under the Manufacturers
and Miners Scheme (M Scheme) and Primary Producers Scheme (P Scheme).

Manufacturers and miners (M Scheme)

Tasmanian based manufacturers and miners are eligible to claim raw
materials and equipment for use in their manufacturing/mining process.

Domestic goods – are Australian goods, or any goods that have undergone
a manufacturing process on the mainland of Australia before shipping to
Tasmania.

Imported goods – are goods that are imported and shipped to Tasmania
from an Australian mainland port. Imported goods may be eligible when
there is no Australia equivalent available.

Imported goods are claimable from 1 October 2021 for shipments on or
after 1 July 2021.

Intrastate goods – are goods manufactured or produced on the Tasmanian
mainland and shipped to King Island or the Furneaux Group for use in a
manufacturing or mining process.

Primary producers (P Scheme)

Businesses or individuals engaged in agriculture, forestry or fishing in
Tasmania are eligible to claim material inputs, machinery, implements
and equipment for use in that industry. Claimants must be the end user
of the goods shipped.

Domestic goods – are Australian goods, or any goods that have undergone
a manufacturing process on the mainland of Australia before shipping to
Tasmania.

Imported goods – are goods that are imported and shipped to Tasmania
from a port on mainland Australia. Imported goods may be eligible when
there is no Australian equivalent available.

Imported goods are claimable from 1 October 2021 for shipments on or
after 1 July 2021.

Intrastate goods – are goods manufactured or produced on the Tasmanian
mainland and shipped to King Island or the Furneaux Group for use in a
primary production industry.

The Resources page contains links to forms, templates and various
websites with TFES information.

Related links

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES)

TFES claim types

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) quality checking

Register a TFES claimant

Update TFES claimant information

Southbound manufacturers and miners claims for TFES (M Scheme)

Southbound primary producer claim for TFES (P Scheme)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
