
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines information about how the source test operates
when determining who is assessed as the controller of a private trust
and a private company.

Application of the source test

The source test may attribute the assets of a private trust or private
company to a customer if the customer transferred assets to the trust or
company for inadequate consideration, or if the customer provides
services to the trust or company for inadequate remuneration. The source
test works on the principle that a person generally transfers assets
into the trust or company because the trust or company will use those
assets:

-   for that person's benefit, or
-   for their family's benefit. For example, to shelter them from the
    means test while preserving their full value for the beneficiaries
    of their estate

Contributions made after 9 May 2000

The source test applies only to contributions made to entities after 9
May 2000. Attribution assessments resulting from the application of the
source test only take effect from 1 January 2002.

The source test works in tandem with the control test. Where control may
be difficult to establish, the source test can simplify attribution. It
is not intended that the source test be absolute. Where the matter is
unclear, the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) will need to investigate
issues such as the level of contributions made and whether the person
who made the contribution can exhibit control.

Gift or Loan

If a person can show that a genuine gift or genuine loan has been made,
and that they have no ongoing involvement in the private trust or
private company, attribution would not be made to that person and
gifting rules may apply.

Related links

Formal control of a trust

Formal control of a company

Informal control test

Controlled private companies

Controlled private trusts

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
