-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines how Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) record
attributable income from a private trust or private company. The
procedure also explains the assessment of income from more than one
source or business with the entity, and follows on from assessing
attribution income.

More than one business within structure

Where a trust or company operates more than one unrelated business
within the private trust or private company structure, the income and
expenses relating to each business will be assessed separately and any
losses from one business will not be offset against the profit of
another business operating within the private trust or private company
structure.

Note: different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust
(SDT). This procedure does not cover SDTs.

Where a private trust or private company operates more than one
necessarily related business within the structure, offsetting of losses
from one business type against the profits from the related business is
allowed. The offset of losses will be limited to the extent that the
loss was necessarily incurred to earn the income or profit of the second
business.

In all cases it is up to the customer to identify a specific proportion
of these losses. This situation would usually only arise at the request
of the customer.

The necessarily related rules can be applied regardless of the business
structures involved. For example, a loss by a business operated by a
private trust or private company could be offset against a profit from a
necessarily related business operated by a partnership or sole trader as
long as the controllers of the private company or private trust are the
same persons who are partners or a sole trader.

The decision about whether the businesses within an organisation are
necessarily related will be made by the CAO.

Service Officers and CAOs must use the correct date of event for
business income and assets.

Working Credit and Work Bonus

Working Credit and employment income nil rate provisions cannot be used
for attribution income as it is not employment income.

From 1 July 2019 Work Bonus may be applied to attribution and
distribution income received by a customer who is:

-   of Age Pension age, and
-   in receipt of an income support payment other than PPS

Work Bonus will be applied only where the customer's role in the trust
or company involves personal exertion, (that is the customer's direct
involvement helps generate the income for the entity). This could
include such activities such as truck driving, book keeping or sales.

Work Bonus can be applied to distribution income prior to 1 July 2019
only if the distributions are considered to be paid in lieu of wages and
coded as employment income.

Note: if the customer is receiving a wage from a private trust, the
customer can deplete their Working Credit balance to offset the wages
only. If the customer is eligible for Work Bonus any available balance
can also be used to offset these wages

The Resources page contains a summary of how attribution and
distribution income is assessed for trusts and companies.

Related links

Assessing attribution income

Assessing and recording distribution income

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Attribution percentages

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Trusts

Indexing, recording and reviewing organisations

Business deductions

Companies

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Working Credit

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
