-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on depreciation schedules and why
they are needed by Centrelink. Depreciation is a term used to describe
the reduction in the value of an asset over time.

Meaning of depreciation

Depreciation is an accounting method used to write off the value of an
asset which reduces over time due to age, wear and tear. The Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) allows the amount of the reduction in value as a
deduction under Division 40 and Sub-division 328-D of the Income Tax
Assessment Act (ITAA) 1997.

Depreciation on plant and equipment claimed under Division 40 of the
ITAA 1997 is an allowable expense for sole traders, partnerships,
Private Companies and Private Trusts for social security purposes as per
sections 1075 and 1208B of the Social Security Act 1991.

The ITAA 1997 includes the following in regard to Division 40:

"You can deduct an amount equal to the decline in value of a
depreciating asset (an asset that has a limited effective life and that
is reasonably expected to decline in value over the time it is used)
that you hold.

That decline is generally measured by reference to the effective life of
the asset."

Under Division 40 of the ITAA 1997, an Instant Asset Write-off of
$30,000 is available for medium sized businesses (with aggregated
turnover exceeding $10,000,000) from 2 April 2019 to 11 March 2020. This
increased to $150,000 for medium sized businesses from 12 March 2020 to
30 June 2020. These Division 40 Instant asset Write-off deductions are
allowable for social security purposes as long as the depreciation on
the underlying asset would have been allowable.

Where a customer provides an income tax return and financial statements
that include this write-off, they will need to consider whether or not
the net income or loss represents the current circumstances of their
business. If not, they will need to provide a profit and loss statement
that represents their current business income.

However depreciation or instant asset write-offs claimed under
subdivision 328-D of the ITAA 1997 are not allowed for social security
purposes. Small businesses (including sole traders, partnerships,
companies and trusts) are able to access taxation concession including
immediately writing off assets (under a set threshold) and using
simplified depreciation rules. The ITAA 1997 includes the following in
regard to Subdivision 328-D.

"If you are a small business entity, you can choose to deduct amounts
for most of your depreciating assets on a diminishing value basis using
a pool that is treated as a single depreciating asset.

Broadly, the pool is made up of the costs of the depreciating assets
that are allocated to it or, in some cases, a proportion of those costs.
The pool rate is currently 30%."

Depreciation claimed under Division 40 can be calculated using either
the prime cost method or the diminishing value method and is also
calculated over the life of the asset whereas Subdivision 328-D allows
the immediate write-off of some assets and the depreciation of a pool of
depreciating assets using the diminishing value method at a rate of 30%
(rather than depreciating individual assets over their effective life).

Depreciation is applied to tangible assets and is commonly used to
reduce the value of assets like machines, equipment and motor vehicles.
Amortisation is another term used to describe the reduction in the value
of an asset, but is usually applied to intangible assets like goodwill
and lease values. Amortisation is not an allowable deduction for Social
Security Income Test assessment purposes.

Depreciation on plant and equipment is an allowable deduction.
Depreciation in respect of buildings is also allowed as a deduction
against business income, but only in limited circumstances. Depreciation
is calculated by reducing the cost of an asset by a certain percentage.
The different percentage rates of depreciation applicable to particular
assets are set by the ATO.

The depreciation schedule

Depreciation of assets claimed under Division 40 of the Income Tax
Assessment Act 1997 is tabled in a document called a depreciation
schedule. The depreciation schedule would normally show the following:

-   the original cost of the item
-   the written down value of the item at the start of the financial
    year
-   the percentage rate of depreciation of the item
-   the amount of depreciation for this financial year (under the
    heading 'Prime Cost Method')
-   the written down value of the item at the end of the financial year
-   details of assets purchased in the last 12 months
-   details of assets disposed of in the last 12 months

Small business entity (SBE) general pool worksheet

Depreciation or write-off of assets claimed under Subdivision 328-D of
the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 is detailed in a document called a
SBE general pool worksheet. This worksheet would normally show the
following:

-   Opening pool balance
-   Depreciation at 30%
-   New assets from Worksheet
-   Depreciation at 15% - this is the percentage that can be claimed on
    assets in the year the business starts to use them or has them
    installed ready for use. 30% is then claimed each year after the
    first year.
-   Value of assets disposed
-   Total decline in value
-   Closing pool balance

See the Resources page for an Example SBE general pool worksheet.

Requirement for a depreciation schedule

The depreciation schedule includes all business assets which are subject
to depreciation. In the absence of a business balance sheet, a
depreciation schedule may provide an indication of the value of business
assets.

It will show the proportion of time an asset is used for private
purposes. Depreciation of business assets which are used for the private
benefit of the owners of the business is not an allowable deduction
against business income under the Social Security Act 1991. See Step 9
in Allowable or non-allowable deductions - A to H table when requesting
a depreciation schedule.

The Resources page contains a link to an example of a depreciation
schedule and small business entity general pool worksheet and also
contains information on the 2 methods of depreciation (prime cost method
and diminishing value depreciation method).

Related links

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships MOD F

Business deductions

The balance sheet

The profit and loss statement

Steps to making an assessment of a business

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
