
Withdrawal from partnership 043-03130120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of income and assets when a
customer withdraws from a partnership.

On this Page:

Partnership agreements

The rights and interests of members of a partnership are defined in a
partnership agreement between the people in the partnership, but there
is no requirement for a written agreement. Whether a partnership exists
or not, is established from the actions of the people involved. Their
actions will also determine the interests of partnership members.

Partnership agreements can be written, oral, or inferred by the conduct
of the parties. The terms of written partnership agreements can be
varied if all partners consent, and that consent may be express
(written), oral, or inferred from the conduct of the parties.

Written partnership agreement

If a written agreement exists, it may specify the proportions in which
the assets of the business are held for partners, or the interest of a
partner in a particular asset. The agreement may also specify the method
of distribution of capital between partners upon wind-up of the
business. Agreements vary considerably, and while some may contain
precise details of the entitlement of partners in each of these
situations, many agreements contain only a broad statement of the
interests of partners.

A written partnership agreement may be taken as prima facie evidence of
the terms of a partnership, but it should not be maintained against
evidence provided by a partner that different terms have been adopted.

Agreement is incomplete

If an agreement is incomplete, and does not contain any agreement
(either written, oral or able to be inferred from the conduct of the
parties) about the distribution of capital upon the dissolution of the
partnership, then the Partnership Act, as enacted in each state,
contains provisions outlining the rights and interests of the
partnership members.

Income of partner after withdrawal from partnership

Generally, Partnership law requires that profits or losses are divided
evenly. All partnership members have legal entitlement to their share of
the profits or losses as specified in the partnership agreement,
relevant Partnership Act or court ordered agreement for division of
profits.

When assessing income received from a partnership by a partner on
withdrawing from the partnership, it is also necessary to consider the
nature of the activity conducted by the business. For example, a small
family business operated as a partnership between members of a couple,
frequently earns income mainly from personal exertion of one of the
couple, e.g. plumber, builder, hairdresser etc. In this situation, if
one of the couple advise they are withdrawing from the business, the
customer should be contacted to discuss what further income the business
is likely to generate and their entitlement to that income.

In some situations, members of a couple may run a business together as a
partnership. If they separate, a Service Officer needs to determine,
based on available evidence, if both members of a couple still have
access to proceeds of the business. If a salary continues to be paid, it
is maintained as income and may be added to profits.

If one partner does not have access to proceeds of the business, their
legal entitlement to a share of the proceeds may not be known until
after the end of the financial year or in some cases until the Family
Court makes an order for payment.

Assets of partner after withdrawal from partnership

Partnership assets (and the value of a customer's interest in a
partnership business) are subject to common law rules upon dissolution
or withdrawal from a partnership. Until a settlement is reached to the
contrary, all partnership members are legally entitled to their interest
in the partnership, as specified in the agreement or partnership law in
each state.

If a court makes an order about the division of partnership property,
the customer's assets need to be updated in accordance with that order.

When calculating assessable value of a customer's interest in a
partnership where there is no agreement about division of partnership
property, the customer's ability to access the assets should be kept in
mind, especially if it is marital separation.

The Resources page contains an example of deprivation where adequate
consideration is not received on withdrawal from partnership.

Related links

Assessing partnership assets

Assessing partnership income

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
