
Income for an independent contractor and commission income 043-03050030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about determining the employment
status of a customer who advises receipt of commission or contract
income. A customer may be employed, self-employed or unemployed, and
this is sometimes not easy to determine where commission or contract
income is received.

Overview of business income and employment income

Income from commission or from work as a contractor may be assessed as
business income, where allowable deductions can be made, or as
employment income, depending on whether the customer can be
characterised as an employee or self-employed. It is sometimes difficult
to characterise the employment relationship of contractors and
commission sales people, because differences between being self-employed
and being an employee are not always obvious.

Each employment situation should be assessed on its merits and factors
to determine self-employment examined to check if it meets the
characteristics of self-employment or the characteristics of an
employee. Examination of the arrangements for taxation, superannuation
and worker's compensation may also assist in determining employment
status.

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period

If customers, or their partners, have ceased any seasonal, intermittent
or contract work in the 6 months prior to claiming, they may be subject
to a Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP).

For the purposes of a SWPP, seasonal work is work that is available for
part or parts of the year at approximately the same time each year. For
example, cray fishing, abalone diving, deep sea fishing, shearing, pearl
diving and fruit picking.

Assessment of commission income

Commission income is assessed for the number of days for which the
income is paid.

For example, commission is paid for the whole of March; the period paid
is 1 March to 31 March, being 31 days. This income will be apportioned
for 31 days, starting from the Entitlement Period Start Date (EPSD) of
the entitlement period in which it was paid. If the commission is for a
period longer than one year, it is apportioned for a maximum of 52
weeks.

This applies where an income support payment continues and when an
income support payment is cancelled and reclaimed.

Taxi drivers, rideshare for profit and delivery service schemes

A taxi driver can be:

an owner driver. Likely to be treated as self-employed

a driver:

-   who has a lease on the taxi. Likely to be treated as self-employed
-   who drives (for the lease-holder or owner) for a share of the
    takings. May be treated as either self-employed or an employee
-   a driver who drives under bailment arrangements. In the taxi
    industry, some drivers (the bailee) who operate under a bailment
    arrangement, make a payment to the owner (the bailor), allowing them
    to use the taxi to earn income. These payments may take the form of
    fixed payments or a percentage of shift takings. Some bailee drivers
    may also be responsible for some of the running expenses of the taxi
    (including petrol costs). Bailee drivers may be treated as either
    self-employed or an employee
-   a bailee driver who is an employee cannot deduct any expenses.
    However, the amount paid to the bailor is not included as part of
    the driver's gross income, as it is not an amount paid to the driver
    for their personal use

Ride share or delivery services for example, Uber and Uber Eats, are
generally a person using their personal vehicle to provide a passenger
or food delivery service for a fee. If the provided service is within a
business structure (sole trader, partnership, company, etc.) allowable
business expenses can be deducted from the income.

This information should only be used as a guide in conjunction with the
characteristics of an employee and the characteristics of
self-employment. In all cases, Service Officers should use the Decision
Support Tool to determine if a customer is self-employed or an employee.

Contract income

Income for employees who receive contract income is assessed at the
gross amount of income received, because employees cannot deduct any
expenses incurred in earning the contract income. The income can be
treated in different ways, depending if the amounts are received:

-   periodically, treat contract income as employment income. If the
    contract is for a period of up to a fortnight, it is assessed as
    income in the entitlement period in which it is paid. If it is for a
    period of more than a fortnight, income is apportioned over the
    period it relates to, starting from the Entitlement Period Start
    Date of the entitlement period in which it was paid
-   as a lump sum after claiming an income support payment, treat
    contract income as a remunerative lump sum that can be held as
    income for up to 52 weeks. That is, spread out over a period in the
    future equal to the length of time the work was done, starting from
    the Entitlement Period Start Date of the entitlement period in which
    it was paid

Income for self-employed contractors who receive contract income is
allowed to be reduced by any costs incurred in generating the income.
The income can be treated in different ways, depending on how the
amounts are received. If the contract is:

-   part of the customer's business, treat the contract income as
    business income
-   received as a lump sum after claiming an income support payment,
    treat the contract income as a remunerative lump sum and held as
    income for up to 52 weeks, that is, spread out over a period in the
    future equal to the length of time the work was done

Commission income

Commissions received by employees are assessed as remunerative lump sums
if received after claiming an income support payment.

Any part received as a wage or retainer is treated as employment income.

If the customer had a partner in receipt of income support at the time
of claiming, any lump sums received by the customer before claiming
payment, would have been assessed and will continue to be assessed as
long as the partner was in receipt of income support when the customer
claimed.

If the employee receives an advance of a future commission, a review of
their contract should determine if the advance is:

-   a repayable loan, which is not income, or
-   a wage or retainer, assessed as income when it is paid

See Commission sales persons considered as employees.

A person employed on a commission basis to sell a product and/or recruit
other commission salespersons, is employed under a contract for services
and is self-employed. The costs of obtaining the income are allowed to
be deducted in the same manner as for businesses. The net commissions
are assessed (from the date they are entitled to be received) as
remunerative lump sums, even where the payments are small and/or
regular. For example, people who are generally characterised as
self-employed include consultants for Avon, Tupperware, Amway and other
similar consultants and distributors.

See Commission sales persons considered as self-employed.

The table on the Resources page explains how to assess commission income
for employees.

Real Estate sales people

Commission-only real estate sales people are regarded as employees
because their duties (selling real estate) are considered an integral
function of the business entity for which they work.

Despite the freedom the sales persons may have about how they perform
the work, they are considered employees as they meet the characteristics
of an employee.

Customers who are employees and receive commission income from the sale
of real estate will have each payment held as income. The period is
determined by the length of time the commission payment was earned, up
to a maximum of 52 weeks. Generally, the period is from when the
property is listed until the property is sold. This is because during
this period, the customer will undertake work related to selling of the
property, such as, administrative tasks, advertising and holding
showings of the property.

The customer may receive regular payslips showing commission payments
paid. However, the income should not be attributed to this pay period if
it is clear it was earned over a different period. The assessment period
will begin on the EPSD of the period the commission payment is paid. The
table on the Resources page explains the assessment of commission
income.

If the customer receives a wage/salary separate from commission
payments, this income is treated as ordinary employment income. See
Recording and correcting employment income details.

GST for customers who are employees

When an employee, such as a taxi driver, has takings including Goods and
Services Tax (GST), the amount of GST is not considered income if the
amount is remitted to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). This is
similar to the treatment of business income where GST is forwarded to
the ATO.

Working Credit

When the customer is assessed as self-employed, income from
self-employment is not employment income. Income from self-employment is
ordinary income and is included with all other ordinary income when
calculating the accrual of Working Credits. The customer is unable to
deplete their Working Credit balance to offset this income.

When the customer is assessed as an employee they may be eligible to use
any Working Credit, balance to offset this income. Apply the Working
Credit rules to the total ordinary income before applying the Income
Test.

Work Bonus

If the customer is a pensioner, and of Age Pension age (excluding
Parenting Payment Single), they may be entitled to the Work Bonus. The
work bonus can be applied if the self-employment is from personal
exertion see Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age.

Note: there is no entitlement to the Work Bonus if the customer is paid
under the transitional rules for pension customers however the Work
Bonus will still be used in the comparison calculations and partners may
still benefit by the reduction in total income.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) website, a table explaining how to assess commission income for
employees, other reference information and links to online forms.

Related links

Factors to determine self-employment

Contractors and commission sales persons

Assessing income and assets from cooperatives

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing income and assets for ministers or religion

Assessing child care business income

Assets and liabilities of a business

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Treatment of lump sums

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
when self-employed

Recording and correcting employment income details

Waiting periods for income support payments

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
