-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the balance sheet, also known
as the statement of financial position, and how the information from it
is assessed.

On this Page:

Purpose of balance sheet

A balance sheet lists the assets, liabilities and proprietorship of a
business at a particular date. It is part of the financial statements
that are often prepared in conjunction with a tax return.

Requirement of the balance sheet

-   The balance sheet will reveal the nature and value of business
    assets and liabilities
-   It is necessary to establish the total value of all business assets
    and liabilities in order to calculate the value of the customer's
    share or interest in the business

The asset position of a business as detailed in the balance sheet does
not necessarily equate to the current market value or worth of a
business. Revaluation of business assets, particularly property and
listed shares, to their market value or realisable value, may be
required. Valuations for some assets such as property are obtained from
approved valuers.

Generally, the financial statements include Notes to and forming part of
the Accounts (explanatory notes). These notes provide more detailed
information on the items recorded in the financial statements, for
example, a breakdown of the amount owed to each trade creditor. Another
common item included in the Notes is the Statement of Accounting
Policies. This statement advises, among other things, the valuation
method adopted for recording assets. It is necessary to obtain these
schedules or notes to ensure that an accurate assessment of income and
assets can be completed.

Assets

Assets are items or possessions owned by a business (such as properties,
investments, stock etc.), and include amounts owed to the business.

The assets of a business are normally classified according to their
degree of liquidity, that is, how easily they can be converted into
cash.

Common balance sheet headings include current assets and non-current or
fixed assets.

Accounting Asset Valuation methods

There are various methods available to accountants to determine what
value to place on assets recorded in a balance sheet. Some assets are
shown on the balance sheet at historical cost, (the original cost of the
item at the time of its acquisition) which may differ from the current
market value:

-   cash at bank will be at current value
-   land and buildings will usually be at the original cost (historical
    value)
-   plant and machinery, motor vehicles, and land and buildings will
    usually be recorded at their historical cost, less any accumulated
    depreciation

Historical cost is the valuation method used by most businesses. For
this reason, the values for some assets shown in the balance sheet
cannot be used for asset test purposes, and it may be necessary to
obtain a customer's estimate of the current market value, or obtain
valuations from an approved valuer, for example, for land and buildings.

Liabilities

Liabilities are any loans outstanding or debts owed by the business
(such as overdrafts, creditor debts, mortgages, or loans from the
business owners). The amount of liabilities owed by a business will
fluctuate over time as loans are repaid or additional borrowings
obtained. Liabilities are generally expressed at current value.

The liabilities of a business are normally classified according to the
time in which they are due to be repaid. Common balance sheet headings
include current liabilities and non-current liabilities.

Under the legislation for private trusts and private companies,
effective 1 January 2002, recognised and non-recognised liabilities of a
controlled private trust or a controlled private company have to be
considered. An example of a non-recognised liability is a loan not made
on a commercial basis, a loan from a person aged under 18, or a loan
secured against a non-company or exempt asset.

Proprietorship

Proprietorship is the difference between the value of the assets and the
value of the liabilities. It is the amount the owners of the business
would receive if they sold all the business assets and repaid all the
business liabilities.

Proprietorship represents the owner's equity in that business. It
represents the contributions of funds made by the owners of the business
and accumulated profits, as well as any withdrawals (drawings) made from
the business. The proprietorship of the business should equal the value
of the net assets of the business.

Proprietorship = Assets less Liabilities

This is how the balance sheet gets its name - the net assets must
balance with the capital.

Depending on the business structure in question, owner's equity may be
known by different terms:

-   sole trader - proprietorship, proprietor's funds
-   partnership - proprietorship, partnership funds, proprietor's funds,
    total proprietor's funds, partnership assets
-   company - shareholder's equity
-   trust - trust funds
-   all business structures - capital

The assessable asset value of a business is generally the
proprietorship. However, as the value of assets stated in a balance
sheet may be the historical cost rather than current market value,
adjustment to the proprietorship may be required to determine the
current assessable value of a business.

The Resources page contains an example of a partnership balance sheet
before and after adjustments have been made, including notes regarding
each adjustment. This is an example only, which demonstrates some
adjustments that may be required. To correctly assess assets from a
business structure, follow the relevant procedures as listed below.

Related links

Assessing sole trader assets

Assessing partnership assets

Assessing asset attribution

Trusts

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

Steps to assess an interim balance sheet

Valuation of real estate and other assets at new claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
