
Designated private trusts 043-04020080

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
SDT's income is exempt from the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt
from the assets test as long as the assets do not exceed the
concessional asset limit. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

This document outlines how to determine if a private trust is a
designated private trust. If a customer is involved in a designated
private trust, the income and assets of the trust may be taken into
account via attribution to the customer when assessing entitlement to
income support.

Rules from 1 January 2002

On 1 January 2002, the way private trusts are assessed under the Income
and Assets Tests changed.

If the trust is not a designated private trust then the customer's
involvement in the trust is not assessed in accordance with Part 3.18 of
the Social Security Act 1991, that is, attribution does not apply. The
assessment of non designated private trusts is in accordance with Pre 1
January 2002 treatment of private trusts.

Definition of a private trust

Under the Social Security Act 1991 private trusts are defined by
exclusion, that is, all trusts are designated private trusts unless
specifically excluded. A trust is a designated private trust unless:

all of the following conditions are satisfied:

-   the trust is a fixed trust
-   the units in the trust are held by 50 or more persons
-   the trust was not created or operated under a scheme that was
    entered into to gain a Social Security or Veterans' Affairs
    advantage, or

the trust is a complying superannuation fund, or

the trust is an excluded trust

Note: excluded Native Title trusts are only those defined under the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Act and do not include
overseas native title, for example, New Zealand Maori trusts are not
excluded.

Types of trusts that are designated private trusts

Trusts that are designated private trusts include those commonly known
as:

-   family trusts
-   fixed trusts with less than 50 members
-   discretionary trusts
-   testamentary trusts
-   statutory trusts (for example, Court ordered trusts)
-   hybrid trusts - these are mixed fixed/discretionary trusts

Trusts that exist in other countries may also be designated trusts.

Trusts such as where a grandparent has a bank account 'in trust for' a
grandchild are affected, as are implied and constructive trusts.

Trusts that are not designated private trusts

Trusts not considered designated trusts are:

-   fixed trusts with 50 or more members
-   public unit trusts
-   complying superannuation funds
-   some fixed trusts with fewer than 50 members that were set up before
    9 May 2000

CAO role and delegation from 1 January 2002

Where the customer is involved in a private trust there is a need to
have their involvement assessed and coded by a Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO), based on information provided in the Module PT - Private
Trust (MOD PT) and accompanying documents.

Related links

Trusts

Trusts and companies assessment

Accepting and disclosing information regarding trusts and companies

Customer contact regarding trusts and companies program review

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Important screens for private trusts and private companies

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
