
Assessing and recording loans and liabilities for trusts and companies 043-04090000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on assessing and recording loans and
liabilities for trusts and companies.

On this Page:

Liabilities and loans

Liabilities can include loans that have been made to a trust or company,
or debts owed by a trust or company. A loan is where a customer has lent
money or an asset to a trust or company and the trust or company has yet
to repay that loan or asset. A loan is also an unpaid distribution or
dividend owed by a trust or company to a customer.

For loans, there are three considerations:

-   The loan must be in the name of the trust or company
-   An actual lending of money or an asset of a particular value to a
    trust or company must have occurred. This is to prevent the creation
    of contrived liabilities in order to reduce assessable asset values
-   There must be a clear intention by the trust or company to repay the
    loan. An intention to repay can be accepted unless otherwise stated.
    Repayment schedules or other written repayment arrangements are not
    required

Reporting on a balance sheet

Liabilities on the balance sheet may be deducted from the value of
assets to determine the assessable net asset value of the trust or
company.

Some loans and debts shown as liabilities on the balance sheet are not
allowable liabilities for social security purposes even though they may
be allowable as liabilities for accounting and taxation purposes. This
decision will be made by Complex Assessment Officers (CAO).

Assessment of liabilities and loans

Loans from controllers, associates or genuine third parties are assessed
as a personal asset of the controller, associate or third party, and
deemed income applies, regardless of whether the loan is allowed as a
liability of the trust or company.

Debts owed by the entity to a controller, associate or genuine third
party who is a Centrelink customer are assessed as an asset of that
customer regardless of whether the debt is allowed as a liability of the
trust or company. Deemed income does not apply as the money represents a
debt rather than a loan.

The main issues that need to be considered when determining whether a
liability is allowable are:

-   the security of the liability
-   whether the liability is secured against an exempt asset, such as a
    controller's home
-   whether the liability is adequately documented

Where a loan is owed to a Centrelink customer the value recorded as a
liability on the trust and company record will be passed by the system
to the customer's record. It will pass to the Direct Investments (SVDI)
screen and be assessed against the customer's record for deeming and
Assets Test purposes. The assessment of the loan may be different if the
customer is in receipt of Farm Household Allowance. See Assessing assets
for Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

Where a debt is owed to a Centrelink customer the value recorded as a
debt on the trust or company's record will be passed by the system to
the customer's record. It will pass to the Other Assets (OAS) screen and
will be assessed against the customer's record for Assets Test purposes.

Contents

Assessment of liabilities for trusts and companies

Trusts and companies - recording liabilities

Related links

Deeming provisions

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

Deeming exemptions

Primary production aggregation

Trusts and companies assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
