
Creating links between organisations for trust and company purposes 043-04150020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines the procedure for Complex Assessment Officers
(CAO) to create links between organisations to assess the income and
assets assessable from a private trust or private company in a multiple
entity structure. These links are created so that the income and assets
of a controlled trust or company are correctly attributed to the
controlling trust or company.

Creating links

To link in the direction of attribution, a link between a controlling
organisation and a controlled organisation must always start on the
controlled organisation's Customer Reference Number (CRN), that is, the
controlled organisation must be in the header to create a link to the
controlling organisation.

Links between two CRNs have to be unique, and need a Type and two
Service Reasons (From and To).

For links between organisations, the link Type is 'TAC' (Trust and
Company).

The Service Reasons are:

-   'TRF' - Trust or Company. This is recorded on organisations. TRF is
    the link from the controlled organisation
-   'TRO' - Linked Trust or Company. This is recorded on the controlling
    organisation. TRO is the organisation linked to, i.e. the
    organisation to which assets and income are attributed

Note: it is essential to start the link between organisations from the
correct organisation. The link must always start on the controlled
organisation's Customer Reference Number (CRN). The link can only be
made to an existing organisation. Add the organisation before the
linking process is begun.

Links Summary screen

The Links Summary (LS) screen displays all links created on an
organisation record. Note: links can only be made to an existing entity,
for example, a new organisation must be added before starting the
linking process.

Trust and company organisations will only have TAC type links on the LS
screen, however customers can have other types of links, e.g. CHI -
child, PYI - Centrepay.

Related links

Creating links from organisations to customers for trust and company
purposes

Deleting trust and company organisation links

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
