-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on a customer's involvement and roles
within a private company. From 1 January 2002, if a customer is involved
in a private company, the income and assets of that company may be taken
into account (attributed to the customer) when working out their income
support payments or concessions.

Shareholder of a private company

A customer may become a shareholder in a number of ways, including:

-   purchasing shares
-   having shares transferred to them by way of a gift from an associate
-   taking up options
-   receiving shares as an inheritance from a deceased estate

The value of a shareholder's investment depends on decisions made by the
directors. Shareholders are guaranteed no return on their investment in
a private company either in terms of income or capital.

Director of a private company

A customer over the age of 18 may become a director when a company is
first set up, or may be appointed by another director or by a vote of
shareholders. Written consent is required for each person who agrees to
become a director of the company. Directors make decisions regarding the
management of the company.

Contributor of a private company

A customer may be considered a contributor if they contribute capital to
a company:

-   and are owed money in return, by way of loan (otherwise referred to
    as a creditor)
-   in return for equity (referred to as a shareholder or member)
-   as a gift

Note: a customer may also be considered a contributor if they contribute
services to a company.

Employee of private company

An employee may receive remuneration for their personal efforts in money
or money's worth, for example, wages, fees, commissions, fringe
benefits, superannuation contributions. A person who is only an
employee, has no other involvement in the company and is not an
associate will have their remuneration assessed as an employee.

Associate

An associate is a person(s) or entity(s) who could be expected to act in
accordance with the customer's or couple's wishes. A customer may exert
informal control over a private company even though they are not a
director of a private company.

For example, an accountant, solicitor or other professional may be
acting under instructions from the customer; or a family member may be
following the directions of the customer or be influenced by the
customer's wishes.

Secretary or public officer of a private company

A company secretary is appointed by the directors to attend to the
company's administrative matters. The public officer for a company is
responsible for the company's tax related issues. Generally, the company
secretary is also the public officer.

A customer may be involved in a private company in more than one way.
For example, a customer may be both a shareholder and a creditor. This
information can be found on the Module PC - Private Company form (MOD
PC).

The Resources page contains general information on types of shares and
the rights and interests attached to them.

Related links

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Formal control of a company

Source test

Attribution percentages

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
