
Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS) 043-22032902

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This document outlines general information about the Apprenticeships
Data Management System (ADMS).

ADMS Functionality

The Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS) is the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) application for the submission
and review of claims for:

-   Boosting Apprenticeship Commencement (BAC) wage subsidies, and
-   Completing Apprenticeship Commencement (CAC) wage subsidies

See Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies.

Australian Apprenticeship Support Network (AASN) providers determine
eligibility for BAC and CAC. When an employer becomes eligible, a claim
application is made available to them in ADMS. After answering a short
list of questions and attaching wage and/or training evidence, the
employer can submit their claim.

ADMS attempts to finalise submitted claims using DEWR Single Touch
Payroll (STP) and Optical Character Recognition (OCR) automation tools
to verify evidence provided by the employer. If the claim fails
automation, a claim work item is allocated to Services Australia staff
via the Workload Allocation method.

Obtaining access to ADMS

Staff must register for Employment Security and Access Management (eSAM)
access before requesting access to ADMS. See System access for
authorised users table on the Resources page.

Staff are granted SARW - BAC Admin level access to view claims and
verify evidence attachments. Do not use the Export function in ADMS
displayed to users with this access level.

Staff undertaking apprentice wage subsidy work should access ADMS
regularly as:

-   ADMS access will be suspended if not used for 40 consecutive days.
    Re-request access to ADMS to remove the suspension
-   eSAM access is removed after 90 days. Make a new access request to
    both eSAM and ADMS, to remove the suspension

Using ADMS

Employers use ADMS to:

-   review pre-populated claim application details and complete required
    questions
-   attach wage and/or training evidence to a claim application
-   submit claim applications
-   receive and view notifications

Services Australia Service Officers use ADMS to:

-   verify wage and/or training evidence attached to a claim
-   return claims to the employer with a request for further
    information, or
-   view claim details to manage employer enquiries

See:

-   Verifying evidence for Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC)
    and Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies
-   Employer enquiries about Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC)
    and Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

The Resources page contains information on accessing ADMS and claim
status descriptions.

Related links

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Verifying evidence for Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Employer enquiries about Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
