
Packaged review activities 043-04040020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines the steps taken by Complex Assessment Officers
(CAO) to complete packaged review activities. Packaged review activities
can be used to assist in the reassessment of the income and assets from
a number of private trusts and/or private companies in a multiple entity
structure as part of a program review.

Packaged review activities - description

Packaged review activities allow the records of all linked organisations
within a structure to be updated at the same time. The packaged review
activity allows for all linked customer records to be reassessed once
only, even though a number of updates have been made on 2 or more linked
organisations.

A package consists of at least 2 different review activities on 2
different Customer Reference Numbers (CRN), allowing them to be assessed
in 1 action. The footer details only need to be coded once and it is
only necessary to go to the Assessment Results (AR) screen once, but the
circumstance screens on all linked CRNs are updated and reassessed.

For trust and company processing, a packaged review activity can only be
used if 2 or more organisation CRNs are linked. Customer records cannot
be included in a packaged review activity, but the activity itself will
reassess all customers linked to the organisation structure.

When all organisation to organisation and organisation to customer links
have been completed, access the T & C Relationships (TRRL) screen, via
any of the entity's CRNs, to view all interposed entities and Services
Australia customers associated with that structure.

When a packaged review activity is finalised on the AR screen, all
organisations in the package will be assessed in the order of
attribution. When the last organisation is reassessed, the updated data
will then ripple through to all linked customers.

Related links

Assessing and recording distribution income

Assessing asset attribution

Recording attribution income

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Coding the Trust\Company Attribution (TRA) screen

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Creating links between organisations for trust and company purposes

Documents required to assess a private company

Documents required to assess a private trust

Multiple entity structures

Packaged activities

Recording attribution income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
