
Assessing asset attribution 043-04060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines the process for attributing the correct amount of
assets to a customer from their involvement in designated and controlled
private trusts or companies. Different rules apply to an approved
Special Disability Trust (SDT). This procedure does not cover SDTs.

Asset attribution

Asset attribution is the attribution of a private trust or private
company's assessable assets to a customer. The amount is determined by
the private trust or private company's assessable assets multiplied by
the customer's attribution percentage. This determination could involve
attribution of assets from multiple trusts and companies. In certain
limited circumstances a customer who is a genuine investor will be
assessed on a dollar and not attribution percentage basis based on the
original value of their genuine investment.

The assets of each private trust or private company will be recorded on
the relevant screens for that trust or company. It is essential that
assets are not double-counted. To prevent double-counting, if a trust or
company balance sheet includes equity in a related private trust or
private company, the assets will only be recorded on that private trust
or private company's own record.

The asset attribution amount for the private trust or private company
equals (adjusted assets less adjusted liabilities less genuine equity
investments) multiplied by the stakeholder's applicable attribution
asset percentage.

When determining the value of the entity's assets to be attributed to
the stakeholders, the net asset on the balance sheet will be the
starting point. Certain assets, such as the home of the attributable
stakeholder may be exempt. The value of other assets may need to be
updated to show their current market value. Certain liabilities, such as
monies owed to a person under the age of 18 years, may not be allowed as
deductions from gross assets. It will therefore be necessary to adjust
the balance sheet.

Types of adjustments

To calculate the true value of the private trust or private company
assets to be attributed to the stakeholders, the balance sheet may need
the following adjustments:

-   exempt or disregarded assets not assessed (removed)
-   asset values updated to reflect their current market value
-   the asset value of any shares in private companies or units in unit
    trusts removed
-   non-recognised liabilities will not be allowed
-   liabilities secured by exempt or disregarded assets will not be
    allowed
-   the apportionment of liabilities secured by both exempt assets and
    assessable assets will be adjusted

The historical value of genuine equity investments is generally accepted
as the current value of a genuine investment. While this is not an
adjustment to the balance sheet to determine the entity's total net
assets, genuine investment asset and liability values need to be removed
when determining the total attributable assets. Information about
genuine investors in private trusts and companies is not covered in this
procedure.

Other considerations that may be required when determining the value of
an entity's assets include:

-   real estate valuations
-   applicable interest rate
-   primary production aggregation

The Resources page contains examples of attributing assets to customers
from single and multiple entities.

Related links

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessment of liabilities for trusts and companies

Attribution percentages

Exempt Assets

Genuine investors in private trusts and companies

Managed investments - updating existing investments

Primary production aggregation

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Adding shares and securities

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
