
Northbound other markets claim assessment for TFES 043-21101452

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) only.

This document explains how to assess a Tasmanian Freight Equalisation
Scheme (TFES) northbound other markets claim.

TFES northbound other markets claims

A person or business may be eligible to claim assistance for a TFES
northbound other markets claim, when they ship eligible goods from
Tasmania to a final destination beyond Australia.

To be eligible for northbound other markets assistance, the goods must
be transhipped. This means that the eligible goods are shipped from
Tasmania to a port on the mainland of Australia and off-loaded from the
vessel. The goods are then loaded back on to the same vessel, a
different vessel, or an aircraft and sent outside of Australia.

To claim assistance for a northbound other markets claim, the claimant
must have incurred and paid the cost of shipping.

A claimant can also incur and pay the cost of shipping if:

-   They have used a freight broker, freight forwarder or freight
    logistics business to arrange shipping. In some cases they do not
    directly deal with a shipping company
-   They have an arrangement with a buyer, who is not a resident of
    Australia for the purposes of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 and
    the buyer pays the shipping costs, or
-   They use a claims agent to organise and pay the cost of shipping on
    their behalf

See the Reference page for a link to Information papers, Expanded
Component (Transhipment) and Incurred and paid the cost of shipping.

Claim receipt and allocation

Approved TFES claimants get online access when they register.

Claimants use Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) to lodge online
claims.

TFES northbound other markets claims are lodged online by either:

-   Tasmanian Bulk Upload System (TBUS) - the claimant enters the
    shipment information into an excel spreadsheet template, which is
    then uploaded to the system. The template and instructions are given
    to the business when approved as a TFES claimant
-   Third Party Portal – the claimant enters shipment information
    directly into the CBOS

If a claimant is unable to lodge an online claim, they can complete a
TFES-Claim for assistance- Goods going to other markets form (TAS022)
and send it by:

-   email
-   post, or
-   fax

Note: if a TFES claimant authorises a claims agent to lodge claims on
their behalf, the agent must lodge claims using one of the online
methods.

Supporting documents

Supporting documents must be lodged with the claim. This includes, but
is not limited to:

-   freight forwarder or shipping company invoices
-   supplier invoices
-   consignment notes
-   additional emails
-   letters or contracts

Required documents vary, depending on the claim type.

The Resources page contains a link to forms, user guides, Services
Australia website and external websites.

Related links

Tasmanian Freight Scheme (TFES)

TFES claim types

Northbound domestic goods claim assessment for TFES

Express Process of TFES claims

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) quality checking

Register a TFES claimant

Update TFES claimant information

Online services for TFES claimants

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
