-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the factors which assist in making a
determination on the nature of business of commission sales persons, and
how income is assessed for those commission sales persons considered as
employees.

Determining if a customer is considered an employee

Not all people working on a commission basis are necessarily
self-employed. For example, a business selling real estate may employ
'commission only' sales persons.

Despite the freedom the sales person may have about how they perform the
work, they are considered employees if they:

-   only carry out the work as representatives of the organisation
-   have calls made on their time
-   have no control over advertising
-   have no control over the form of contracts that buyers have to
    execute

A person is classed as an employee if the work they do is part and
parcel of the business. Real estate salespersons are considered
employees because their duties (selling real estate) are considered an
integral function of the business entity for which they work. For the
same reason an insurance salesperson is generally also regarded as an
employee.

Assessing commission income for employees

A person may be employed as an employee on a commission only basis, for
example a commission only real estate salesperson. In these cases where
commission is only payable if a result is obtained, the income is
classed as ordinary income.

The gross income earned from commission is then treated as assessable
income. The expenses incurred in generating commission income are not
allowable deductions from the commission received. The only exception to
this is when an allowance is paid for a specific purpose, for example
Motor Vehicle Allowance. In this case the employee must keep a record of
expenditure which can be claimed against the allowance and declare any
unused allowance as income.

Related links

Income for an independent contractor and commission income

Factors to determine self-employment

Income and expenses of a business

Assets and liabilities of a business

Commission sales persons considered as self-employed

Self Employed Decision Support Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
