-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines how to establish what is considered an entity
asset and how to assess the value of assets owned by a customer.

Establishing an entity asset

An asset of a designated entity is any asset (excluding exempt assets
and excluded assets), whether fixed or financial that the entity wholly
or partially owns. The value of the assets of a designated entity is
determined by the current market value less any allowable liabilities.

Generally, the starting point for the assessment of a trust or company's
assets is the entity's balance sheet amounts. In most cases, the balance
sheet figures contained in the trust or company's most recently
completed annual financial statements and taxation return can be used.

Asset Value

Assets should be assessed at their current market value. Where
necessary, Centrelink will obtain valuations from an approved valuer.
This cost is met by Centrelink.

Plant and equipment and motor vehicles are usually recorded on the
balance sheet at the depreciated value. It may be necessary to update
the value recorded to reflect the current market value. Livestock may be
recorded at an average cost. It may be necessary to update the value
recorded to reflect the current market value of the livestock.

Borrowing costs and formation expenses are not included as assets and
should be removed from the assessment of the entity assets. It is the
view of the Department of Social Services (DSS) that formation expenses
are an amount spent that would be unlikely to be recovered if the assets
of the entity were sold or if the entity itself were sold. The same
rationale applies to borrowing costs.

Liabilities of trusts and companies may not necessarily be recognised or
allowed as a liability of a trust or company.

Each entity should be indexed and have its own record to code
information on.

Related links

Adding shares and securities

Assessing asset attribution

Assessment of liabilities for trusts and companies

Customer's principal residence owned by a private trust or private
company - determining home ownership

Exempt Assets

Home property adjustment amount and apportionment calculations on entity
owned residence

Important screens for private trusts and private companies

Primary production aggregation

Real estate owned by a private trust or private company

The balance sheet

Valuation of real estate and other assets at new claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
