
Business structures and assessment 043-03000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the various business structures and how income
and assets from them are assessed against payments made under social
security law.

On this Page:

Types of business structures

Customers can be carrying on a business and have assessable income and
assets from one or more of the following types of business structures:

-   sole trader
-   partnership
-   private company
-   private trust

The assessment of a business under the income and assets tests can vary
depending on which type of business structure a customer is involved in.
Therefore, correct identification of the structure is important.

The financial statements of a business are also required to determine
the effect of the business on the customer under the income and assets
tests. An accurate assessment will ensure that customers receive their
correct entitlement to payment.

Assessing business income and assets

Generally, for sole traders and partnerships, Services Australia uses
the business entity accounting convention. Assets and investments not
considered to be related to the principal function of the business are
removed and assessed separately. From 1 January 2002 new rules have
applied to the assessment of trusts and companies under legislation
effective from that date.

Assessable income in regard to a business is based upon information
contained in the profit/loss statement.

The assessable asset value of a business is primarily based upon
information contained in the balance sheet and depreciation schedule.

Business profits are defined and calculated differently for accounting,
taxation and social security purposes.

Accounting profit is calculated in accordance with various accounting
standards and guidelines followed by the accounting profession. Profits
for taxation and social security purposes are calculated in accordance
with various legislative provisions.

As a general rule, the business deductions allowed by the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) are also allowed for social security purposes.
However, some expenses claimed as deductions, and certain special
concessions allowed by the ATO, are not deductible for Social Security
income test purposes. The primary source of verification should be the
latest available income tax return (ITR) and associated financial
statements.

Contents

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Self-employed or employee?

Factors to determine self-employment

Share traders

Contractors and commission sales persons

Steps to making an assessment of a business

Common financial statements

Starting a new business

Assets and liabilities of a business

Income and expenses of a business

Sole traders

Partnerships

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Related links

Business deductions

Business revenue

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Companies

Trusts

Primary production aggregation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
