
Controlled private trusts 043-04020090

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
SDT's income is exempt from the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt
from the assets test as long as the assets do not exceed the
concessional asset limit. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

This document outlines information regarding controlled private trusts.
A trust is a controlled private trust in relation to an individual if
the trust is a designated private trust and the individual passes the
control test or the source test.

On this Page:

Overview of controlled private trusts

When a private trust is assessed as a controlled private trust, the
income and assets of the trust may be attributed to the customer if they
are assessed as being an attributable stakeholder.

If the trust is not a controlled private trust, the assessment of the
customer's interest in the trust will be in accordance with Pre 1
January 2002 private trusts.

The control test

The control test looks at both formal and informal control, and is
applied on the grounds that the controller of a structure can be
considered the de facto owner of the structure's income and assets. This
is because he or she can use the assets for their own benefit or that of
their family.

Whereas the source test recognises that a customer transferring assets
to a structure generally retains some means of control.

To determine if a private trust is under an obligation or could
reasonably be expected to act in accordance with the directions or
wishes of the customer (alone or with associates) the following factors
may be relevant:

the relationship of the parties to each other, for example:

-   professional adviser
-   family
-   friends

any written agreements between the parties, for example, regarding the
use of accommodation or other trust assets

the nature and extent of any gift made by a customer to the private
trust, for example:

-   the value of the contributions
-   the type of contribution such as home, car, cash
-   the proportion that the value of the contribution has to the total
    assets of the trust
-   if the individual received consideration for the contribution, the
    amount of consideration

the nature and extent of any loans made by a customer to the private
trust, for example:

-   the value of the loan
-   the rate of interest payable
-   the proportion that the value of the loan has to the total
    liabilities of the trust

the nature of any benefit received by a customer from the trust for
example, use of a motor vehicle or holiday home of the trust

Related links

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Formal control of a trust

Informal control test

Source test

Attributable stakeholders for private trusts

Accepting and disclosing information regarding trusts and companies

Important screens for private trusts and private companies

Designated private trusts

Review of a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
