
Verifying evidence for Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy (AWS) claims 043-22032122

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to verify the information in Apprenticeship
Wage Subsidy (AWS) claims, including Boosting Apprenticeship
Commencements (BAC), Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC), and
Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS) claims where the Apprenticeship Data
Management System (ADMS), could not finalise the claim through
automation.

Verifying evidence to support an Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy claim

The Apprenticeship Data Management System (ADMS) uses Single Touch
Payroll (STP) to automatically verify AWS claims. ADMS also uses Optical
Character Recognition (OCR) to automatically verify BAC and CAC claims.

The STP automation process matches the gross wage amounts declared by
the employer against STP data. STP automation requirements are met if:

-   STP data is available, and
-   the declared gross wage amount is equal to or less than the STP data

Where ADMS is unable to automatically verify a PWS claim application
against STP data, the claim will be allocated to a Service Officer to
verify the attached evidence.

For BAC or CAC claims, ADMS will attempt to automatically using OCR to
verify the claim to:

-   read the wage evidence attachment, and
-   compare it with the gross wage amounts declared by the employer

Where ADMS is unable to automatically verify the claim using OCR, it is
allocated to a Service Officer to verify the attached evidence.

Claims cannot be verified through automation if:

-   training evidence is attached, or
-   ADMS has calculated a $0 subsidy amount payable

These claims are allocated to a Service. Officer to verify the attached
evidence.

Determining what evidence requires verification

Employers may upload a single payroll summary for the claim period or
attach multiple payslips. They may choose to upload several payslips in
a single attachment, or attach each payslip individually. For each
attachment there is a new line for the employer to declare:

-   date from
-   date to
-   gross amount

The ADMS System messaging in the Comments field will identify which
evidence attachments require reviewing. All claims with evidence that
training has commenced will allocate to Services Australia to verify.

Training evidence exemptions

Employers are not required to attach training evidence if:

they confirm it has previously been provided, or

if the apprentice's workplace (shown within the claim) is within the
following states and territories:

-   ACT
-   NSW
-   SA
-   TAS
-   Employers in these states are exempt from providing training
    evidence with their claim

Rejecting claims

Do not mark claims as Ineligible. Only Technical Peer Support Officers
(TPSO) are to mark claims as Ineligible, where the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) Apprenticeships Wage Subsidy
Escalations (AWSE) line provides advice to do so.

The Resources page contains Outbound contact protocols, Outbound call
scripts and internet links.

Related links

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Employer enquiries about Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS)

Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS)

Priority Wage Subsidies (PWS)

Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
