
Indexing an organisation for nominees and private trusts and companies 043-04120010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps for indexing an organisation for either
nominee arrangements or the private trusts and companies assessment
rules. Once an organisation is indexed it will have a record within the
Centrelink computer system and an independent Centrelink Reference
Number (CRN)

When indexing is required

Indexing will be required at the new claim stage or whenever a customer
requests an organisation to act as their nominee, or advises of
involvement in a private trust or company and a current record does not
exist. Information required to index the organisation record will be
found in the Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on
your behalf (SS313) form for nominees, and in the Private Company
(MODPC) or Private Trust (MODPT) form for private trusts and companies.

Four main reasons that an organisation would need to be indexed and a
record added, are for:

-   Centrepay purposes
-   payments to Child Care services (that is, Family Day Care subsidy
    remittances)
-   private trusts and companies assessment rules
-   recording organisations that are acting as nominees

Trusts and companies records are created in the Centrelink system in
Environment 'A'.

Nominee organisations will include the various State Trustee bodies,
other commercial trustee companies such as Perpetual Trustees or
financial planning companies who may act as nominees.

Nominee organisation records are created in the ORG system in
Environment 'B'. A nominee organisation must have a unique nominee
record. Where an organisation has an existing record, such as a Trust
and Company (TAC) or Centrepay record this cannot be used for nominee
relationships and a new record must be created.

Only officers with appropriate ICT Security Portal (ISP) access have the
ability to add a nominee organisation.

The Resources page contains links to modules used to gather information
about private trusts and companies and the form used to appoint a
nominee.

Related links

Centrepay

Creating links from organisations to customers for trust and company
purposes

Indexing, recording and reviewing organisations

Nominee organisations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
