
Home property adjustment amount and apportionment calculations on entity owned residence 043-04060020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines assessment of real estate owned by an entity. It
covers how real estate is assessed with regard to the entity's income
and assets, and the effect on the customers who reside in the property
and have an interest in the entity. It is possible for real estate owned
by a private trust or company to be both an exempt asset for one
controller, and not an exempt asset for the other controller(s).

On this Page:

Special Disability Trust real estate ownership

A Special Disability Trust (SDT) may own real estate that is the
principal beneficiary's home. It is not necessary to determine if the
principal beneficiary is a homeowner for a SDT. The home and curtilage
is an exempt asset.

Home ownership

When a customer occupies a house owned by a private company or trust and
is an attributable stakeholder they are considered to be a homeowner. A
customer may be considered a homeowner even if they are not an
attributable stakeholder of the private trust or private company. This
will be the case if the customer has a right or interest in their
accommodation that gives them reasonable security of tenure.

The term house and curtilage describes the portion of real estate which
is not assessed for Assets Test purposes. It is considered the home of
the customer. A common example is where the real estate is a farm on
which the customer's home is situated. For Assets Test purposes the farm
portion may be considered an assessable asset. If the customer owns the
property directly or indirectly as part of a private trust or private
company, the value of the house and curtilage is subtracted from the
gross value when determining the assessable assets amount of the private
trust or private company.

Since 1 January 2007, for all new claims the Assets Test assessment for
the principal home and curtilage has been restricted to the customer's
house and the adjacent land on the same title document. This is known as
the single title rule. There are now two curtilage tests used to
determine a customer's allowable house and curtilage concession, a
private land use test and an extended land use test. Note: a title
document may have more than one parcel of land included.

A grandfathered savings provision for real estate will grandfather
concessions to two groups of existing customers on payments continuously
prior to 1 January 2007.

The savings provision will cease when the customer's payment is
cancelled for any reason, or if they leave the property.

This also applies to customers whose home is held in a private trust or
private company structure. Where a private trust or private company owns
a property there may be more than one house and curtilage amount. For
example, the private trust or private company may own a farm on which
there are two or more houses each owned by different controllers who are
income support payment customers.

Where an asset includes the house and curtilage of a controller (that
is, the controller resides in the home), the house and curtilage portion
will not be considered to be an asset of that controller and a home
property adjustment amount will need to be recorded and is subtracted
from the controller's total net entity assets. If the property is also
owned by another controller (who is not living in the house) then the
value of the house and curtilage would be an assessable asset for that
controller.

The home property adjustment amount is the value of the house and
curtilage multiplied by the applicable attribution percentage. This is
deducted from the controller's attributed value of the entire property.

If there are a number of stakeholders with different exempt assets
(house and curtilage) on the property, then the Home Property Adjustment
must be recorded for each stakeholder.

If a liability is held against the property (that includes the exempt
house and curtilage), then the liability must be apportioned so that it
is not offset against the whole property when some of the liability is
actually for the exempt asset (for example, the house the controller is
living in).

Where apportionment is required, the home property value will need to be
reduced by the allowable portion of the liability before the applicable
attribution percentage is applied.

If there is more than one home property, individual home property
adjustment amounts will need to be calculated and applied for each
controller.

The Resources page contains examples of calculations of the home
property adjustment amount and apportionment.

Related links

Assessing asset attribution

Assessing house and curtilage

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Customer's principal residence owned by a private trust or private
company - determining home ownership

Other assets owned by an entity

Real estate owned by a private trust or private company

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
