
Bass Strait Passenger Vehicle Equalisation Scheme (BSPVES) 043-05010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) Team only

This document contains information relating to the Bass Strait Passenger
Vehicle Equalisation Scheme (BSPVES).

On this Page:

Purpose of the Scheme

The BSPVES reduces the cost by providing a rebate for transporting
eligible passenger vehicles across Bass Strait.

BSPVES was introduced in September 1996.

Administration of BSPVES

Services Australia undertakes the delivery of the BSPVES on behalf of
the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and
Communication.

All claims for a rebate payment under the scheme are assessed and
administered in accordance with the Ministerial Directions issued in
June 2008, as amended by the Secretary of the Department effective 1
July 2016.

Claims are processed by the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) Team.

Eligible transport for the rebate

The rebate is for the transport of eligible passenger vehicles
northbound, southbound or on a round trip between:

-   Devonport and Melbourne
-   Flinders Island and Port Welshpool
-   Melbourne and King Island - special conditions apply for King Island
    travel

Passenger vehicles not eligible for assistance are:

-   prime movers
-   vehicles carried on other vehicles or trailers
-   trailers
-   a vehicle charged a freight rate by a service operator that isn't
    part of a King Island or the Furneaux Group service

Rebate amounts

The following rebates are current from 1 July 2016. The rebate is up to:

-   $220.00 each way for a motor car
-   $220.00 each way for a bus
-   $440.00 each way for a motor home
-   $440.00 each way for an eligible passenger vehicle towing a caravan
-   $112.00 each way for a motorcycle
-   $32.00 each way for a bicycle

The rebates amounts are reviewed annually.

Eligible ferry operators under BSPVS

Eligible operators are:

TT Line passenger ferry operate between Devonport and Melbourne

SeaRoad - operates between King Island and Melbourne, once per week, on
Sundays (weather permitting)

-   claimants ferry their car on the SeaRoad ship 'Mersey' between King
    Island and Melbourne. The traveller then flies on or around the same
    date
    Note: charter flights are not eligible

Rebates for the driver

Rebate is provided to the driver of an eligible passenger vehicle

The rebate is provided to the driver of an eligible passenger vehicle in
the form of a reduced fare charged by a service operator. The service
operator is not the recipient of the rebate, this is reimbursed on a
monthly basis by the Australian Government for the total rebate provided
to eligible passengers under the scheme.

Drivers with a medical condition

Eligible drivers with a medical condition are able to access the reduced
passenger vehicle fare available under the Scheme if they travel on a
commercial airline service between either:

-   Melbourne and Devonport, or
-   a place on the Australian mainland and King Island or the islands of
    the Furneaux Group

Their vehicle must be carried in the same direction of travel on a Bass
Strait ferry service on or about the same day of travel.

Drivers who fly between mainland Australia and King Island or the
islands of the Furneaux Group

The scheme is also available to eligible drivers who must fly between
mainland Australia and King Island or the islands of the Furneaux Group
in the absence of a passenger ferry service between the islands and
mainland Australia.

Enquiries and contact information

All enquiries concerning eligible vehicle bookings and level of fares
applied under the scheme should be directed to the relevant ferry
operator.

Prospective ferry operators seeking information on BSPVES and other
associated administrative matters should contact the Tasmanian Transport
Programs (TTP) team.

The Resources page contains contact details and links to the Services
Australia website and the Department of Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development and Communications website for more information and
contact details. It also contains a table on terms relevant for
(BSPVES).

Related links

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
