[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist when assessing income from
sole trader and partnership business structures, following the disposal
of an asset by the business.

On this Page:

Adjusting the assessable income

If an asset is disposed of (sold) by a business, a decision must be made
as to whether an adjustment should be made to the assessable income
(assessed from the business) for social security Income Test purposes.

Any requests for adjustments of income from controlled private trusts or
companies must be referred to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) who
will do the assessment and determine the attribution to the customer.

Depreciated assets

If an asset is disposed of, or sold for less than its written down value
(WDV) in the depreciation schedule, a loss on disposal will have
occurred. Similarly, if an asset is disposed of for more than the WDV in
the depreciation schedule, a profit on disposal will have occurred. The
amount of the profit or loss on the sale of a depreciated asset is taken
into account when determining the overall profit of a business for tax
purposes.

For social security Income Test purposes the profit on the sale of a
depreciated asset is regarded as assessable income. Similarly a loss on
the sale of a depreciated asset is regarded as an allowable deduction
from other income earned by the business.

The principle of 'striking the current rate of income' must be kept in
mind in deciding whether to include this profit or loss, on the sale of
a depreciated asset, when calculating the assessable income of a
customer involved in a sole trader or partnership business. If the sale
of a particular item of depreciated asset is not part of the normal
cycle of activity undertaken by the business (i.e. such a sale occurs
only every few years) then the profit or loss derived from the sale is
not indicative of the current rate of income earned by the customer from
the business. In this situation the profit or loss from the sale would
not be taken into account when determining the current rate of
assessable income to be maintained from the business.

If, however, the sale of a particular item of depreciated asset occurs
on a regular basis (that is, every year) then the profit or loss derived
from such a sale would be taken into account when determining the
current rate of assessable income from the business.

Assets not depreciated

If an asset that has not been depreciated is sold (for example, real
estate), and the price obtained exceeds the original purchase price, a
capital gain would have occurred. This amount is not taken into account
when determining the current rate of assessable income of the business
for social security Income Test purposes, unless such a disposal is part
of the normal pattern of activity undertaken by the business.

Similarly, if an asset that has not been depreciated is sold and the
price obtained is less than the original purchase price, a capital loss
would have occurred. This amount is not taken into account when
determining the current rate of assessable income for social security
Income Test purposes.

Related links

Business revenue

Business deductions

The profit and loss statement

Business assets

The balance sheet

The depreciation schedule

Assessing sole trader income

Assessing partnership income

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessing income from private companies pre 1 January 2002

Historical treatment of income from discretionary trusts pre 1 January
2002

Assessing income from fixed trusts pre 1 January 2002

Steps to making an assessment of a business

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
