-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines information regarding the assessment of real
estate owned by an entity. It covers how the value of the real estate is
assessed and attributed to stakeholders.

Determining an exempt asset

It is possible for real estate owned by a private trust or company to be
both an exempt asset for one controller, and an assessable asset for
another controller(s).

A Special Disability Trust (SDT) may own real estate that is the
principal beneficiary's home. An SDT must not own any business property
or farm or holiday home used by a related party (for example, the
business premises of a small family business) even if market rent is
paid.

Where a customer occupies a house owned by a private company or trust
and the customer is an attributable stakeholder then they are considered
a homeowner. A customer may be considered a homeowner even if they are
not an attributable stakeholder of the company. This will continue to be
the case if the customer has a right or interest in their accommodation
that gives them reasonable security of tenure.

Determine the property value

Real estate is assessed as either a primary production asset or a
non-primary production asset. If assessed as primary production then the
primary production aggregation rules may apply.

Real estate is recorded on the entity's record.

Unlike individual customers, the real estate owned by an entity will not
be included for selection for annual indexation or automatically chosen
for review.

A valuation should be obtained unless the property has been purchased or
professionally valued within the last 12 months. The customer must
provide a copy of the purchase documents or valuation, and this value
should be used. However, if the customer's estimate differs to the
purchase price or valuation, a valuation should be obtained before
grant, unless it is clear the real estate value will not affect the rate
of payment. In these cases, request a valuation after grant. In the CAO
assessment DOC advise the assessing Service Officer after the claim has
been granted, to escalate to CAO using the T&C real estate valuation
Fast Note.

For annual reviews, if a customer is attributed with the assets of a
trust or company and the real estate has not been formally valued within
the last 24 months, a valuation should be obtained as part of a Trust
and Company program review. A higher valuation cannot be applied until
the date the valuation is returned. The review can be finalised pending
the return of the valuation.

Valuations can be applied after grant unless:

-   the estimate is unreasonable, or
-   customer is claiming PBS (Pension Bonus Scheme) or PBBS (Pension
    Bonus Bereavement Payment)

A valuation can also be requested:

-   if the value has significantly increased or reduced, or
-   if there has been a significant change to the property, or
-   where the customer's estimate is considered unreasonable

For property located overseas owned by a private trust or company, see
Valuation of real estate and other assets.

Return of valuation

A DOC will appear on the entity record when the valuation has been
completed. Details for coding are included on the DOC.

Escalate to Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)

To request action by a CAO for a valuation of real estate owned by a
private trust or private company, create an open work item. Use Fast
Note - select Auto text, use Complex Assessment > Request for CAO
action > T&C real estate valuation.

Related links

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Assessing asset attribution

Claiming and processing a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Customer's principal residence owned by a private trust or private
company - determining home ownership

Home property adjustment amount and apportionment calculations on entity
owned residence

Other assets owned by an entity

Loans and liabilities against assets

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

Primary production aggregation for private trusts and private companies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
