
Assessing derivation periods for debts arising from trust or company attributed income 043-04160080

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document provides information on derivation periods and attribution
periods for income earned by a private trust or private company.

Private trust or private company assets and income

Income earned and assets held from a private trust or private company
are assessed by a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO). The income and
assets will generally be assessed from the private trust or private
company’s most recent tax return. The period of time during which the
income must be calculated is the derivation period.

A customer who is involved in a private trust or private company may be
considered an attributable stakeholder. An attributable stakeholder can
request a reassessment of their circumstances at any time.

Debts for private trust or private company

Debts may occur when the income and assets of the private trust or
private company:

-   increase the level of income and/or assets of the private trust or
    company structure, and
-   the customer failed to notify within the notification period

See Using the correct date of effect when raising debts.

Attribution periods

A CAO will assess the income and assets of a private company or private
trust to determine the period for which the relevant income is to be
attributed to the customer. This is the attribution period.

Debt periods will align with attribution periods, which may be less than
12 months. Refer to the relevant attribution period when raising debts
and not the company's income in the particular financial year.

Discretion to determine the relevant attribution period sits with the
Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) as the delegate. In some cases, the
decision maker may determine that the attribution period should be the
same as the derivation period. This would mean that the attribution
period is the same as the tax year and a debt may exist for the full tax
year.

The Resources page contains examples of how CAOs assess an attribution
period.

Related links

Assessing and recording distribution income

Attribution percentages

Notification provisions

Attributable stakeholders for private companies

Attributable stakeholders for private trusts

Assessing attribution income

Specific cause of debt raising

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
