-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the factors used to decide if a customer is
self-employed or not.

Difference between self-employed and employed

A self-employed customer will:

-   have control over their work
-   supply most of the plant, equipment or materials
-   have responsibility for losses or damages caused by their business
    activity
-   have control over the use of any profit
-   work under a contract for service to produce a result

An employed customer will be:

-   receiving a wage or salary
-   likely to have some kind of supervision
-   integrated into the business they are supplying their services to
-   working under a contract of service, meaning they are usually paid
    an hourly or daily rate

Determining if a customer is self-employed

Make a decision by weighing up the facts to decide if a customer is
self-employed or not.

The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) website contains a guide called
'Are you in business?' which can help work out if some activities count
as running a business. See the Resources page for a link.

Factors to consider

Factors to consider to determine if a customer is running a business
include:

-   Does the activity have a significant commercial purpose or
    character?
-   Is there more than just an intention to engage in business?
-   Is there a purpose of profit as well as a prospect of profit?
-   Is there repetition and regularity in the activity?
-   Is the activity of the same kind and carried on in a similar manner
    to businesses in the industry?
-   Is the activity planned, organised and carried on in a business-like
    manner?
-   What is the size, scale and permanency of the activity?
-   Is the activity better described as a hobby, recreation or sporting
    activity?
-   Does a contract exist to produce results or for labour?
-   Who has the power or right to make decisions?
-   Is the work done for the business or as part of the business?
-   Does the risk of the profit or loss from the work rest with the
    person or the business?
-   Who owns the business premises, tools and equipment?
-   Has the customer received a payment summary?

Decision Support Tool

The Decision Support Tool:

-   is included in the Self-Employment workflow in Process Direct
-   will display if a Service Officer selects ‘Unsure’ to the question
    ‘Is the customer self-employed?’
-   gives a recommendation

The information, including the recommendation, will be recorded in a
Process Direct Note.

The Resources page contains the Decision Support Tool. It can be used to
help Service Officers in working out if a customer is self-employed or
an employee.

Related links

Commission sales person considered as employees

Commission sales person considered as self-employed

Income for an independent contractor and commission income

Partnerships

Self-employed or employee?

Sole Traders

Treatment of lump sums

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
