
Offsetting profit and losses between businesses 043-03100070

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the offsetting of profit
and losses between businesses.

On this Page:

Offsetting losses

A person may operate more than one business and be able to offset the
losses from one against the profit from others, for taxation purposes.
Under section 1075 of the Social Security Act 1991, only expenses that
relate to each business can be deducted from that business's income.
This applies regardless of whether the business activities are conducted
under the umbrella of the same business structure. That is a business
that operates in more than one field or by separate businesses entities.

Limits of offsetting

Businesses that are not necessarily related cannot be offset against
each other. Unrelated fields of activity are to be treated as separate
sources of income.

A loss from one business activity can only be offset against the
assessable profit from another business activity if the assessable
income relating to the second business could not have arisen without the
losses by the first business being incurred, that is, the loss was
necessarily incurred to produce the income for the other profitable
activity.

When the loss made by one business activity is related to the profit of
a second business activity, offsetting is allowed for the specific
portion of the losses which directly relate to the profits of the second
business activity. In some cases this will be the total loss. In other
cases it will only be a portion of the overall loss made by a business
that is able to be offset against the profitable business activity.

In all cases it is up to the customer to identify the specified portion
of the losses of the first business that were necessarily incurred to
earn the income of the second business. This situation would usually
only arise at the request of the customer. The Australian Taxation
Office will allow a loss from a business to be offset against income
from salary/wages, interest on investments, dividends or almost any
other sources of income. Offsetting, in this case, is not allowed for
Social Security income test purposes. Each source of income is assessed
separately with no offsetting except in the circumstances mentioned
above.

Treatment of real estate activities

The income received from renting, letting or a lease, is considered to
be derived from a profit-making activity and not from a business.
Accordingly, in most situations offsetting of rental income is not
allowed for Social Security income test purposes either:

-   between rental properties, or
-   between income from rental activities and income from business
    activities

If the net income from a property is a negative amount, the income for
social security purposes is nil

Rental income and expenses

The customer may be a controller, partner or sole trader in one business
which owns the real estate which is occupied and rented by another
business in which they are a controller, partner or sole trader. For
example:

-   A farming property is owned by a private company which the customer
    controls. The farm is leased by the sole trader farming business
    owned by the customer
-   A partnership between two customers which own a commercial laundry,
    the premises are rented by one of the partners. This partner
    operates a laundry/dry cleaning business, from the rented laundry

When the loss made by one business activity is related to the profit of
a second business activity, offsetting is allowed for the specific
portion of the losses which directly related to the profits of the
second business activity. In some cases this will be the total loss. In
other cases it will only be a portion of the overall loss made by a
business that is able to be offset against the profitable business
activity.

If the rental activity profit is dependent upon the loss generated by
the second business activity, then the loss that directly relates to the
rental activity profit may be offset against the rental activity profit.

Only expenses/loss that relate to the generation of the rental activity
profit may be offset. The losses need to be necessarily related (for
example, land rates expense, rent expense, maintenance and repairs). If
the total amount of loss distributed to the customer from one related
activity exceeds the profit of another, this does not mean there is no
income to be assessed.

The amount allowed to reduce the profitable entities income is limited
to the loss distributed to the customer.

Property developers are considered to be carrying on a business,
therefore income from this source can be offset by losses from a
necessarily related business.

If more assistance is required in determining whether the profit and
losses of the businesses are related, the case can be referred to a
Complex Assessment Officer for assessment.

Offsetting for trusts and companies

Offsetting of business losses also applies to controlled private trusts
and companies. A sole trader or partner in a partnership is allowed to
offset any loss from that business operation against their share of any
attributed income from a private controlled trust or company (and vice
versa), provided the loss of one business is necessarily related to the
profit of the other.

The Resources page contains examples of cases of groups of businesses
and whether they are able to offset profits or losses and offsetting
profit and losses between businesses.

Related links

Income and expenses of a business

Business revenue

Business deductions

The profit and loss statement

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
