
The profit and loss statement 043-03070010

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the profit and loss statement,
also known as the statement of financial performance, and assessing the
information.

Description

A profit and loss statement (sometimes called an 'income statement') is
a historical record of the business gross income derived during an
accounting period and the costs and expenses incurred in generating this
income. It usually covers a period of 12 months, but can be shorter. For
example a new business operating for less than a year.

The profit and loss statement is not intended as an accurate guide to
the future earning capacity of the business because it is a record of
past performance.

A profit and loss statement will often detail the current year's figures
alongside last year's figures. This allows easy comparison between the 2
years. It is usually prepared in conjunction with a business tax return.

Generally, the assessable income of a business is based on the net
profit of a business. However, not all expenses claimed by a business
for tax purposes are allowed by Centrelink to calculate the assessable
income of a business.

Why does Centrelink need a profit and loss statement?

-   The profit and loss statement shows the type and value of the total
    business income from all sources
-   It is also necessary to establish the type and value of all business
    expenses deducted from business income as not all expenses are
    allowable deductions from income under Social Security Law
-   Once the total value of all business income is known, then the
    customer's share of the income can be calculated

Income

Income can be amounts of revenue derived (not just amounts received) in
the period covered by the profit and loss statement.

Revenue

Sources of revenue a business might have:

-   sales
-   interest
-   fees
-   rent
-   profit or loss on sale of an asset

Revenue items are resources or benefits received by the business during
the financial period as a result of providing products or services to
customers. Revenue refers to earnings from the operations of the
business. It is usually shown separately from non-core business income,
for example rent, interest, capital gain

If a source of revenue is the Fuel Tax Credits, administered by the
Australian Taxation Office, it is not a separate source of income but
should be added into the business general income

Sales

Sales include both cash sales for which payment has been received and
credit sales for which payment has yet to be received.

Expenses

Expenses are the outflows of resources required to generate revenue for
the financial period.

Expenses commonly incurred by a business in earning revenue include:

-   wages
-   insurance
-   rent
-   utilities
-   depreciation

Expenses detailed on a profit and loss statement can include those
incurred but not yet paid

Gross profit

The gross profit of a business is the value of sales, less the cost of
purchasing the goods sold during the period covered by the profit and
loss statement.

Net profit

The net profit of a business is calculated by deducting all the expenses
incurred from the income received. The Assessable income for a business
is based upon the net profit.

A profit will result when there is an excess of revenue/income over
expenses. If expenses are more than revenue, the business result is a
loss. This shows in a profit and loss statement by the word 'loss' or
enclosing the amount in brackets. That is, ($5,000) indicates a loss of
$5,000.

Trading stock

Included in the net profit of a business is accounting for the change in
the value of stock of a business. The Cost of Goods Sold is a deduction
from the gross profit.

Cost of Goods Sold = Opening Stock + Purchases - Closing Stock

When the customer provides a profit and loss statement including Cost of
Goods Sold, there is no need to adjust the net profit. In some
circumstances, there is a 'negative' Cost of Goods Sold included as
income of the business.

Annualising net profit

If a customer supplies a profit and loss for less than 12 months, the
net profit must be annualised to be coded on the Business Detail (BUS)
screen.

For example, a customer provides a 3 month profit and loss statement
(SU580) with net profit of $2,500. Expenses claims may be annual costs
so must be apportioned to the period of the profit and statement.

Remove non allowable deductions

Divide the resulting net income by the number of days the profit and
loss statement represents, then:

-   for sole traders and partnerships, multiply by 364, or
-   for private trusts and private companies, multiply by 365

When a customer provides more than 1 profit and loss for a business
commenced part way through a financial year, the net profit must be
annualised for coding the BUS screen. For example, a business commenced
1 January. The customer provides monthly profit and loss statements for
the period 1 January - 30 June. The customer will have calculated in the
last statement the figure for the period 1 January - 30 June, resulting
in a calculation of a net profit of $5,000. The Service Officer must
convert this to an annual figure.

Note: due to legislation, 365 days must be used when annualising private
trust and private company income (SSAct section 1207Y) and 364 days when
annualising sole trader and partnership income (SSAct Section 1073).

The Resources page contains a links to the Profit and Loss Statement
(SU580) and interim profit calculators.

Related links

Business deductions

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Assessing sole trader income

Assessing partnership income

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessing income from private companies pre 1 January 2002

Historical treatment of income from discretionary trusts pre 1 January
2002

Assessing income from fixed trusts pre 1 January 2002

Steps to making an assessment of a business

Steps to assess an interim profit and loss statement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
