
Intrastate (King Island and Furneaux Group) claim assessment for TFES

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) only.

This document explains how to assess a King Island and Furneaux group
(KIFG) claim.

Intrastate - King Island and Furneaux Group (KIFG) claims

A person or business may claim assistance when they ship eligible goods
from King Island or the Furneaux Group to Tasmania, or from Tasmania to
King Island or the Furneaux Group.

The meaning of eligible intrastate goods is found in clause 2.13 of the
Ministerial Directions.

The claimant must have incurred and paid the cost of shipping the
eligible intrastate goods. Assistance must not have been paid to any
other person for the shipment of the goods.

Claim receipt and allocation

KIFG claims are lodged by either:

Online lodgement (for registered claimants) using Centrelink Business
Online Services (CBOS). Using either:

-   Tasmanian Bulk Upload System (TBUS) - the claimant enters the
    shipment information into an excel spreadsheet template, which is
    then uploaded to the system. The template and instructions are given
    to the business when approved as a TFES claimant
-   Third Party Portal – the claimant enters shipment information
    directly into the CBOS system

a Claim for assistance – domestic goods form (TAS002) manual claim form
and sent by:

-   email
-   post, or
-   fax

Note: if a TFES claimant authorises a claims agent to lodge claims on
their behalf, the agent must lodge claims using one of the online
methods.

Supporting documents

Supporting documents must be lodged with the claim. This includes, but
is not limited to:

-   freight forwarder or shipping company invoices
-   supplier invoices
-   consignment notes
-   additional emails
-   letters or contracts

Required documents vary, depending on the claim type.

The Resources page contains a link to forms, user guides, Services
Australia website and external websites.

Related links

Register a TFES claimant

Register a claim for a TFES claimant

Southbound manufacturers and miners claims for TFES (M Scheme)

Southbound primary producer claim for TFES (P Scheme)

TFES claim types

Update TFES claimant information

TFES payment process

Express Process of TFES claims

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) quality checking

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
