
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Private Company (MOD PC)
which is used to obtain details when a customer indicates that they (or
their partner) are involved in a private company, or that they were
involved in a private company immediately before claiming an income
support payment.

Purpose of MOD PC

The information collected in conjunction with the MOD PC enables
Services Australia to assess income and assets from a private company.

Customers (or their partners) who indicate they are involved in a
business as a sole trader or are a member of a partnership need to
complete a Business details MOD F. If they are involved in a private
trust, they will need to complete a Private Trust MOD PT.

On 1 July 2019, the Work Bonus was extended to include self-employment
income through personal exertion. This is when self-employed people earn
income from engagement in gainful work for example bookkeeping, lawn
mowing or plumbing. Customer's who are eligible for Work Bonus will be
asked to declare the percentage of their income from the company that is
earned through personal exertion.

Assistance completing the MOD PC

Much of the information required on the form is only available from
those who know the details of the company. Therefore staff will not be
able to help the customer complete the form.

Services Australia suggests the customer talks to the company tax agent
or accountant and considers having them complete the form on their
behalf. However, it is still the responsibility of the customer to
ensure that the form is completed and returned.

If a customer (or their partner) requires an accountant or tax agent to
assist in completing the form, Services Australia will not reimburse any
fees charged.

Documentation required

The MOD PC requires customers (and/or their partners) to attach
documents such as taxation returns, profit and loss statements, balance
sheets, depreciation schedules, trust deeds etc.

When the MOD PC is returned, ensure that all questions on the form have
been completed and that the appropriate documents have been attached.
See Documents required to assess a private company for guidance.

Scan all documents provided and then record referral to Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) on the customer's record.

If the customer (or their partner) is involved in more than one private
company, separate MOD PC is required for each private company.

The Resources page contains a link to the Private Company (MOD PC).

Related links

Assessment of trusts and companies

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships MOD F

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
