-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the assessment of income and
assets when a business has ceased to operate or has closed.

Business income

Income from a customer's interest in a business is not employment
income. Business income is assessed as other ordinary income. It is used
when calculating the accrual of Working Credits. However, the customer
is unable to deplete their Working Credit balance to offset business
income.

When a customer who is involved in a business (as a sole trader,
partnership, or is involved in a private trust or private company)
advises of a complete cessation of current business activity, the
business is to be reassessed. It is important the income and assets
being maintained from the business are not zeroed, as more information
is required to determine the reason for the change, whether the
situation is temporary or permanent, and what effect the change in
circumstances has had on the structure itself. The business structure
doesn't necessarily cease to exist merely because the business activity
has ceased.

Business impacted by a natural disaster

When a business has been impacted as a result of a natural disaster,
such as the Victorian Bushfires or the Queensland Floods, a reassessment
of the income and assets will be required. If the business has suffered
a reduction in activity as a result of the event, it must be reassessed
as an unexpected downturn of a business. If the business activity has
completely ceased as a result of the event, whilst the business
structure may not have ceased to exist, the current income would be nil
and the asset value may have to be revised.

Assessment of a business

Each business must be assessed on its merits. It is important the
business income in regard to the entity continues to be maintained until
investigation has proven the business has ceased or been sold. It may
also be necessary to examine if there have been business cycles in past
years to determine if the business income is of a seasonal nature. This
is particularly important, as the previous year's business income must
be maintained unless there is a change in circumstances. The fact there
is no current business income may not be a true reflection of the
continuing annual business income of the customer (or their partner).
For example, is the closedown:

-   due to a change in personal circumstances, for example, the customer
    is ill
-   due to the new circumstances of the business, such as the loss of a
    major contract or major downturn in the industry
-   a part of the normal seasonal cycle of activity applicable to the
    business
-   a result of a natural disaster such as the Victorian Bushfires, the
    Queensland floods, etc

Such factors could have a significant influence on the Income Test and
Assets Test assessment of the business.

Cessation of business activity

A business has ceased when, the:

-   customer and/or partner has sold the business and there are no more
    assets and no further income will be received, or
-   business has permanently stopped trading and there are no more
    business assets to assess and no further income will be received

If the business has been sold or ceases to operate, the income
previously assessable in respect of the activity undertaken by the
business is no longer relevant. However the assets of the business must
be reassessed. For example, if some of the business assets, or the
business itself, have been sold, then proceeds from the sale may have
been reinvested through the business structure, or used to pay debts. If
the proceeds are invested, the investments may produce a different
income and the business asset values may be different to the previous
financial statements provided. If the customer indicates the previous
balance sheet is no longer an accurate indication of the current net
asset position of the business, a revised balance sheet of the sole
trader or partnership business and a statement outlining what has
happened to the assets of the business is required.

Evidence of cessation or sale of business

Information and evidence is required in order to establish exactly what
has occurred. Documents can be in the form of:

-   a contract of sale
-   confirmation of a Company, business name or ABN cancellation
-   confirmation a lease on a shop has expired
-   confirmation plant and equipment have been sold
-   a copy of the last contract
-   a letter from the customer’s accountant stating ‘the business has
    ceased’ and the reason for the change
-   if the customer is ill, a statement detailing if anyone else is
    going to continue the business during the period of illness

Sale or cessation of a business operated through a private trust or private company

If the business is conducted by a private trust or private company
(entity) and the business has been sold or has ceased, the case will
need to be referred to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO). The CAO will
conduct a full review of the entity.

The updated balance sheet of the entity and a statement outlining what
has happened to the assets of the business and whether these have been
distributed to shareholders or beneficiaries or reinvested by the entity
must be obtained and referred to the CAO.

Related links

Seasonal business activity has ceased completely

Seasonal downturn in business

Unexpected downturn of a business

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships Mod F

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Assessing and coding the Private Trust details from the Mod PT

Income and expenses of a business

Assets and liabilities of a business

The balance sheet

Sole traders

Partnerships

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
