
Sportsperson and professional entertainers claim assessment for TFES 043-22070622

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) only

This document explains how to assess a Tasmanian Freight Equalisation
Scheme (TFES) claim for sportspersons and professional entertainers.

TFES sportsperson and professional entertainers claims

TFES assistance may be available for the cost of shipping equipment used
by:

-   Sportspersons competing in a sporting event where prize money or
    other financial reward is offered
-   Professional entertainers receiving an income, fee or financial
    reward for performing in a show or event

Other financial reward may include monetary payment, goods or services
which may provide monetary gain if sold. Examples include:

-   An employment or other contract engaging a person to compete
-   Appearance money or other payment for competing
-   Reimbursement or other contribution in return for competing (e.g.
    payments or store gift cards, food, fuel, travel or accommodation)
-   A sponsorship agreement that requires the sportsperson to
    participate in specific events while displaying a company logo in
    return for payment
-   Equipment related to the profession (e.g. electronics, cars, golf
    clubs)
-   Collectables
-   Shares

Non-financial reward is not acceptable for the purpose of a TFES
sportsperson or professional entertainer claim. Examples of
non-financial reward include:

-   A recognition or participation certificate
-   Trophy, medal or plaque
-   An item named after the winner

The claimant may need to provide evidence of prize money, income, fee or
other financial reward. Acceptable evidence is:

-   Entry forms
-   Website details showing prize money on offer
-   Photographic evidence
-   Copies of contracts
-   Receipts

All eligible equipment must be transported by sea in a round trip
between:

-   Mainland Australia and Tasmania, or vice versa
-   Mainland Tasmania and King Island or vice versa, or
-   Mainland Tasmania and the Furneaux Group or vice versa

Equipment shipped to the mainland for transhipment is not eligible for
TFES assistance.

The claimant must have incurred and paid the entire cost of shipping the
eligible equipment. Claims are not eligible if more than one person pays
the freight for the round trip.

Equipment must be used directly in the entertainment or sporting event,
it does not include living accommodation or personal vehicles.

TFES assistance is only paid on the return leg of a round trip. The
return leg must be completed within 6 months from the outward leg and
contain the same cargo.

Both legs of the round trip must be completed before a claim is
submitted.

Consideration is given to whether the sporting event or entertainment is
the primary purpose of the trip.

Talent managers who have incurred the cost of shipping eligible
equipment may claim on behalf of the sportsperson or professional
entertainer, if they:

-   register as a claimant
-   provide a letter of authorisation from the eligible sportsperson or
    professional entertainer

Claim receipt and allocation

TFES sportsperson and professional entertainers claims are lodged
either:

Online (for registered claimants) using Centrelink Business Online
Services (CBOS) and choosing either:

-   Tasmanian Bulk Upload System (TBUS) - the claimant enters the
    shipment information into an excel spreadsheet template, which is
    then uploaded to the system. The template and instructions are given
    to the business when approved as a TFES claimant
-   Third Party Portal – the claimant enters shipment information
    directly into the CBOS system

Claim for assistance – domestic goods form (TAS002) and sent by:

-   email
-   post, or
-   fax

Note: if the claimant authorises a claims agent to lodge on their
behalf, the agent must lodge using one of the online methods.

Supporting documents

Supporting documents must be lodged with the claim. This includes, but
is not limited to:

-   TFES – Sportsperson and Professional Entertainers form (TAS008)
-   TFES – Cargo and trailer dimensions form (TAS016)
-   freight forwarder or shipping company invoices for both legs of the
    round trip
-   supplier invoices
-   consignment notes
-   additional letter, email, or contacts

The Resources page contains a link to forms, user guides, Services
Australia website and external websites.

Related links

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES)

TFES claim types

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) quality checking

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
