
Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS) 043-22090842

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides details of the Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies
(AWS).

Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS)

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) has engaged
Services Australia to support service delivery of the following AWS:

-   Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC), from 12 April 2022
-   Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC), from 12 April 2022
-   Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS), from 1 October 2022

BAC and CAC are 2 AWS paid under the Australian Apprenticeships
Incentives Program (AAIP). The PWS is an AWS paid under the Australian
Apprenticeships Incentive System (Incentive System). The PWS commenced
on 1 July 2022, replacing the AAIP. Employers and/or apprentices
receiving payments or subsidies under the AAIP can continue to receive
these for the remainder of their apprenticeship.

There are several apprenticeship wage subsidies, employers or
apprentices could claim under the Incentive System or AAIP. The agency
only supports service delivery for BAC, CAC and PWS.

To prevent confusion, refer to each subsidy by its name (BAC, CAC or the
Priority Wage Subsidy) when speaking with employers rather than the
collective term “Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy”.

The agency undertakes:

-   Verification of AWS claims, claims in the DEWR Apprentice Data
    Management System (ADMS), using DEWR Logons, and
-   Inbound telephony support to employers claiming an AWS

See Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies and Priority Wage
Subsidy (PWS) for details of each subsidy.

Differences between BAC/CAC and PWS

The eligibility criteria for BAC and CAC covers all occupations. PWS has
a specific scope that only applies to priority occupations. PWS
eligibility requires the apprenticeship to be in a relevant
qualification and occupation as defined in the Australian
Apprenticeships Priority List.

Claim periods differ between PWS and BAC/CAC . Employers claim:

-   BAC/CAC in arrears on a quarterly basis. For example. 1 January – 30
    March, 1 April – 30 June, 1 July – 30 September, 1 October – 31
    December. These claim periods are the same for every BAC/CAC claim
-   PWS in arrears for 3 months. The claim period is based on individual
    apprenticeship commencement date. The claim application becomes
    payable when the apprentice or employer reaches their Effect date,
    after serving an initial 3 month waiting period. Effect dates differ
    for each apprentice. See Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS)

BAC/CAC payments are available to employers under the AAIP
grandfathering arrangements, for apprenticeships that commenced or
recommenced between 5 October 2020 and 30 June 2022. The PWS, is
available to eligible employers under the Incentive System, for
apprenticeships that commenced or recommenced from 1 July 2022.
Employers are unable to receive an AWS under both the AAIP and the
Incentive Scheme, for the same apprentice.

Staff roles and responsibilities

Services Australia staff are not responsible for:

-   determining eligibility for AWS
-   providing advice or assistance on the myGov ID/myGov registration
    process
-   providing IT or ADMS navigation support
-   reassessment of rejected claims
-   appeals, complaints, compliance or debt actions
-   general enquiries relating to AAIP or Incentive System payments
    (other than BAC, CAC and PWS)
-   claims or enquiries about BAC/CAC for wages from 5 October 2020 to
    31 December 2021

Australian Apprenticeship Support Network (AASN) providers determine
eligibility for all AWS. Refer employers enquiring about eligibility to
their AASN provider.

Services Australia staff are responsible for:

-   verifying AWS claim evidence where a claim cannot be finalised
    through automation, and
-   providing a telephony service for employer enquiries about their AWS
    claims

Note: ADMS will calculate and pay the subsidy amount.

Contents

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
