
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage contact from employers regarding
Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS), including Boosting Apprenticeship
Commencements (BAC), Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC), or
Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS) claims.

Employer contact

Services Australia provides an inbound telephony service on behalf of
the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) for employer
enquiries about the following Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS):

-   Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC)
-   Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC), and
-   Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS)

Employers contact the agency via the Apprenticeships Wage Subsidy (AWS)
line. Do not transfer calls to or from the line.

Note: there are several apprenticeship wage subsidies, employers or
apprentices could claim under the Incentive System or AAIP. The agency
only supports service delivery for BAC, CAC and PWS. To prevent
confusion, refer to each subsidy by its name (BAC, CAC or the Priority
Wage Subsidy) when speaking with employers rather than the collective
term 'Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy'.

Staff roles and responsibilities

Staff use the Apprenticeship Data Management System (ADMS) to manage
employer enquiries.

The roles and responsibilities of Australian Apprenticeship Support
Network (AASN) providers vary, for each AWS.

For BAC and CAC:

Refer employers to their AASN provider for enquiries about:

-   eligibility for an AWS
-   advice on the AWS registration process
-   general AWS information
-   claims for wages paid from 5 October 2020 to 31 December 2021
-   questions about grandfathering arrangements for the Australian
    Apprenticeship Incentive Program (including BAC and CAC)

Refer employers in the first instance to the Australian Apprenticeships
website for enquires about:

-   myGov/myGov ID registration and accessing ADMS
-   assistance with claim navigation in ADMS
-   general advice about subsidy payments and calculations

Where employers indicate they would prefer telephony assistance or their
enquiry relates to an appeal or complaint, refer them to the Department
of Education Student enquiry line (option 3).

For PWS, refer employers to their AASN provider for all of the above
enquiries.

Progress of Claim

Employers may contact to enquire about the progress of a submitted BAC,
CAC or PWS claim, see Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies and
Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS).

Determine claim progress by:

-   checking the AWS claim application status, and
-   reviewing the Comments and Service Notes in ADMS

When assisting employers with progress of claim enquiries:

-   record a Service Note in ADMS detailing the discussion and any
    actions taken
-   do not make updates to the claim status in ADMS, unless directed to
    in the Operational Blueprint

Services Australia Local Peer Support (LPS) will manage claims referred
to the DEWR AWSE line. Advise employers enquiring on the progress of
these claims that their claim has been escalated for investigation and
will be progressed as soon as possible after resolution. The DEWR AWSE
line is for Services Australia LPS only, do not give the number to
employers.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the student
enquiry line, the Australian Apprenticeships website with information on
Australian Apprenticeship Support Network (AASN) providers and to make a
complaint about Employment Services.

Related links

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Verifying evidence for Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy (AWS) claims

Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
