-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for the assessment of sole traders
involved in primary production. The aggregation of a customer's primary
production assets and liabilities allows primary producers to offset the
value of all their primary production liabilities against the value of
all their primary production assets.

On this Page:

Assets and liabilities of sole traders

As a sole trader's business is not a separate legal entity to the
person, the assets and liabilities of the business are the assets and
liabilities of the customer. A sole trader lodges an individual tax
return and the associated financial statements. The balance sheet shows
the assets and liabilities of the business.

A primary production sole trader may also have an attributable interest
in a private company or private trust engaged in primary production.
From 1 January 2002, any net primary production asset or net primary
production liability attributed from a private company or private trust
to the customer, must be included in the overall aggregation calculation
to provide the most favourable result for the customer.

This means if the customer has an interest in one or more business
structures involved in primary production, the assets and related
liabilities need to be taken into consideration.

Loans

Loans from sole traders to their own attributable primary production
private companies or trusts, are not primary production assets.

A sole trader's borrowings from their primary production private
companies or trusts are not primary production liabilities, unless proof
of the primary production purpose of the borrowings can be demonstrated
(for example, the funds are used to purchase a primary production asset
such as a tractor).

If a loan is used to purchase 100% of primary production assets (for
example, buy a tractor) and the loan is secured over primary production
and non-primary production assets (for example, the family home), the
liability is still considered a 100% primary production liability.

Apportionment

Apportionment is used if a loan relates to both primary production
assets and non-primary production assets. An example is, the loan was
obtained to purchase a farm and the customer's principal home. Only the
portion of the loan relating to the primary production asset is used in
the aggregation calculation.

Refer sole trader aggregation assessments to a Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO) to do, see  Identifying and making suitable referrals to
the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).

The Resources page contains an example of an apportionment calculation
of a mixed asset.

Related links

Assessing sole trader assets

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Primary production aggregation

Raising social security debts due to self-employment or business income

Sole traders

The balance sheet

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
