
Testamentary trusts 043-04110040

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on testamentary trusts and their
effect on a customer's income and assets assessment. A testamentary
trust is a trust created by the will of a deceased person. A will is a
document that describes how the person wishes their property to be
distributed after their death.

On this Page:

Assessment of income and assets for a testamentary trust

The assessment of a customer's income and assets in relation to a
testamentary trust depends on whether the customer has a:

-   right to a devise (freehold land) or a legacy for the estate
-   life interest in the estate
-   remainder interest or contingent interest in the estate

Any share in a deceased estate is disregarded until it is received or is
able to be received. For a period of up to 12 months following the death
of the testator (the maker of the will) it will be accepted that an
interest in an estate which has not been distributed is not able to be
received. After this period investigation into the reasons for
non-distribution will be carried out. If there is no legal action
preventing the distribution of the estate then the customer's share of
the estate should be assessed.

Testamentary trusts activated on or before 31 March 2001

Where a fixed testamentary trust is activated on or before 31 March
2001, the practice of assessing the asset value based on the fixed
entitlements of the beneficiaries and the income on actual distributions
to beneficiaries will continue. However, the rules for attribution will
apply, if after 31 March 2001 a customer:

-   transfers additional assets or funds to the trust
-   provides services to the trust, or
-   alters the entitlements of trust beneficiaries, for their own
    benefit or otherwise

Where a discretionary testamentary trust is activated on or before 31
March 2001, the trust income and assets would be attributed, via the
general attribution rules, to the formal controller. However, if the
trust is being administered for the sole or partial benefit of the
surviving partner and if the surviving partner is exercising informal
control, attribution will be to the surviving partner

Testamentary trusts activated after 31 March 2001

The surviving partner will be attributed with the income and assets of
the trust if:

-   the surviving partner has control of the trust (irrespective of
    whether the surviving partner is a beneficiary), or
-   an associate of the surviving partner has control of the trust, and
    the surviving partner is a potential beneficiary

If the surviving partner (or an associate of the surviving partner) does
not control the trust, the trust income and assets would generally be
attributed, via the general attribution rules, to the formal controller.

Testamentary trusts with a commercial trustee

Some testamentary trusts will be established with a commercial trustee
as the controller of the trust. In these cases the terms of the will
must be examined to determine who the testator intended to benefit under
the terms of the will. Attribution will be made to those who are
nominated as beneficiaries of the trust. It is not possible to attribute
the income or assets of a trust to a commercial trustee.

Related links

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Genuine investors in private trusts and companies

Life interest in an asset or income

Protective and statutory trusts for persons unable to handle their own
affairs

Recording attribution income

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Where a controller could not access trust capital and/or income as at
7.30 pm on 9 May 2000

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessing income from fixed trusts pre 1 January 2002

Fixed trusts set up before 7.30 pm on 9 May 2000

Historical treatment of assets from discretionary trusts pre 1 January
2002

Historical treatment of income from discretionary trusts pre 1 January
2002

Assessing assets from fixed trusts pre 1 January 2002

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
