-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for the use of a Business details
(MOD F) for sole traders and partnerships to assess a customer's
eligibility for an income support payment. It also outlines the
supporting documentation a customer needs to provide with a MOD F.

When to use a MOD F

A MOD F is used when a customer has indicated they:

-   are, or were current on an income support payment, and
-   operate a business as a sole trader or as a partner in a partnership

The MOD F provides details about one sole trader business or one
partnership. If a customer is involved in more than one business
structure, a separate MOD F is required for each business.

Note: Private Company (MOD PC) and/or Private Trust (MOD PT) are to be
sent to the customer for private company and private trust involvement.

The information collected in conjunction with the MOD F enables Services
Australia to assess income and assets from a:

-   Sole trader business
-   Business partnership

Customers are required to attach documents with the MOD F such as:

-   income tax returns
-   profit and loss statements
-   balance sheets
-   depreciation schedules etc.

Defining business activities

A person is regarded as carrying on a business when they are:

-   actively engaged in profit making activities (that is, not just
    owning rental properties) and
-   are a sole trader or partner in a partnership

A sole trader or partnership has a legal entitlement to the profits
generated by the business. The business is theirs and not a separate
entity, meaning that they cannot employ themselves. This is in contrast
to the profits made by a private company or private trust. These profits
belong to the private company or private trust until declared or
distributed.

Effect of business income on rate of payment

The only exception to the general rule of using a customer's gross
income to determine their or their partner's rate of income support
payment or Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) eligibility is when the
customer or their partner carries on a business. If the customer carries
on a business, the customer's ordinary income from the business is to be
reduced by losses and outgoings (expenses) which relate to that business
and which are allowable deductions under specific sections of the Income
Tax Assessment Act (ITAA) 1936 and the Income Tax Assessment Act (ITAA)
1997.

Note: not all deductions claimed under tax legislation are allowable
under the Social Security Act 1991. All non-allowable deductions must be
added onto the net profit of the business.

Documenting business income and asset assessment

The assessment of the sole trader or partnership must be documented to
show all decisions involved in arriving at the income and asset figures
of the business. This includes (but is not limited to) expenses not
allowed, loans against assets which are disallowed or reduced, assets
coded to the customer record instead of the business, etc.

Defining business income

The share of profit to which a sole trader or partner in a partnership
is entitled to, is known as 'business income'. It is the net profit
earned by the business after allowable reductions under section 1075 of
the Social Security Act 1991.

Note: section 1075 of the Social Security Act 1991, does not apply to
income received by a customer from a private company or private trust.

Occasionally a partner in a partnership will receive their share of the
partnership profit and then claim some business related reductions on
their personal income tax return. For example, they use a vehicle that
they own personally for partnership business activities, and in such
cases, the amount claimed as a business deduction is an allowable
deduction.

Assets of the business

As a customer's interest in the assets of a business falls within the
definition of 'asset', the value of this interest must be taken into
account when determining entitlement to payments made by Services
Australia.

Assessable assets are taken into account at their market value. The
market value of an asset is only decreased by the value of an
encumbrance secured against it for the purpose of purchasing the asset.
The net assets formula is the market value of the assets, less allowable
liabilities = net assets.

Business assets and liabilities are assessed as either primary
production or non-primary production. Primary production aggregation
rules allow for all primary production liabilities to be offset against
all primary production assets. Non-primary production assets and
liabilities are not covered by these aggregation rules. Non-primary
production liabilities can only be offset against the specific asset
they are secured against as per the principles outlined in Section 1121
of the Social Security Act 1991.

Customers receiving Carer Payment (CP)

If a customer is in receipt of/or claiming Carer Payment (CP) and has
commenced self-employment, consideration must be given to the number of
hours the customer is working in the business. See Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid employment,
self-employment, voluntary work, education or training activities.

The Resources page contains links to the Business details form (MOD F)
and Office Locator.

Related links

Sole traders

Partnerships

Assessment of business structures for Centrelink payments

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Assessing and coding a Private Trust Mod PT

Primary production and aggregation

Assessing and coding a Real Estate Mod R

Business has ceased or has been sold

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

Ceasing or downturn in business

Steps to assess an interim profit and loss statement

Unexpected downturn of a business

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
