
Protective and statutory trusts for persons unable to handle their own affairs 043-04110050

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on protective and statutory trusts
and the concessions available to those customers who manage the
financial affairs of these trusts.

What is a protective trust?

A protective trust is a trust administered for the exclusive benefit of
a person who is not competent to handle their own financial affairs.
That is, all the income and capital of the trust are used for the sole
benefit of the person who is not competent to handle their own financial
affairs and for whom the trust was set up.

A person may not be competent to handle their own financial affairs
because they are under 18 years of age (a minor) and therefore unable to
sign contracts, or are unable to understand a contract because of an
intellectual disability, or are unable to make a decision for themselves
because they are in a coma or because of the stage their degenerative
disease has reached.

Documentation will need to be provided to confirm a person is not
competent to handle their own financial affairs and can include a:

-   birth certificate for a person who is under 18 years
-   guardianship order
-   report from a treating doctor or psychiatrist of the person who is
    not competent

There may be circumstances where a Social Worker report is recommended.
For example, a person may be competent to handle their own financial
affairs but have a severe physical disability which makes it necessary
for another person to act on their behalf.

There are a number of concessions available for those customers who
manage the financial affairs of people who are not competent to handle
their own financial affairs.

Protective trusts established before 7:30 pm on 9 May 2000

The attribution of income and assets from discretionary protective
trusts will generally be to the controller, most likely the appointor or
trustee. However, a concession applies for these trusts established
before 7:30 pm on 9 May 2000. Where a controller can show that the trust
has been, and continues to be, administered for the exclusive benefit of
a person who is unable to handle his or her own financial affairs,
attribution will be to the person who is not competent to handle their
own financial affairs.

The income and assets from fixed protective trusts established before
7:30 pm on 9 May 2000 will be assessed in accordance with the
individual's fixed rights as set out in the deed. However, a Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) may determine attribution among the
attributable stakeholders of the trust as if the trust had been
established after that date, if in the circumstances, the CAO considers
it appropriate to do so, and if, after 9 May 2000:

-   the trust is varied or altered under the trust deed, or
-   additional contributions (income, assets or services) have been
    provided to the trust, or
-   there are changes to the beneficiaries entitlement under the trust

Protective trusts established after 7:30 pm on 9 May 2000

If the source of the income and/or assets of the trust (or associates of
the source) retains control or an interest, the trust income and assets
will be attributed to the source. For example, a trust set up for a
minor where the parents are the source of the funds and the parents
retain full control of the income and assets of the trust.

Attribution will transfer to the person not competent to handle their
own financial affairs:

-   upon the death of the source, provided the trust is being
    administered for the exclusive benefit of the person who is not
    competent
-   if the source resigns all control and interest in the trust and can
    show that the trust assets are being used for the sole benefit of
    the person who is not competent

Note: if the source dies or resigns all control and the new controller
does not administer the trust for the exclusive benefit of the person
who is not competent to handle his or her own financial affairs, the
trust assets will generally be attributed to the new controller.

Power of attorney

A customer who manages the affairs of another person under power of
attorney arrangements will not be affected by that person's income
and/or assets because of the power of attorney.

The Public Trustee in each state can act both as power of attorney and
as trustee. When a customer's financial affairs are administered by the
relevant Public Trustee, each case would need to be determined based on
individual circumstances. If the customer's personal income tax return
(ITR) includes the income as a distribution from a trust (not as
interest), this would indicate that the funds may be administered as a
trust.

Generally if a customer's financial affairs are administered under a
Financial Management Order (Guardianship Act 1987) and the investment
interest is listed on the personal ITR and not lumped together as a
trust distribution, then the customer is not involved in a private trust
and no Module PT - Private Trust (Mod PT) is required.

Some Public Trustees offer funds for the general public to invest in,
while others only administer statutory trusts. The Resources page
contains a link to the FINS Bulletin, which includes information about
the Public Trustee for each of the states and territories.

Court Ordered Statutory trusts

Assessments before 18 May 2005

Prior to 18 May 2005, court ordered statutory trusts were generally
excluded from being considered as designated private trusts.

Assessments from 18 May 2005

The disallowable instrument in relation to designated private trusts was
amended on 18 May 2005.

From that day all court ordered statutory trusts are to be assessed
under the attribution provisions of private trusts and companies by a
CAO.

The customer's share of the net assets and net income of the trust are
assessed as theirs.

Statutory trusts are assessed and coded on the trust and company
screens.
These must be referred to a CAO to make attribution decisions and must
not be assessed by Service Officers.

Statutory trusts are generally administered by a State Public Trustee or
similar. Not all trusts administered by a public trustee are statutory
trusts. Public Trustees also administer other private trusts on a
commercial 'fee for service' basis. These other private trusts are
subject to the new trust and company rules in force after 1 January
2002.

The income assessable from a statutory trust is calculated by
multiplying the balance of money held by the most recent rate of return.
In some cases, gross taxable income is provided by the administrator of
the funds. For example, the Senior Master’s Office in Victoria. If the
trust has not been in place for a full financial year, the income must
be annualised. This income is recorded on TRID. Statutory trust funds
are not subject to deeming nor are actual distributions received from
statutory trusts assessable. For assets purposes, the balance of the
money held is an assessable asset and is recorded on the appropriate
screen in the trust record..

Note: the value held in the statutory trusts is not assessed as an asset
of the customer if there is a clause stating that the payment of assets
is contingent on a certain event occurring.
For example, a clause states that the payment of assets is contingent on
the customer reaching a certain age.

One-off payments made from the capital funds held by the statutory
(court-ordered) trust are not taken into account as income, but are
assessed as an asset. The amount that is assessed as the assets held by
the trust must be reduced by the amount of the payment. For example,
distributions to enable modifications to be made to the customer's home
to assist with their disability.

CAO's must set a manual review on the customer record to facilitate the
periodic review and update of statutory trust fund balances and rates of
return.

Incidental benefits

If a person gains an incidental benefit from managing the affairs of a
person who is unable to handle their own affairs, no attribution of the
assets and/or income of the trust may be made to that person. For
example, private use of a vehicle that is used to transport the person
who is unable to manage his or her own affairs would be classed as an
incidental benefit.

Note: an incidental benefit does not include fees and wages paid to the
stakeholder.

The Resources page contains an example of an assessment of a protective
trust established after 7:30 pm on 9 May 2000 and a link to the FINS
Bulletin.

Related links

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Fixed trusts set up before 7.30 pm on 9 May 2000

Genuine investors in private trusts and companies

Life interest in an asset or income

Recording attribution income

Testamentary trusts

Trusts

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Where a controller could not access trust capital and/or income as at
7.30 pm on 9 May 2000

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
