
Trusts 043-04020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on trusts and the assessment of
income and assets of private trusts.

Definition of a Trust

A trust is an obligation binding a person (the trustee) to hold property
(the trust property) for the benefit of persons (the beneficiaries). The
trustee may be an individual or a private company. Likewise, the
beneficiaries may be individuals and/or other trusts or companies.

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT).
Income generated by SDT is exempt from the Income Test. SDT assets are
exempt from the Assets Test as long as the assets are not over the
concessional asset limit.

Rules from 1 January 2002

From 1 January 2002, new rules were implemented for the way private
trusts are treated under the Income and Assets Tests. If a customer is
involved in a private trust, the income and assets of that trust may be
taken into account (attributed to the customer) when working out their
rate of income support payments or concessions. The attribution decision
is made by the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO), based on information
provided on the Private Trust form (MOD PT) and accompanying documents.

There are occasions where a customer claims that a trust exists even
though there is no trust deed or will. A trust would not be accepted to
exist solely because such a claim has been made. In these cases the CAO
will determine if a court would be likely to decide that a trust exists.

Overview on Trusts

Trusts are divided into three main types under the Social Security Act
1991 and the Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986, namely public trusts,
statutory trusts and private trusts.

Public Trusts

Public trusts are run commercially and the public can invest by
purchasing units for example, property trust, mortgage trust, and equity
trust. These investments are treated as financial assets.

Statutory trusts

Statutory trusts are created by law, usually established to look after
the affairs of a customer who is incapable, or legally unable to attend
to their own affairs, and exists if property is held by public trustees,
Workers Compensation Boards and courts. Statutory trusts are treated as
private trusts.

Private trusts

Private trusts are set up by customers either to hold property or
investments, or to run a business. Some private trusts are considered a
designated trust, and assessed under the rules implemented 1 January
2002. Other private trusts are non-designated private trusts and are
assessed in a similar manner to the rules existing prior to 1 January
2002.

The trust in which the customer is involved may be referred to using
several different words to describe the same trust. For example, a
discretionary trust may fit the definition of a designated trust in Part
3.18 of the Social Security Act.

The terms 'family trust' and 'unit trust' may be included in the name of
a trust but are not relevant to the determination of the type of trust
in which the customer is involved. Family trusts are the most common
type of trust requiring an assessment under income and assets tests.
These trusts are known as express trusts as they were set up by a trust
deed. These tend to be discretionary and will generally fall within the
definition of a designated private trust. However, a CAO will need to
establish the type of trust and should not make any assumptions in this
respect.

Delegation for assessment

The delegation for the assessment of a person's involvement in a private
trust is normally a CAO. In most cases the CAO will determine the income
and assets to maintain.

Although a CAO can provide specialist advice about a customer's
qualification for an income support payment or other benefit, the
delegation for this decision is with the Service Officer in a Service
Centre.

If a customer is not qualified for an income support payment and/or
concession card, it is not necessary for the case to be referred to the
CAO for assessment nor will it be necessary for the CAO to assess the
private trust in which the customer is involved. For example, if a
customer lodges a claim for the Disability Support Pension they are not
medically qualified for the payment then there is no need for an
assessment of the customer involvement in a private trust at this stage.

The Resources page contains information on the life of a trust, links to
forms, a link to information on the Services Australia website and links
to user guides.

Contents

How to identify a private trust

Documents required to assess a private trust

Completing the Private Trust details in the MOD PT

Assessing and coding the details from the Private Trust MOD PT

Roles within a private trust

Designated private trusts

Controlled private trusts

Attributable stakeholders for private trusts and private companies

Related links

Attribution for private trusts and private companies

Accepting and disclosing information regarding trusts and companies

Customer contact regarding trusts and companies program review

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Indexing an organisation for nominees and private trusts and companies

Income and expenses of a business

Assets and liabilities of a business

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
