
Leaving Australia 061-02000000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and procedures relating to customers
leaving Australia.

Government intent

Travelling outside Australia affects customers differently, depending on
the payment or concession type received and the duration of the absence.
In many cases, if the customer is not absent for longer than 6 weeks
their payment will not be affected.

Services Australia will assess whether a customer's payment can continue
while the customer is outside Australia, for what length of time and the
rate payable during any absence. Due to the complexity of portability
rules, if the Portability Script - Departures and Returns is available,
the script must be used to code the absence for customers leaving
Australia.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex, they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

To continue to access their myGov account, customers who have elected to
receive myGov security codes by SMS will need to ensure that they can
still receive SMS to their Australian mobile phone number while they are
overseas.

Otherwise they will need to change their Sign-in options to myGov Code
Generator app codes, or secret question prior to travelling overseas. To
change myGov Sign-in options, customers need to sign in to their myGov
account and select Account settings.

The Resources page has a link to the Services Australia website that
lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving or
returning to Australia.

Change in circumstances

Customers leaving Australia are still required to notify any other
changes to their circumstances that would normally affect their payment
or concession card. Depending on the event, customers may be able to
notify the change [] online. Refer to the Change of circumstances
procedure for the relevant payment or concession card type.

Portability Interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns assists the Service
Officer to collect relevant information from the customer during an
interview. It is to be used to assess the customer's entitlement to
payment while outside Australia. The script will correctly code the
departure information onto a customer's record, issue a letter if
requested by the customer providing information about the possible
effect on their entitlement while outside Australia, and provide contact
details for the agency while outside Australia.

If the Portability Script - Departures and Returns is unavailable there
are a number of procedures which can assist a Service Officer to
determine if payments are portable during an overseas absence and for
how long.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information on payments while outside Australia and travelling overseas
with Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medicine.

Contents

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas

Age Pension customer going overseas

Austudy customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) overseas absences

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) overseas absences

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer going overseas

Mobility Allowance (MOB) customer going overseas

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer and/or child going overseas

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer and/or child going overseas

Partner Allowance (PA) customer going overseas

Special Benefit (SpB) customer going overseas

Widow Allowance (WA) customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Transfers to international social security agreements

Transferring a customer record to provide additional services options
when customer is going overseas long term

Related links

Portability of concession cards

Portability of Add-ons

Discretion to extend portability period

Former resident provisions

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences when
customer has special circumstances

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Overseas absences for acute family crisis

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Student studying outside Australia

View/Update overseas travel online

Actioning immigration datalink activities

myGov Access - Code Generator app

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
