
Utilities Allowance (UA) overseas absences 061-01070070

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether Utilities Allowance (UA)
is payable to a customer while they are overseas and for how long. It
also explains the actions to be taken by the Service Officer and the
customer on their departure from Australia.

On this Page:

Temporary absence

UA can be paid to an eligible customer who is temporarily absent from
Australia if:

-   a UA test day falls within 6 weeks from the date of departure from
    Australia, and
-   the customer remains qualified for income support

UA test days are 20 March, 20 June, 20 September and 20 December each
year.

Leaving to live in another country

UA is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country UA is
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
UA during any temporary returns to Australia.

Portability Interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns is to be used to assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while they are outside Australia.
If the script is available, coding the absence from Australia should be
done using the script.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The portability of the
payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether
the customer notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink
activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link to this
information.

Payment of UA upon return to Australia

Payment of UA will continue on the customer's return to Australia if the
main income support payment is current. Alternatively it may be
re-granted if or when the customer lodges a new claim for income support
which is subsequently granted.

Related links

Utilities Allowance (UA)

Telephone Allowance (TAL) overseas absences

Coding absence using the Portability Script (departures and returns) for
customer leaving Australia

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
