-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions to be taken when a customer with a
Pensioner Concession Card (PCC), Health Care Card (HCC), Commonwealth
Seniors Health Care Card (CSHC), ex-Carer Allowance Health Care Card
(EHC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) or a Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC) advises they are leaving Australia.

Temporary absences for PCC and automatic issue HCC

PCCs and automatically issued HCCs are portable for up to 6 weeks from
departure, subject to continuing eligibility. This includes non-income
tested Pensioner Concession Cards.

If a PCC or automatically issued HCC customer returns to Australia
before the end of the portability period and entitlement has continued
throughout the absence, the original card remains current and a new card
is not required.

If the eligible holder of a PCC or an automatically issued HCC returns
to Australia after the portability period has ended, and their
associated payment is current or restored, a new PCC or HCC will be
issued. The start date of the new card is the date the customer returned
to Australia.

If a current PCC or automatically issued HCC customer returns to
Australia and leaves again, another portability period of up to 6 weeks
will commence, even if the return and departure are on the same day.

Temporary absences for EHC, FST and LIC customers

Subject to continued eligibility, EHCs, FSTs and LICs are portable for
up to 6 weeks from departure for temporary absences.

If the customer (this refers to foster child in the case of FST) returns
to Australia before the end of the portability period and entitlement
has continued throughout the period of absence, a new card does not need
to be issued.

For FST, only the foster child’s temporary absence is subject to
portability requirements. There is no limitation on the temporary
absence of the foster carer.

If a current EHC, FST or LIC customer returns to Australia and leaves
again, another 6 week portability period will commence, even if the
return and departure are on the same day.

If the absence from Australia is more than 6 weeks and the FST, EHC or
LIC has been cancelled, the customer must reclaim their card.

If a customer has been outside Australia for less than their portability
period but their LIC has cancelled incorrectly due to an absence of the
return to Australia information from Department of Home Affairs, their
LIC should be restored without the need to reclaim as long as the
customer contacts within 13 weeks of cancellation.

If a LIC or FST customer reclaims after their card has been cancelled
they must complete a new claim by completing an [] online claim or
completing a Claim for a Health Care Card (SS050).

If an EHC customer reclaims after their card has been cancelled, they
must complete a new claim by using the [] online claim or completing an
Application for a health care card for former recipients of a carer
allowance health care card (SS456).

Temporary absences for CSHC customers

Subject to continued eligibility CSHCs are portable for up to 19 weeks
from departure for temporary absences. Quarterly supplement can be paid
for up to 6 weeks from the date of temporary departure, provided the
CSHC customer remains qualified, if the test day falls within 6 weeks of
the date of departure. Test days are 20 March, 20 June, 20 September and
20 December.

If the customer returns to Australia before the end of the 19 week
period and entitlement has continued through the period of absence, a
new card does not need to be issued.

If a current CSHC customer returns to Australia and leaves again,
another 19 week portability period will commence, even if the return and
departure are on the same day.

If a customer has been outside Australia for less than their maximum
portability period but their CSHC has cancelled incorrectly due to an
absence of the return to Australia information from Department of Home
Affairs, their CSHC should be restored without the need to reclaim as
long as the customer contacts within 13 weeks of cancellation.

If a customer has been outside Australia for more than their maximum
portability period and their CSHC has cancelled, a verbal re-claim may
be undertaken in certain cases. See Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal re-claims) after a portability
cancellation. Note: as of 6 December 2014, CSHC date of claim will be
taken as the immigration advised date of return if the customer lodges a
claim within 14 days of the date of return to Australia. This will
include CSHC [] online claims, customised claims, paper claim received
by mail, uploaded online, or in office and verbal re-claims. New claims
will not be included.

Customers who do not meet the verbal re-claim criteria or who have
returned to Australia and are contacting less than 26 weeks since their
CSHC cancellation date will need to complete a Re-claim for Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (SA296a) or use the online claim.

Customers who re-claim after 26 weeks will have to complete a full new
claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (SA296) or use the online
claim.

Leaving to live in another country

Concession cards cannot be retained by people who cease to reside in
Australia.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country, their
concession card is cancelled from the date the customer leaves
Australia, regardless of whether or not any of the customer's payments
are portable.

If either the foster child or foster carer leaves Australia to live in
another country, the FST concession card is cancelled from the date
either leaves Australia.

If a CSHC customer leaves Australia to live in another country, their
concession card will be cancelled immediately on departure and any
accrued quarterly Supplement that the CSHC customer is entitled to prior
to leaving Australia will be paid to the customer.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
a concession card during any temporary returns to Australia.

Customers returning to live in Australia

Customers who were residing overseas and subsequently return to live in
Australia, may be eligible for a concession card to be issued when they
return.

For all pensioner customers, see Return to Australia procedures for
service centre and Smart Centre staff for pension payments.

For non-pensioner customers and card holders, see Return to Australia
procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff for non-pension
payments and cards.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise the Services
Australia when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure prior to leaving Australia or advise they have returned
to Australia.

In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their []
Centrelink online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more
complex they will be prompted to contact the agency. The Resources page
contains a link to the Services Australia website which lists situations
when customers must advise they are leaving or returning to Australia.

The Resources page contains a link to the Concession, Allowances, Rent
and Payment Summaries homepage and information on travelling overseas
with Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medicines.

Related links

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal
re-claims) after a portability cancellation

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Quarterly supplement

Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Restoration of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Restoration of a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Quarterly supplement overseas absences

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Health Care Card (HCC)

Non-income tested (NOI) concession cards

Advising of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
