
Customers overseas on 1 July 2004 061-01040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding significant changes to the
laws governing portability of Centrelink payments from 1 July 2004.

Customers overseas before 1 July 2004

Centrelink customers who were overseas immediately before 1 July 2004
and who have not returned to Australia have the portability of their
payment determined using the rules in force at that time, pre 1 July
2004 portability rules.

Payments with limited portability

For customers going overseas before 1 July 2004, most Centrelink
payments had limited portability overseas with a maximum portability
period of 26 weeks. The maximum portability period for most payments has
been reduced for customers leaving Australia on or after 1 July 2004 to
13 weeks and for departures since 1 January 2013 reduced to 6 weeks.

From 1 January 2015 further limitations on portability for Disability
Support Pensions (DSP) customers were introduced. Customers who left
Australia before 1 July 2004 continued to receive payment under the
rules at the time of their departure until they returned to Australia or
they exceeded the maximum portability period and their payment stopped.
Normal portability rules apply to any subsequent departure from
Australia.

Savings provisions DSP

A special savings provision applies to Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers who were overseas on 1 July 2004 with indefinite portability.
These are customers who were either severely disabled on departure or
granted before 12 November 1991 and covered by the pre 20 September 2000
portability rules. The savings provision states that payment will
continue to be paid to a person leaving Australia on or after 1 July
2004 under the same conditions that they were subject to on their last
departure before 1 July 2004.

A DSP customer who is covered by this savings provision can return to
Australia temporarily and then return overseas an unlimited number of
times without losing their savings provision as long as they do not
remain in Australia for residence. Customers who return temporarily and
therefore do not lose their savings provision are not entitled to any
add-ons (for example, Rent Assistance, Pharmaceutical Allowance) or
concession cards while they are in Australia as they are not an
Australian resident.

If a DSP customer with unlimited portability returns to Australia for
residence on or after 1 July 2004 they will lose their savings
provision. If they then decide to return overseas, they will be subject
to the portability rules which apply at the time. Unless the customer
satisfies indefinite portability provisions, their payment will be
portable for a limited period. From 1 January 2012 customers who cease
to remain an Australian resident for DSP purposes (leaving to live in
another country) and who are not exempt from the ongoing residence
requirement will cease to be eligible for DSP from the date of
departure.

If a customer is going to an Agreement country that covers DSP they may
be able to transfer to a payment under an International Agreement when
autonomous entitlement ceases after leaving Australia.

Customers overseas on 1 July 2004 and who had limited portability for 26
weeks (or 12 months if covered by the pre 20 September 2000 portability
rules) were not covered by any savings provision once they returned to
Australia. Normal portability rules apply to any subsequent departure
from Australia.

There are no changes to the portability rules for Age Pension.

General information

It is important that customers currently subject to the 1 July 2004
savings provisions contact International Services (CIS) if they plan to
return to Australia. CIS will ensure the customer is given accurate
information about the possible effect on their payment if they decide to
return.

The savings provisions described above do not generally apply to
customers paid under an International Agreement because the portability
provisions for these customers are governed by the Agreement.

Customers paid under the pre 1 July 2004 portability rules may still
apply for a discretionary extension.

The Resources page contains an example relating to a Disability Support
Pension (DSP) customer returning to Australia and a link to customer
information about travelling overseas with Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) medicine.

Related links

Age Pension customer going overseas

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Mobility Allowance (MOB) customer going overseas

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme customer/child going
overseas

Portability of add-ons

Discretion to extend portability period

Returning to Australia

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
