
Pension Supplement overseas absences 061-01070080

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether Pension Supplement is
payable to a customer while they are overseas and for how long. It also
explains the actions to be taken by the Service Officer and the customer
on their departure from Australia.

On this Page:

Temporary departures

Customers who temporarily depart Australia can continue to receive the
full Pension Supplement rate for up to 6 weeks from the date of
departure. If the customer is still outside Australia after 6 weeks and
their main payment remains payable, the Pension Supplement rate will
reduce to the Pension Supplement Basic Amount.

Transitional customers will receive the transitional pension rate
outside Australia after 6 weeks.

A customer who is paid using an International Agreement will receive the
Pension Supplement if the Agreement dictates this. For example, under
many Agreements a person leaving Australia temporarily will continue to
receive the inside Australia rate (including the Pension Supplement
where qualified) for up to 26 weeks from departure.

Leaving to live in another country

Customers who leave Australia to live in another country and whose
income support payment remains payable, will continue to receive the
Pension Supplement Basic Amount from the date of the departure. The
Pension Supplement Remaining Amount and Minimum Amount cease to be
payable from the day of the departure.

When a customer lives in another country and returns to Australia
temporarily, the Pension Supplement Remaining and Pension Supplement
Minimum Amounts do not become payable unless they become payable under
an international agreement. These amounts are only payable to customers
who reside in Australia or customers payable under an agreement.

Autonomous customers who have been residing outside of Australia who
return to reside in Australia will have their entitlement to all
components of the Pension Supplement reassessed from the date of their
return. It is particularly important to ensure that the person is aware
of the possible impact of the return being assessed as resuming
Australian residence when it is not.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless whether the customer contacted or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In most cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily for less than 6 weeks, or when they have
returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular circumstances where customers should
advise of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will still need to contact the agency.

Portability rates and payment

The Pension Supplement continues to be subject to changes in income and
assets during any overseas absence.

If the customer's income support payment cancels or suspends during
their absence from Australia, the Pension Supplement will cease to be
payable.

Portability of Pension Supplement will be automatically assessed as long
as the departure details are recorded correctly for the customer. The
Portability Script - Departures and Returns must be used to assess
portability of Pension Supplement where customers advise the agency they
are leaving Australia.

Rate of Pension Supplement Basic Amount will be proportional if their
primary payment for example, Age Pension or Disability Support Pension
is proportional. The rate payable will be reduced if the customer's own
Working Life Residence (WLR) is less than the maximum working life
residence (WLR).

A customer who is paid according to the Customers overseas on 20
September 2000 portability savings provisions or the Customers overseas
on 1 July 2004 portability rules is always paid as if they are leaving
Australia to live in another country and will receive the Pension
Supplement Basic Amount only, both during a temporary return to
Australia and immediately on departure.

Minimum Pension Supplement Amount

Entitlement to the minimum Pension Supplement amount will cease:

-   If the customer is no longer entitled to their income support
    payment while overseas, that is, payment is suspended or cancelled.
    Any accrued amounts will be issued with the customer's final income
    support payment
-   Once a temporary overseas absence exceeds 6 weeks. Note: some
    customers paid under an International Agreement may receive the
    minimum Pension Supplement for up to 26 weeks

Accrued amounts

If the customer has elected to receive the minimum Pension Supplement
amount quarterly, any accrued amounts of the minimum amount will be
issued with the customer's regular payment that falls on, or after, the
next quarterly payment test day (20 March, 20 June, 20 September, 20
December).

If the customer has not elected to receive the amount quarterly and
their income support remains payable, any accrued amounts of the minimum
Pension Supplement amount will be paid with the customer's next income
support payment.

Related links

Pension Supplement

Coding absence using the Portability Script (departures and returns) for
customer leaving Australia

Return to Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Customers overseas on 1 July 2004

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Payment rates and thresholds

International Social Security Agreements

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
