
Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons 061-01110010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether a customer may continue to receive
payment when they are temporarily overseas due to an eligible medical
reason.

Payments portable for eligible medical reasons

Customers receiving the following payments may continue to receive
payment while temporarily overseas for eligible medical reasons.

-   ABSTUDY
-   Austudy (AUS)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   family assistance, Parental Leave payments and Double Orphan Pension
    (DOP) payable to the holders of visa subclasses 309, 785 granted on
    or after 16 December 2004, 790 or 820
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Eligible medical treatment criteria

The term eligible medical treatment means recognised medical treatment
of a kind that is not available in Australia. It could include
specialised or new types of surgery such as transplants or other kinds
of treatment. It does not include consultations or travel to be with
family outside Australia because the doctor advised if would benefit the
patient.

Treatment does not necessarily satisfy the definition of eligible
medical treatment just because a doctor approves or recommends it. For
example, iridology, herbal treatment, faith healing and similar
treatments are not considered eligible medical treatments. See Resources
for examples of treatments that do not satisfy the medical treatment
criteria.

Centrelink International Services (CIS) staff may need to contact the
Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU) for further help in determining
the consensus of opinion on whether a certain treatment meets the
eligible medical treatment criteria.

Note: if a customer enquires about assistance under the Medical
Treatment Overseas Program (MTOP), see Discretion to extend portability
period.

Verification of eligible medical treatment and payment period

Customers must provide acceptable proof of the absence, preferably prior
to departure.

Payment will be subject to general portability rules pending receipt and
assessment of evidence. If evidence supports travel was for an approved
reason, a specific negotiated period will be determined and back payment
issued if required.

Portability Script - Departure and Returns

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will correctly assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while outside Australia. If the
script is available, coding the absence from Australia must be done
using the script.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding where a customer clearly
does not satisfy an approved reason for travel. The Portability Script
will guide service centre staff and Smart Centre staff when it is
necessary to refer to Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Only designated CIS staff have the delegation to approve and record
payment overseas for an approved reason.

Portability period

The portability period starts on the day the customer leaves Australia.
For portability purposes, a person is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia, regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of the
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example,
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Payment restoration

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on return to
Australia may be possible. Generally, the payment may be automatically
or manually restored if the return to Australia is within 13 weeks of
payment stopping.

If a customer is unable to return to Australia after the maximum
portability period, Centrelink International Services (CIS) has
discretion to expend the period of portability under limited
circumstances.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system
regardless of whether the customer notified or not.

Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

The Resources page has Services Australia website links about travelling
overseas with Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) medicine and about
payments while outside Australia, the International Programme intranet
page, contacts and examples of unsatisfactory reasons for requesting
portability for eligible medical treatment.

Related links

ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice customer going overseas

Austudy (AUS) customer going overseas

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Discretion to extend portability period

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) overseas absences

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer going overseas

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Special Benefit (SpB) customer going overseas

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

The Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
