
Return to Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services (CIS) staff 061-03010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For International Services (CIS) staff only.

This document outlines the action taken by a Service Officer in CIS, and
the effect on a customer's payments when they return to Australia.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer or child returns to Australia. The system assesses
portability of the payment, regardless of whether the customer notified
or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not
be cancelled.

Services Australia (the agency) uses the date of departure or arrival
provided by the Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the
customer can provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should
consider applying the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results
in a beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency when they have
returned to Australia from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations where customers must advise of a departure
before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

Customers who have been outside Australia long-term or are paid using an
international agreement and continue to receive a payment while they are
outside Australia should advise the agency of their date of return to
Australia to ensure that their payment will continue at the correct
rate.

Immigration datalink

If the customer and/or child has an active immigration datalink, their
return date will generally be automatically updated when they return to
Australia.

For those customers or children who do not have an active immigration
datalink, the date they returned to Australia will need to be manually
recorded.

Processing returns to Australia

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns can be used to assess a
return to Australia. The purpose of the portability script is to assess
the return rules associated with the payment and, where possible, update
the record. The portability script cannot process a return in all cases
(for example, customer returning to Australia after living overseas or
paid under the New Zealand (NZ) Agreement).

If the script cannot complete the assessment or coding, it will advise
the Service Officer and create a review for manual follow-up of the
activity where required. In these cases, procedures relevant to the
payment type should be followed to manually action the return to
Australia.

At every customer contact Service Offices must check, and update if
needed, the customer's:

-   address (including postal address) and
-   telephone contact details (including mobile phone numbers)

Restoration of payment

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

Effect of return to Australia

Where a customer on a pension payment returns to Australia and has been
on a proportional rate, the rate generally ceases to be proportional
from the date of return. Some international agreements have provision
for the rate paid under the agreement to continue for the first 26 weeks
of a temporary return to Australia.

Australian residents who return to Australia will be issued with a
concession card from the date of return or once their payment has been
restarted.

If a customer returns to Australia temporarily and is not an Australian
resident they are not entitled to any add-ons, including concession
cards, unless they are paid under the Agreement with New Zealand. For
more information, see New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension
information.

If a customer returns to Australia and leaves again the same day, the
portability period is reset. A new portability period begins for the
latest departure. For example, an Age Pension customer will cease to be
on a proportional rate on the day of return and for the first 26 weeks
of the subsequent departure. The resetting of portability rules does not
apply to customers who have limited payments such as Disability Support
Pension or if they are subject to return rules.

Multiple absences from Australia - return rules

Returning to Australia may affect subsequent portability if the customer
is receiving one of these payments:

-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Newborn Supplement (NBS)
-   Paid Parental Leave (PPL)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Pension Education Supplement (PES)
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

If these payments have ceased to be payable or are reduced for
portability reasons (the customer was outside Australia for more than 6
weeks) and they return to Australia and resume payment they must
generally remain in Australia for at least 6 weeks before these payments
are portable. The exact rules vary according to which payment(s) the
customer receives.

It is very important that a customer who is planning on returning to
Australia and going overseas again contacts before they return to
Australia. The Service Officer can then advise them what effect any
return to Australia may have on their future payments if they travel
outside Australia again.

Multiple absences from Australia - former residents

Returning to Australia may affect subsequent portability if the customer
has returned to live in Australia and then claimed or transferred to one
of these payments:

-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

If these customers leave Australia within 2 years of their return for
residence, their payments are unlikely to be portable at all.

It is very important that a customer planning to leave Australia within
2 years of a return for residence (and subsequent grant/ transfer to one
of these payments) contacts before leaving. The Service Officer can then
advise them what effect the departure may have on their future payments
if they travel outside Australia.

For more information, see Former resident provisions.

Multiple absences from Australia - residence

If the customer repeatedly goes overseas for long periods with short
returns to renew their portability, this may indicate that the person is
actually residing overseas. Customers receiving Age Pension do not need
to remain Australian residents to continue to be entitled to payment.
Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers exempt from the ongoing
residence requirement may also continue to be paid if they cease
residing in Australia. These customers do not have to remain in
Australia for any minimum period before payment is portable again and,
if the customer is paid a proportional rate, their rate will increase
from the date of their return to Australia.

However, determining whether customers receiving the above payments are
Australian residents or not is still important as it can affect:

-   entitlement to either the 20 September 2000 portability savings
    provisions or the 1 July 2004 portability provisions
-   entitlement to add-ons during any temporary return and for up to 26
    weeks after departure
-   entitlement to a concession card during any temporary return to
    Australia
-   whether working life residence or working age residence is increased
    during any absence from Australia
-   the rate of payment under certain agreements, and
-   qualification for payment if they receive payment solely because
    they have a qualifying residence exemption because they are a
    refugee

If an absence, or multiple absences with short returns to Australia
between the absences, exceeds approximately 3 years, continuing
Australian residence is questionable.

Pre 1 July 2004 savings provisions for DSP

Customers who were overseas on 1 July 2004 and receiving Disability
Support Pension (DSP), which was portable indefinitely, will retain the
same portability rules, unless they return to Australia for residence.

Customers could receive DSP indefinitely while overseas if they were:

-   severely disabled, or
-   granted pre 12 November 1991 and saved under the pre 20 September
    2000 portability rules

Return to Australia for residence

If a customer with pre 1 July 2004 savings provisions returns to
Australia for residence, they will lose these savings and future
payments are likely to be only portable for 28 days in a rolling 12
month period. However, the customer may have entitlement to:

-   Add-ons including Rent Assistance and Pension Supplement. Note:
    transitional rate customers would be entitled to the Transitional
    pension rate inside Australia
-   A Pension Concession Card
-   A family assistance payment including Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and
    Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Return to Australia temporarily

If a customer with pre 1 July 2004 savings provisions returns to
Australia temporarily, they will retain these savings and will be
payable indefinitely for any future absence from Australia under the
same conditions of the previous departure. However, while in Australia
and during the subsequent absence, the customer will not be entitled to:

-   Add-ons including Rent Assistance or the full Pension Supplement
    (the Pension Supplement Basic Amount will still be payable, if
    eligible). Note: transitional rate customers would not be entitled
    to the full Transitional pension rate inside Australia
-   Any Pension Concession Card
-   Any family assistance payments including FTB or CCS

It is important to ensure that a customer with these savings is aware of
the effect their return to Australia will have on their payments.

Pre 20 September 2000 savings provisions

Payments to customers who were overseas immediately before 20 September
2000 were portable according to certain rules, which changed on 20
September 2000. Certain customers will retain these savings provision on
their return to Australia. Other customers will lose their savings
provision immediately on return to Australia, whether that return is
temporary or not.

Customers receiving Age pension may continue to be paid according to the
pre 20 September 2000 rules. If a customer paid under these old rules
returns to Australia and remains for more than 26 weeks, they lose the
savings provision and any future departure will be according to current
portability rules. It is not relevant whether they are returning to
Australia for residence or not - only the length of presence in
Australia is important

-   If the customer is still an Australian resident, they may be
    entitled to some add-ons (for example, Rent Assistance) and
    concession cards during their return but entitlement will cease
    immediately on their departure. These customers will not be entitled
    to receive the full Pension Supplement or the full Transitional
    pension rate inside Australia while they are in Australia
-   If the customer is not an Australian resident, they will not be
    entitled to any add-ons or concession cards during their return

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers who were paid under the pre
20 September 2000 portability rules who are not portable indefinitely
lost their savings provision immediately on their return to Australia.
If the customer goes overseas again, payment will be portable under the
current rules

A customer unable to depart within 26 weeks due to unforeseen
circumstances, may be able to maintain the portability savings for a
negotiated period. This is known as a discretionary portability savings
extension. For more information, see Customers overseas on 20 September
2000.

Pre 1 July 2014 savings provision

Customers who were overseas immediately before 1 July 2014 were payable
according to rules that applied prior to 1 July 2014. Customers will
retain this savings provision on their return to Australia, however they
will lose this provision if they remain for 26 weeks or more. When they
lose this savings provision, payment for any future absence will be
according to the rules that apply at departure. It is not relevant
whether the return to Australia is temporary or not, only the length of
presence in Australia is important.

If a customer is unable to depart Australia within 26 weeks due to
unforeseen circumstances, they may be able to maintain the portability
savings for a negotiated period. For more information about
discretionary portability savings extensions, see Customers assessed
under pre 1 July 2014 Australian Working Life Residence (AWLR) rules.

The savings provision also applies to customers who resided outside
Australia and who were temporarily inside Australia immediately before 1
July 2014. These customers retain the savings provision if they departed
Australia on or before 29 December 2014.

The payments affected are Age Pension, Disability Support Pension (DSP)
or payments made under the terms of an International Agreement.

Customers saved from the 1 July 2014 AWLR changes are generally paid a
proportional rate using their own AWLR (international agreement and
certain saved 20 September 2000 customers may use their partner's AWLR).

Customers who have the savings provisions generally require 300 months
(25 years) AWLR in order to receive the maximum means tested rate of
payment (some international agreements apply different rules).

From 1 July 2014 customers who do not have the savings provisions will
generally require 420 months (35 years) AWLR in order to receive the
maximum means tested rate of payment (some international agreements
apply different rules).

The Resources page contains contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS), Calculators and rates.

Related links

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Portability of concession cards

Portability of Payments

Recording residence details for dependent children

Actioning Immigration datalink activities

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Assessing if a customer is an Australia resident

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Customers assessed under pre 1 July 2014 Australian Working Life
Residence (AWLR) rules

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
