-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information which helps determine whether
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) is payable to a customer while they
are overseas and for how long. It also explains the actions to be taken
by the Service Officer and the customer on their departure from
Australia.

Leaving to live in another country

PES is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country PES is
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
PES during any temporary returns to Australia.

Temporary absence

A customer receiving PES can be paid for the first 6 weeks of a
temporary absence to any country while the customer remains qualified
for PES and entitled to their primary payment. PES is also payable for
the duration of course units undertaken outside Australia when these are
required as part of an Australian course.

PES will only remain payable if the customer remains eligible for their
main income support payment. If the customer is outside Australia when
their main payment ceases, entitlement to PES will also cease.

Brief return to Australia after temporary absence

A person absent from Australia for more than 6 weeks for a reason other
than study, (for example, holidays) who returns to Australia and leaves
Australia again less than 6 weeks later is taken not to have returned to
Australia. They must be back in Australia for more than 6 weeks before a
new portability period can start. If it is less than 6 weeks, PES will
cancel on the date of the new departure.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The portability of the
payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether
the customer notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink
activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations when customers should advise of
a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned
to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex they will
be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when a customer must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia, see the Resources
page.

Portability interview

PES portability is correctly assessed when the Portability Script -
Departures and Returns is used. If the script is available, coding the
absence from Australia should be done using the script.

Restoration of payment

If a customer returns to Australia within 13 weeks of their payment
suspending, PES may be restored from the date of the customer's return
to Australia, as long as they remain qualified.

Note: if a customer is receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and payment
ceases due to the portability approved temporary absence period being
reached, the customer will no longer qualify for PES on return to
Australia.

The Resources page contains examples of payments of Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) during travel outside Australia and a link to the
Services Australia website for more information about payments while
outside Australia.

Related links

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and ABSTUDY PES

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Rates of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

View/update overseas travel online

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
