
Change in relationship status to single for a customer residing outside Australia 061-02010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the procedure for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff to follow when assessing a change in relationship
status from partnered to single for customers residing outside
Australia.

Notification of change in relationship status

A change from being a member of a couple to being single or vice versa
needs to be advised by the customer as their relationship status is a
factor in determining their rate of payment and, in some cases, their
qualification for a payment. It will be necessary to determine the
relationship details of customers in order to ensure the correct rate of
payment is paid and qualification is established.

Customers who advise they are no longer able to live in the couple's
home with their partner due to illness but who consider they are still a
member of a couple are treated as members of an illness separated
couple.

CIS customers have up to 28 days to report changes in their
circumstances, including relationship status. Failure to advise Services
Australia of a separation or becoming a member of a couple may result in
an overpayment.

Verifying the separation

Generally, staff are unable to verify a CIS customer's separation from
their partner. If CIS require further information regarding the
separation of a customer residing overseas, they issue a Separation
Details - Outside Australia (AUS184) form.

Customer becomes single - impact on payment

If the customer continues to qualify for their Centrelink payment, the
person's rate of payment will generally increase to the single rate.
However, income and assets can cause a reduction in the rate of payment.

If a CIS customer receiving an Age Pension or Disability Support Pension
(DSP) paid under an international social security agreement becomes
single due to separation or death of a partner, they may be entitled to
be paid according to their current or former partner's WLR. If a Carer
Payment (CP) customer becomes single, and CP was granted under an
agreement due to caring for the partner, the customer will lose their
qualification for payment from the date of separation. These cases
should be assessed by CIS staff.

Nominee arrangements

When a customer, who has their partner appointed as their nominee,
advises they have separated they must be asked at first point of contact
if they wish to cancel the nominee arrangement. A request for
cancellation of the arrangement must be actioned immediately. The
request does not have to be in writing.

The Resources page contains a link to the forms to be issued to
customers changing their relationship status and the International
homepage which contains a link to a chart of which payments are covered
by various international agreements.

Related links

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

International Social Security Agreements

Working Life Residence (WLR)

28 day rule for Centrelink International Services (CIS) customers

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
