-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether a customer may continue to receive
payment when they are temporarily overseas due to an acute family
crisis.

Payments portable for an acute family crisis

Customers in receipt of the following payments may continue to receive
payment while temporarily overseas for an acute family crisis:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Austudy (AUS)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Family assistance, Parental Leave Payments and Double Orphans
    Pension payable to the holders of visa subclasses 309, 785 granted
    on or after 16 December 2014, 790 or 820
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Acute family crisis criteria

If a person has to suddenly leave Australia because of an acute family
crisis, it has to be for the purpose:

-   of visiting a family member who is critically ill
-   of visiting a family member who is hospitalised with an illness
    which is serious
-   relating to the death of a family member, or
-   relating to a life-threatening situation facing the family member
    which is beyond their control

The acute family crisis provisions do not cover providing ongoing care
for a family member. If the purpose of the trip is to visit an ill
family member, it is understandable that a person may briefly provide
some care or assistance during the visit. If the purpose of the trip is
to visit and then take on caring responsibilities, payment may only be
granted for the time that is considered to be a visit.

Note: see Resources for examples about acute family crisis situations.

Definition of family member

The definition of a family member is restricted to the person's partner,
parent, sibling or child. It may be extended to cover a person who
fulfilled a similar role. For example, if someone was brought up by
another person in a relationship, that could be considered equivalent to
a parent/child relationship. This decision can only be made by either
the Service Support Manager or Business Manager of Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Verification of acute family crisis and payment period

Customers must provide acceptable proof of the absence, preferably prior
to their departure.

A Service Officer in CIS will determine whether payment can continue
prior to evidence being received, if not, they will advise the customer
an assessment will occur once acceptable proof of the absence has been
provided.

Payment may be considered prior to evidence being received in the
following circumstances:

-   customer is travelling due to the recent death of a family member
-   reason for travel would clearly meet grounds for payment and
    customer would be placed in significant hardship with suspension of
    payment

Note: these cases must be discussed with a Service Support Officer
before approval

In all other cases, acceptable proof of absence should be provided prior
to approving payment. This is to prevent unnecessary overpayments raised
due to unacceptable evidence being provided. For this reason, the
majority of assessments occur after the period of absence.

In instances where pre-approval is not granted, payment will be subject
to general portability rules. Once acceptable proof of absence has been
provided, assessment will be made and back payment issued to customer if
necessary.

If approval has been made before receipt of evidence, the customer will
be required to provide supporting documentation on their return. If the
documentation is not acceptable or not provided, a debt will be raised.

The Service Officer in Centrelink International Services (CIS) will
determine the specific negotiated period and advise the customer how
long they may be paid while overseas.

Portability Script - Departures and Returns

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will correctly assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while outside Australia. If the
script is available, coding the absence from Australia should be done
using the script; see Coding departures and returns for customers
leaving Australia.

Services centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding where a customer clearly
does not satisfy an approved reason for travel. The Portability Script
will guide service centre staff and Smart Centre staff when it is
necessary to refer to Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Only designated CIS staff have the delegation to approve and record
payment overseas for an approved reason.

Portability period

The portability period starts on the day the customer leaves Australia.
For portability purposes a person is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day,
regardless of the time of return, and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example,
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Payment restoration

If a customer or child remains outside Australia after their payment has
stopped for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on
their return to Australia may be possible. Generally their payment can
be automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within
13 weeks of their payment stopping.

If the customer is unable to return to Australia after the maximum
portability period, Centrelink International Services (CIS) has the
discretion to extend portability period under limited circumstances.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not.

Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. Services Australia should
consider applying the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results
in a beneficial outcome for the customer.

The Resources page contains Services Australia website links about
portability of payments and travelling overseas with Pharmaceutical
Benefit Scheme (PBS) medicine, a link to the International and DVA
Programmes intranet page, contact details and examples of customers
travelling for an acute family crisis and whether payment can continue.

Related links

ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice customer going overseas

Austudy customer going overseas

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Discretion to extend portability period

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) overseas absences

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer going overseas

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Restricted portability assessment procedure for Centrelink International
Services Staff

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Special Benefit (SpB) customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
