
About Australians Overseas 061-06000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains a summary of issues that may affect customers in
relation to the Australians overseas theme. Customers living in
Australia or overseas may be affected if they are claiming or receiving
social security payments, cards, family assistance and/or parental leave
payments or foreign pensions.

On this Page:

Portability of Payments

Travelling outside Australia affects customers differently, depending on
the payment or concession type received and the duration of the absence.
In most cases, if the customer is not absent for longer than 6 weeks
their payment will not be affected.

Due to the complexity of portability rules, if the Portability Script -
Departures and Returns is available, use the script to record the
absence for customer's leaving Australia.

A customer who has income, for example earnings, must report before
departing Australia to prevent any overpayments and reporting problems
on their return to Australia.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system
assesses the portability of the payment, whether the customer contacted
or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not
be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

There are however particular circumstances where customers must advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer’s circumstances are more complex they must
contact the agency.

Returning to Australia

If the customer has an active Department of Home Affairs datalink, their
return date will automatically record when they return to Australia. If
this does not happen automatically, manually record it.

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has ceased
to be portable, their payment can generally be restored automatically or
manually if they return to Australia within 13 weeks of their payment
ceasing.

International social security agreements

Social security agreements modify domestic social security legislation
to assist people to receive social security entitlements when they
travel or migrate between agreement countries. Australia has a number of
international social security agreements.

All agreements cover Age Pension. Some agreements also cover pensions
such as Disability Support Pension (DSP), Carer Payment (CP) (adult),
Double Orphan Pension (DOP) and Parenting Payment (PP) (single).

Rate of payment outside Australia

If the customer is autonomous and payable for more than 26 weeks outside
Australia, payment will become proportional after 26 weeks absence from
Australia.

A proportional rate can be paid to a customer receiving payment under
the terms of the particular international social security agreement.

The proportional rate is based on how long the person has lived in
Australia during their working life. Working Life Residence (WLR) is
generally the total of all periods in which the person has been an
Australian resident between age 16 and Age Pension age. The maximum
proportional rate is usually based on a period of 35 years (420 months).
For example, a person who has 10 years WLR would usually get a
proportional rate of 10/35 of the maximum rate. Agreements may modify
the type of WLR that can be used and the proportion used in the rate
calculation. Different rules apply under the Agreement with New Zealand.

Add-on payments such as Rent Assistance or the Pension Supplement may be
paid subject to the specific portability rules for each of those
payments or the terms of an agreement.

Delivery of payments outside Australia

Customers receiving a social security pension (other than Parenting
Payment Single) who leave Australia and will remain payable for more
than 26 weeks or who are paid under an international agreement, are paid
by Centrelink International Services (CIS). If a customer intends to be
outside Australia for less than 12 months, payment will generally
continue to be made into their normal Australian bank account every 2
weeks.

Family assistance and parental leave payments can only be paid into an
Australian bank account every 2 weeks.

Foreign pensions

Social security law requires a person who is in receipt of a designated
Australian payment to claim any comparable foreign payment (CFP) to
which they may be entitled. The agency is responsible for assisting
customers with the process for making a claim, as well as any
non-customers who voluntarily seek assistance from staff. The agency
also assists customers to maintain their foreign pension, for example,
assisting with life certificates.

It is important any foreign payment is correctly identified, as foreign
pensions may be assessed differently under social security law; they may
be directly deducted, proportionalised or exempt from the income test.

Customers receiving foreign pensions or who have other income and assets
from overseas will have the Australian dollar amount of the overseas
income revalued using foreign currency exchange rates.

Foreign income and assets

Foreign income and assets from a country other than Australia must be
recorded in the original currency.

Foreign income or assets are converted to Australian dollars before the
income and assets test is applied. The exchange rate used by the agency
is updated on a monthly basis. A customer can ask for a review if the
exchange rate used by the agency is different to the actual rate
received by the customer (conditions apply).

Related links

Portability of payments

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Leaving Australia

Returning to Australia

International Social Security Agreements

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Transfers to international social security agreements

Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional rate

Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia

Foreign pensions

Foreign currency and exchange rate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
