-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information which helps determine whether
Telephone Allowance (TAL) is payable to a customer while they are
overseas and for how long. It also explains the actions to be taken by
the Service Officer and the customer on their departure from Australia.

On this Page:

Temporary absences

TAL is usually payable where a customer is receiving certain Centrelink
payments.

TAL can be paid for temporary departures, on any TAL payday which falls
during the first 6 weeks of the absence. The TAL paydays are 1 January,
20 March, 1 July and 20 September.

TAL is not payable when:

-   the customer has been absent from Australia for 6 weeks
-   qualification otherwise ceases (for example, no longer a subscriber)
-   the customer is no longer qualified for the main payment

Leaving to live in another country

TAL is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country TAL is
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
TAL during any temporary returns to Australia.

Portability Interview

When the Service Officer determines the customer's entitlement to their
main payment, they may also need to decide whether TAL is payable and
for how long.

TAL portability is correctly assessed when the Portability Script -
Departures and Returns is used. If the script is available, coding the
absence from Australia should be done using the script.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The portability of the
payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether
the customer notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink
activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link to this
information.

Related links

Portability of add-ons

Portability of payments

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Telephone Allowance (TAL)

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
