
Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) overseas absences 061-01070030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether Pharmaceutical Allowance
(PhA) is payable to a customer while they are outside Australia and for
how long. It also explains the actions to be taken by the Service
Officer and the customer on their departure.

On this Page:

Temporary absence

PhA is portable for up to 26 weeks for a temporary absence if the main
payment is portable indefinitely (for example, Age Pension).

If the main payment has limited portability, then payment is portable
until the main payment’s portability ends.

Even where PhA is portable, the customer must remain eligible to receive
their income support payment to continue receiving PhA. If the customer
is still overseas when their main payment ceases, entitlement to PhA
will also cease. For example, payments such as Parenting Payment Single
are only payable for 6 weeks from departure and therefore the PhA will
cease after 6 weeks absence from Australia.

If the customer is payable because of discretionary extension
provisions, PhA can continue for as long as the extension applies.

PhA is not portable if the customer is paid under the 1 July 2004
portability provisions or the pre 20 September 2000 portability rules.

Leaving to live in another country

PhA is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country PhA is
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
PhA during any temporary returns to Australia.

International agreement and portability

If a customer is paid under the terms of an international agreement, PhA
portability is determined according to the rules of the relevant
international agreement.

Portability Interview

PhA portability is correctly assessed when the Portability Script -
Departures and Returns is used.

If the script is available, coding the absence from Australia should be
done using the script.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia. [] In most cases, customers can notify of their
departure from Australia via the Travelling outside Australia service
within their Centrelink online account. Where a customer's circumstances
are more complex, they will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website
which lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving
Australia.

Related links

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Discretion to extend portability period

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
