
Former resident overseas absences when a payment is based on past/prior periods of residence 061-01060000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to customers who return to
Australia after a period of residence in another country and who are
granted (or transfer from assessment under an international agreement)
an affected pension payment under domestic qualification rules. These
customers are affected by the former resident provisions if they leave
Australia within a certain period, which is currently two years.

On this Page:

Payments affected by former resident provisions

The payments affected are Age Pension and Disability Support Pension
(DSP).

Customers who are granted a payment, and continue to be paid under an
International Agreement are not affected by former resident provisions.

Customers who are receiving financial assistance under the Medical
Treatment Overseas Program (MTOP), either because they are receiving
treatment or are accompanying such a person, are not affected by former
resident provisions for the period MTOP assistance is payable.

Pension granted to a former resident

If the payment to a former resident was granted:

-   Before 20 September 2000, the customer's pension would have been
    cancelled if they had left Australia within 12 months of their most
    recent return for residence unless there were unforeseen
    circumstances that required them to leave Australia
-   On or after 20 September 2000, the customer's pension will cease if
    they leave Australia within two years of their most recent return
    for residence. There is no discretion for unforeseen circumstances

From 1 January 2014 agreement customers residing in a country other than
Australia, who then return to Australia to take up residence, and who
are transferred back to an affected payment under the domestic
qualification rules are to be assessed as a former resident if they
leave Australia again within two years. This applies even if payment
type does not change on transfer.

Note: they can be transferred back to the agreement payment if they're
returning to an agreement country during their two year wait.

Before 1 July 2016, former resident provisions applied to residents of
Norfolk Island who returned to Australia to take up residence, started
to receive an affected payment and then left Australia (including where
they returned to Norfolk Island) within the two year period.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However there are particular situations where customers should advise of
a departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the [] Travelling outside of Australia service within their
Centrelink online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more
complex they will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website
which lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving
Australia, information about former residents who may qualify for
payment under an Agreement and a link to Medicare information on the
portability of Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) medications.

Contents

Former resident provisions

Related links

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
