
Incentive Allowance (IA) overseas absences 061-01070010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to qualification and payment
of Incentive Allowance (IA) during overseas absences.

On this Page:

Definition of IA

IA is a 'saved' payment made to Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers to encourage them to participate in sheltered workshop
employment. In some cases, IA will remain payable when the pensioner is
temporarily absent overseas.

Leaving to live in another country (permanent absence)

IA is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country, IA is
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
IA during any temporary returns to Australia.

If the person later returns to live in Australia as a resident, IA
cannot be re-granted, even if the person was qualified for it. The
customer could, however, be considered for Rent Assistance (RA)
qualification as IA precludes payment of RA.

Temporary absence

For temporary absences, continuing IA qualification is assessed manually
at departure. The customer can continue to receive IA for up to 26 weeks
after departing Australia if their main payment remains payable and
their employment with the sheltered workshop has not ceased and they
intend to resume their employment at the end of the leave period. For
example:

-   they are on leave (either paid or unpaid)
-   workshop closures during holiday periods
-   other absences, including sick leave
-   periods of long service leave

IA is portable for up to 26 weeks for a temporary absence as long as the
customer remains qualified and payable for their main payment. If the
main payment has limited portability, payment is portable until the main
payment’s portability ends.

If the departure is temporary but the customer's employment with the
sheltered employment has ceased or the customer does not intend to
return to it, IA is cancelled. The customer can be reassessed
immediately for Rent Assistance (RA), which would then be portable as
per the RA rules.

Note: discretionary extensions can apply to IA provided the person
remains qualified.

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, the payment may be
restored automatically or manually if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment ceasing. See Disability payments and services
which may no longer be granted for further details.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system
assesses portability of the payment, regardless of whether the customer
notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities
should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In most cases, customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations when customers must advise of a
departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. When a customer's circumstances are more complex, the
system will prompt them to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia, see Resources.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information about payments while outside Australia.

Related links

Disability payments and services which may no longer be granted

Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) portability

Returning to Australia

Portability of payments

Actioning immigration datalink activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
