
Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional rate 061-02010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to assist Service Officers
determine whether Age Pension, Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Carer
Payment (CP) customers who can be paid indefinitely outside Australia
will be paid a proportional rate.

Discretionary decisions for Age Pension and DSP recipients

Discretionary decisions for Age Pension and DSP recipients

As of 1 July 2021, legislation passed to allow for a discretionary
extension to customers receiving Age Pension or DSP, where they are not
able to return to Australia within 26 weeks due to certain
circumstances. This allows the customer to remain overseas without their
payment rate affected by working life residence (WLR) rules, and may
allow certain add-on payments to continue for the period of the
extension. These add-on payments are Incentive Allowance, Pharmaceutical
Allowance and Rent Assistance.

This change also allows for a discretionary extension to customers
receiving Age Pension or DSP, subject to portability savings under the
pre 20 September 2000 portability rules, or 1 July 2014 portability
rules. This allows customers who normally live overseas and who are in
Australia and unable to depart Australia due to specific circumstances,
and not lose their grandfathered status by being in Australia for a
continuous period of 26 weeks or more.

Age Pension customers paid by virtue of the New Zealand Agreement, and
who are temporarily in third countries and unable to travel due to
unforeseen circumstances, may be able to be paid beyond 26 weeks.

-   For New Zealand Agreement-affected customers (autonomous and those
    paid by virtue of another agreement) it also means the New Zealand
    Agreement rate can continue for the extension period. This applies
    to customers who have left:

-   Australia (i.e. Direct Deduction Rate if ordinarily present
    long-term in Australia), or

New Zealand (i.e. Proportional Rate (PPR) rate, if ordinarily present
long-term in New Zealand)

To determine whether the customer may be extended and paid under the
discretionary portability extensions, see Discretion to extend
portability period.

Proportional rate

A customer long-term outside Australia is generally paid a rate based on
their residence in Australia. This rate is called a proportional rate.

A proportional rate may be paid to:

-   a customer receiving payment using an international agreement
-   an autonomous customer who remains payable after 26 weeks outside
    Australia, or
-   a customer who is present long term inside New Zealand

Customers saved from proportional rate

A customer may be saved from being paid a proportional rate if:

-   the continuing inability to work or permanent blindness occurred
    while the customer was an Australian resident (DSP only)
-   the customer is saved under the 20 September 2000 savings provision,
    or
-   the customer is saved under the 1 July 2004 savings provisions
-   the customer is assessed under the discretionary portability
    extension provisions

Pensions payable for more than 26 weeks

As well as customers who are paid using an international agreement, the
following customers may be payable more than 26 weeks after departure
from Australia:

-   All customers paid Age Pension, unless paid by virtue of the New
    Zealand Agreement
-   DSP customers paid using the 'no future work capacity' portability
    provisions
-   DSP customers paid using the terminally ill provisions
-   DSP customers saved under the pre 1 July 2004 portability rules

Note: customers paid DSP by virtue of the New Zealand Agreement can only
be paid a maximum of 4 weeks in a rolling 28 day period. There is no
indefinite portability for this customer cohort. See New Zealand
Agreement and foreign pension information.

International agreements and rate of pension

If the customer is paid using an agreement, then payment will become
proportional according to the terms of the particular Agreement.

If the customer is paid using an agreement which includes the temporary
departure/return provisions, then the rate will generally become
proportional:

-   immediately on departure from Australia when the customer is leaving
    Australia to live in the agreement country (permanent departure), or
-   after 26 weeks absence from Australia for temporary absences

If the customer is paid using an agreement which does not include the
temporary departure/return provisions, the rate will generally become
proportional immediately on departure

Note: there are different arrangements for travel to New Zealand. See
Departures to New Zealand below.

Generally, there are no savings provisions from a proportional rate for
customers outside Australia who are paid using an international
agreement. However, if a customer has the equivalent of or more than the
maximum working life residence for that agreement, they will be
unaffected by this rule.

If a customer is autonomous and is transferred to an international
agreement after their autonomous entitlement ceases after leaving
Australia then payment will become proportional on the date of effect of
the transfer.

Working life residence (WLR)

Working life residence (WLR) refers to a customer's period of residence
in Australia between the ages of 16 and Age Pension age. It is used in
the proportional rate calculation for departures to countries other than
New Zealand.

For more information, see Working Life Residence.

Working age residence (WAR) is used for departures to New Zealand and
refers to a customer's period of residence in Australia between the ages
of 20 and Age Pension age.

For more information, see Departures to New Zealand below.

Calculating the proportional rate

A person's proportional rate is generally calculated by multiplying
their income and asset tested rate by their working life and dividing
the result by the applicable denominator.

For customers paid according to their working life residence the
applicable denominator is the maximum working life residence amount
required to receive the full income and asset tested rate. Before 1 July
2014, this was generally 300 months. On 1 July 2014, this amount changed
and is now generally 420 months. Some exceptions apply, for example,
customers who are 'saved' (grandfathered) from the 1 July 2014 AWLR
changes.

Customers paid using either of the International Agreements with Greece
or the Republic of North Macedonia, may have an applicable denominator
of 528 months or 44 years.

For example, an autonomous customer who is paid $300.00 per fortnight
under the means test who has 150 months working life residence will be
paid $300 x 150/420 or $107.15 per fortnight. If the same person was
living in Greece and paid under that agreement, they would be paid $300
x 150/528 or $85.22 per fortnight.

For those paid according to their working age residence, the applicable
denominator depends on the payment type being received. For more
information, see New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information.

Departures to New Zealand

The New Zealand Agreement is similar to other agreements in that a
proportional rate may be payable to customers who are outside Australia,
however there are key differences:

a proportional rate is payable to someone present long term in New
Zealand, rather than after 26 weeks,

the proportional rate calculation is based on working age residence
(WAR), rather than working life residence (WLR), and

this proportional rate applies to customers present long-term in New
Zealand who are:

-   paid by virtue of the New Zealand Agreement,
-   receiving Age Pension, DSP or Carer Payment autonomously, and
-   receiving Age Pension, DSP or Carer Payment by virtue of any other
    agreement

For more information, see New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension
information.

Notification of intended departure and return

[] Customers can notify of their departure from Australia via the
Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink online
account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they will be
prompted to contact the agency.

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. Staff should consider applying
the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise when they are leaving
Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

The Resources page contains:

links to the Services Australia website for information about:

-   payment while outside Australia
-   situations when customers must advise they are leaving or returning
    to Australia, and
-   travelling overseas with medicine

a link to the International Programme intranet page

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Disability Support Pension (DSP) severely disabled assessments for
International Agreements

Disability Support Pension (DSP) overseas absences for terminally ill
customers

Assessment for Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers going overseas
under the no future work capacity provisions

Age Pension (Age) customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Transferring a customer record to provide additional service options
when customer is going overseas long term

Working Life Residence (WLR)

Returning to Australia

Discretion to extend portability period

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

International Social Security Agreements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
