
Remote Area Allowance (RAA) overseas absences 061-01070050

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information which helps determine whether Remote
Area Allowance (RAA) is payable to a customer while they are overseas
and for how long. It also explains the actions to be taken by the
Service Officer and the customer on their departure from Australia.

On this Page:

Temporary absence

RAA is payable to a customer living in a remote area and can also be
paid for temporary absences from that remote area for up to 8 weeks.
These absences can include periods when the customer is temporarily
overseas as long as the customer intends to return to the remote area.

RAA can be paid for temporary absences overseas for a maximum of 8 weeks
if the customer left their remote area and went directly overseas. If
the customer stayed somewhere else before their departure (for example,
spent 2 weeks in Sydney with their daughter before going overseas), RAA
is only payable for the remainder of the 8 weeks after their departure
from the remote area (a further 6 weeks outside Australia). The 8 week
period starts from the date the customer leaves the remote area, not the
date they leave Australia.

RAA is not generally payable for a discretionary extension period.

RAA is not portable if the customer is paid under the 1 July 2004
portability provisions or the pre 20 September 2000 portability rules.

The additional component for an RAA child can also be paid for a
temporary absence of up to 8 weeks from the remote area, including an
overseas absence. It does not matter whether the child is travelling
with the adult or by themselves, provided they remain a dependent Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) child. Additional RAA should be cancelled 8 weeks
after the parent or the child leaves the remote area, whichever comes
first.

For RAA qualification purposes all remote areas are in Australia. If a
customer is outside Australia then they cannot be in a remote area, and
can only be paid RAA for the 8 weeks after they left the remote area.

Leaving to live in another country

RAA is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country RAA is
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
RAA during any temporary returns to Australia.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise Services Australia if they
are leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact Services Australia.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia.

Portability interview

RAA portability is correctly assessed when the Portability Script -
Departures and Returns is used.

If the script is available, coding the absence from Australia should be
done using the script.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information about payments while outside Australia and travelling
overseas.

Related links

Remote Area Allowance (RAA) eligibility and payment

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
