-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for Service Officers to follow when
a customer has advised of a change to their return to Australia and may
be used for any payment type.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not.

Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia. The Resources page
has a link.

Changes in travel details advised

Some payments will reduce or stop after a certain period outside
Australia. As a result, changing the date of return to Australia can
affect a customer's payment. It is very important that a customer is
clearly advised of any effect on their payment if they advise of a
delayed return to Australia.

Where a customer is prevented from returning to Australia for certain
reasons, they should also be given the opportunity to apply for an
extension to their payment. Customers on a restricted portability
payment who require more time outside Australia for an approved reason
should also be given an opportunity to apply for an increase in their
approved portability period.

Portability script

If the customer is still outside Australia, the Service Officer must use
the Portability script - Departures and Returns to ensure that a new and
correct decision is made and the customer receives advice of the effect
on their payment. However, the portability script cannot code the change
in return date, so this must be done manually.

Related links

Cancelling a trip outside Australia or changing the departure date

Recording or changing details of a child's travel to or from Australia

Changing the reason for leaving Australia or the length of an approved
absence

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Return to Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Portability of payments

Returning to Australia

Coding the Country of Residence (CRES) screen

Discretion to extend portability period

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
