
Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons 061-01110020

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether a customer may continue to receive
payment when they are temporarily overseas due to humanitarian reasons.

Payments portable for humanitarian reasons

Customers in receipt of the following payments may continue to receive
payment while temporarily overseas for humanitarian reasons:

-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   family assistance, Parental Leave payments and Double Orphan Pension
    payable to the holders of visa subclasses 309, 785 granted on or
    after 16 December 2014, 790 or 820
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers

Humanitarian reason criteria

Humanitarian reasons are limited to the following:

-   custody proceedings
-   adoption of a child by the customer
-   certain legal proceedings
-   attendance at a memorial service for Australians killed or injured
    overseas, or
-   participation as a competitor who is a formally selected member of
    the Australian Paralympic Team at the Paralympic Games
-   attendance at competitions or events necessary to qualify or prepare
    as a competitor for the Paralympic Games (Disability Support Pension
    only)

Note: overseas voluntary work is not considered a reason for which a
customer may continue to receive payments.

Custody proceedings

A person may receive payment while they are overseas where they are
required to personally attend court hearings or similar formal
proceedings to gain or keep custody of their child/ren.

Adoption proceedings

Most of the preliminary arrangements will have been made by
correspondence or phone. Payment for travel overseas should only be made
for the period required to collect the child.

Certain legal proceedings

A customer is eligible for payment under these provisions where they are
required to attend a court or other legal proceeding as a witness. This
covers circumstances where the legal proceedings have been instigated by
public prosecutors, police, or similar authorities. As such, this does
not include situations where the customer is the person who is alleged
to have committed the crime. It also does not include situations where
the customer has instigated the proceedings (such as a civil case where
the customer is suing a person for an injury, or a negligence case
against a company).

Memorial services

If approved by the Australian Government, an Australian resident who was
seriously injured overseas, or a family member of an Australian resident
who died or was seriously injured in an event overseas, can receive
payment to attend a memorial service commemorating the event.

The Paralympic Games

A person attending the Paralympic Games as a competitor in the
Australian Paralympic Team.

Competitions and events prior to the Paralympic Games (DSP only)

A person may continue to receive payments for up to 28 days per trip if
attending athletic competitions or other events necessary to qualify or
prepare for the Paralympic Games. These events must take place within
the 12 month period before the Paralympic Games.

Note: this provision applies for both summer and winter Paralympic
Games.

Verification of humanitarian reason and payment period

Customers must provide acceptable proof of the absence, preferably prior
to their departure.

Payment will be subject to general portability rules pending receipt and
assessment of evidence. If evidence supports travel was for an approved
reason, a specific negotiated period will be determined and back payment
issued if required.

Any relevant preliminary proceedings should be dealt with by phone,
email, letter, or other method that does not require physical
attendance. For custody, adoption, or other legal proceedings, payment
should only continue for the periods covering the formal proceedings.
This may include some travel time to and from the location of the case,
as well as a week prior to the hearings if necessary to consult with
lawyers or other professionals.

Payments generally cannot continue between court hearings where the
hearings are more than a week apart. Should the customer seek to
continue receiving payment, generally they must return to Australia.

Portability Script - Departures and Returns

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will correctly assess
the customer's entitlement payment while outside Australia. If the
script is available, coding the absence from Australia must be done
using the script.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding where a customer clearly
does not satisfy an approved reason for travel. The portability script
will guide service centre and Smart Centre staff when it is necessary to
refer to Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Only designated CIS staff have the delegation to approve and record
payment overseas for an approved reason.

Portability period

The portability period starts on the day a person leaves Australia. For
portability purposes, a person is not considered to be inside Australia
for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of the time
of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia on a
cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day,
regardless of the time of the return, and therefore no longer affected
by portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example,
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Payment restoration

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, the payment may be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

If the customer is unable to return to Australia after the maximum
portability period, Centrelink International Services (CIS) has the
discretion to extend the period of portability under limited
circumstances.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system
regardless of whether the customer notified or not.

Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

The Resources page contains Services Australia website links about
portability of payments and travelling overseas with Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) medicine, a link to the International Programme
intranet page, contacts and examples of customers travelling for
humanitarian reasons and whether payment can continue.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for Customers leaving Australia

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Discretion to extend portability period

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) overseas absences

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer going overseas

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Special Benefit (SpB) customer going overseas

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
