
Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves 061-01110040

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether a customer may continue to receive
payment when they are temporarily overseas due to attending an
Australian Defence Force Reserves training camp.

On this Page:

Payments portable for Australian Defence Force Reserves training

Customers in receipt of the following income support payments may
continue to receive payment while temporarily overseas for Australian
Defence Force Reserve service which is an allowable or approved reason:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Austudy
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (partnered or single)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Temporary absence to attend Australian Defence Force Reserves training

The customer's right to continue to receive their income support payment
is not affected for the period of an overseas absence that is for the
purpose of undertaking Reserve service. This means attending training
camps as a member of the Australian Defence Force Reserves. This does
not include active service for example, duty in East Timor.

A customer's payment is portable for as long as is required for the
camp, plus travelling time (which would be determined by the Reserves
Service concerned as they would provide travel). The length of the
absence can theoretically exceed the normal maximum portability period,
although in practice it is unlikely to ever be more than a few weeks.

The customer must provide written advice confirming proof of the reason
for their absence for assessment. They would normally have papers from
the camp Commander or similar advising them where the camp is, how long
it will be, and when they are required to travel to and from the camp.
These papers need to be provided before departure.

Such camps are normally an acceptable reason for exempting a person from
their mutual obligation requirements in Australia.

Portability Script - Departure and Returns

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns is to be used to
initially assess the customer's entitlement to payment while they are
outside Australia.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
initial portability interview when a customer clearly does not satisfy
an approved reason for travel or has an exemption due to a training
camp.

The Portability Script will guide service centre and Smart Centre staff
when it is necessary to refer to Centrelink International Services
(CIS). When a customer has advised their overseas travel is for a
training camp with the Australian Defence Force Reserves, the case must
be referred to the International Smart Centre to assess entitlement and
code the departure.

Only designated CIS staff have the delegation to approve and record
payment overseas for an approved reason.

The Resources page contains a link to information on the portability of
Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) medications.

Related links

ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice customer going overseas

Austudy customer going overseas

Defence Force Reserves as an approved activity

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer going overseas

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer and/or child going overseas

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer and/or child going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
