-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to when customers whose
payment has a limited portability period and who are in an agreement
country may be entitled to continue to receive payment under an
international social security agreement. Note: staff in Centrelink
International Services (CIS) are responsible for decisions on transfers
to agreements.

Principles of using agreements

The underlying principle of agreements is to preserve customers'
entitlement, not to maximise the rate of payment. This means that:

-   agreements can only be used when the customer's existing entitlement
    ceases after leaving the country they are in, and
-   where more than one agreement may apply, unless specifically
    requested by the customer, the agreement for the country where the
    customer is located should be used

Requirements for transfers

A person can only use an agreement to receive a payment that is covered
by the relevant agreement. All agreements cover Age Pension but may also
have further limitations on other payments, e.g. severely disabled for
Disability Support Pension (DSP).

Although no claim form is required, the claim requirements under the
relevant agreement must be met as at the date the transfer is to take
effect. Most agreements require a person to be resident in either
Australia or the agreement country and also present in Australia or the
agreement country. Customers must provide evidence of their location in
an agreement country and a residence determination also needs to be
made.

Note: where a customer loses qualification for their payment, they may
also need to qualify under the relevant agreement including
totalisation. For example, refugees in receipt of Age Pension who depart
Australia permanently lose their qualifying residence exemption so must
then be able to totalise under the relevant agreement to meet the 10
year residence requirement at the date the transfer is to take effect.

Breaks in entitlement

Customers who are not portable on departure, for example, former
resident leaving Australia, can still be paid for reasonable direct
travel time in getting to the agreement country. Customers cannot be
paid for intentional stop-overs in non-agreement countries, for example,
short holidays.

Customers who are suspended for portability reasons in a non-agreement
country may be restored under an agreement with a break in entitlement
if they subsequently go to an agreement country and meet the
requirements for transfer, including providing evidence of their
location. Customers who are cancelled must generally lodge a new claim
although consideration should be given for reasonable delays in dealing
with customers outside Australia.

Agreement customers

Once a customer uses a provision of an agreement, for example, transfer
for portability, they are then considered to be paid by virtue of the
agreement and all other provisions of the agreement apply including rate
of payment, for example, proportional according to Australian working
life residence and altered portability provisions. For more information
on agreements, see International Social Security Agreements.

Transfer to autonomous

Transfers from agreements to autonomous are subject to 'former resident'
provisions. This means a customer paid under an agreement who ceases to
be an Australian resident and again becomes an Australian resident and
then transfers from an agreement to autonomous is not portable if they
depart Australia again within 2 years of the date they again become an
Australian resident. The customer may again transfer to an agreement to
be portable if they meet the requirements for transfer, including
providing evidence of their location.

An autonomous customer who transfers to an agreement while outside
Australia but remains an Australian resident throughout the period of
the absence is not a 'former resident'. Provided they have not been
suspended, these customers will be automatically transferred to
autonomous when they return to Australia.

The Resources page contains examples of situations when an autonomous
customer in receipt of Disability Support Pension can be transferred to
an agreement country, the online form for certifying location in an
agreement country and links to the CIS homepage and International
Programme homepage.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Disability Support Pension (DSP) severely disabled assessments for
International Agreements

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Portability of payments

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
