
Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff for pension payments 061-03020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a pension customer needs to advise of a
return to Australia, the action to be taken by a Service Officer in a
service centre or Smart Centre and the effect on a customer's payments
when they return to Australia.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations when customers should advise of a
departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

Immigration Datalink

If the customer and/or child has an active immigration datalink, their
return date will generally be automatically updated when they return to
Australia.

For those customers or children who do not have an active immigration
datalink, the date they returned to Australia will need to be manually
recorded.

Portability Script

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns cannot process a return
in all cases, for example, customer returning to Australia after living
overseas or paid under the New Zealand (NZ) Agreement. If the script
cannot complete the assessment or coding, it will advise this and create
a review for manual follow-up of the activity where required. In these
cases, procedures relevant to the payment type should be followed to
manually action the return to Australia.

Contact details and change of circumstances

A customer's address (including postal address) and telephone contact
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact with the customer, and updated if required. Note: if the
customer has authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not
need to be confirmed.

If a customer has a change in circumstances on their return, for
example, begins to pay rent, resumes part time work, they must still
contact Services Australia within 14 days as usual.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

Customers with reporting requirements are re-profiled as a notification
reporter during a period of absence from Australia. Upon return to
Australia, their reporting requirements are again automatically
re-profiled.

A Carer Payment (XWP) customer loses their qualification for CP under
grandfathering provisions if they have a break in payment level Carer
Allowance (CA) entitlement. Carer Payment (XWP) can only be restored if
their CA is reinstated without a gap in entitlement. For more
information see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Centrelink International Services (CIS) customer returns to Australia

Some return actions must only be done by CIS. To identify these cases,
see the Process page.

Portability of concession cards

Concession cards are portable for temporary absences from Australia up
to 6 weeks (19 weeks for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card) from
departure, subject to continued eligibility. If a current concession
card customer returns to Australia before the end of their allowable
portability period and entitlement has continued throughout the period
of absence, a new card does not need to be issued as a result of the
return.

If a customer is not a resident of Australia, they are not entitled to
any add-ons including concession cards if they return to Australia
temporarily, unless they are paid under the Agreement with New Zealand.

Multiple absences from Australia - residence

If the customer is repeatedly absent from Australia for long periods
with short returns to renew their portability, it may indicate that they
are actually residing overseas. Customers receiving Age Pension do not
need to remain Australian residents to continue to be entitled to
payment. However, if they are also receiving any add-ons, Carer
Allowance (CA) or family assistance payments, these payments will cease
on departure if the customer is leaving Australia to live overseas.

For all other payments, the customer must remain an Australian resident
to remain qualified. The Service Officer must be satisfied of this each
time a customer leaves Australia, or payment should be cancelled
immediately on departure. If an absence, or a period of multiple
absences with short returns to Australia between the absences, exceeds
approximately 3 years, continuing Australian residence is questionable.

If a customer whose payment has been suspended or cancelled returns to
Australia after multiple absences, ensure they are still a resident of
Australia before their payment is restored or re-granted. If payment is
restored or re-granted, any future absences should be checked very
carefully before making the portability decision to ensure that the
customer is still an Australian resident.

Most customers do not have to remain in Australia for any minimum period
before payment is portable again and, if the customer is paid a
proportional rate, their rate will increase from the date of their
return to Australia. However, some payments are affected by return rules
and other payments may be affected by former resident rules.

Customers who cease to be Australian residents and lose entitlement to
Centrelink administered payments may need to return to Australia to
reside before they can lodge a proper claim for payment. Their status as
an Australian resident will need to be assessed. If the customer is not
an Australian resident, they will generally not be able to lodge a claim
or qualify for a payment.

Multiple absences from Australia - return rules

Returning to Australia may affect subsequent portability if the customer
is receiving Pension Education Supplement (PES) or Parenting Payment
(PP). If the customer's payment has stopped or reduced for portability
reasons (they were outside Australia for more than 6 weeks) and they
return to Australia and resume payment, they must generally remain in
Australia for at least 6 weeks before this payment is portable again.

It is very important that a customer who is planning on returning to
Australia and then going outside Australia again contacts before their
return to Australia. The Service Officer can then advise them what
effect any return to Australia may have on their future payments if they
travel outside Australia again.

Multiple absences from Australia - Approved study

The 6 week return rule on payments allowing extended portability for
approved study means there is no interruption of the portability period
where:

-   the customer has an approved overseas study absence granted, and
-   the customer returns to Australia for up to 6 weeks

There is no requirement to make a new decision.

Multiple absences from Australia - former residents

Returning to Australia may affect subsequent portability if the customer
has returned to live in Australia and then claimed or transferred to 1
of these payments:

-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

If these customers leave Australia within 2 years of their return for
residence, their payments are unlikely to be portable at all.

It is very important that a customer planning to leave Australia within
2 years of a return for residence (and subsequent grant/ transfer to 1
of these payments) contacts before leaving. The Service Officer can then
advise them what effect the departure may have on their future payments
if they travel outside Australia.

For more information, see Former resident provisions.

The Resources page contains a link to the International Services (CIS)
intranet page for access to their contact details.

Related links

Return to Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for non-pension payments and cards

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Portability of concession cards

Portability of payments

Carer Restoration workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Restoration of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Actioning Immigration datalink activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
