-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about whether a payment can continue
while a customer is outside Australia.

Government intent

Travelling outside Australia affects customers differently, depending on
the payment or concession type received, and the duration of the
absence.

Services Australia will assess whether a customer's payment can continue
while the customer is outside Australia, for what length of time and the
rate payable during any absence. Due to the complexity of portability
rules, if the Portability Script - Departures and Returns is available,
the script must be used to code the absence for customers leaving
Australia.

Planning an overseas trip

When a customer is planning to leave Australia to travel to or live in
another country, they should check how this might affect their:

-   payments
-   health care and
-   child support arrangements

Customers can check their circumstances and plans against the Services
Australia website. They can then decide whether to notify the agency of
their plans to travel. If a customer advises they are planning to
travel, staff must always use the Portability Script - Departures and
Returns to correctly code the absence from Australia. If the script is
not available due to technical issues, see Contents below for links to
payment specific and concession card portability procedures.

Portability period

The portability period represents how long a person's payment can
continue outside Australia and depends on the type of payment. Customers
must remain qualified for payment during their absence and, for some
payments, the customer must continue to meet activity requirements

The portability period starts on the day the customer leaves Australia.
For portability purposes, a person is not considered to be in Australia
for any part of the day they departed Australia, regardless of the time
of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia on a
cruise the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be in Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and, therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day (for example,
airline crew) this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

The maximum portability period is the maximum period payment can
continue for a customer who leaves Australia.

Factors affecting the maximum period

There are various factors that affect the maximum period, these include:

-   the type of visa the customer holds (for example, a partner
    provisional visa limits the maximum period)
-   if the customer is attending an Australian Defence Force Reserves
    service training camp
-   discretionary extension provisions
-   International social security agreements
-   if the absence is temporary (e.g. holiday) or if the customer is
    leaving to live overseas
-   savings provisions
-   if payment was granted to the customer as a former Australian
    resident
-   return rules for certain payments
-   respite rules for carers

See Resources for a guide to maximum portability periods.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia.
Portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified us before leaving Australia.
Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.
However, there are situations when customers should advise of a
departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[]In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the online Travelling outside of Australia service within their
Centrelink online account. If a customer's circumstances are more
complex they will be prompted to contact the agency.

To continue to access their myGov account while they are overseas,
customers who have elected to receive myGov security codes by SMS will
need to ensure that they can still receive SMS to their Australian
mobile phone number outside Australia.

Otherwise they will need to change their Sign-in options to myGov Code
Generator app codes, or secret question prior to travelling overseas. To
change myGov Sign-in options, customers need to sign in to their myGov
account and select Account settings.

The website lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving
or returning to Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Change in circumstances

[]Customers leaving Australia are still required to notify any other
changes to their circumstances that would normally affect their payment
or concession card.

Depending on the event, customers may be able to notify the change
online. Refer to the Change of circumstances procedure for the relevant
payment or concession card type.

Portability Interview

Due to the complexity of portability rules, the Portability Script -
Departures and Returns must be used whenever a customer contacts about
leaving Australia even when customers do not need to advise the agency.

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns assists the Service
Officer to collect relevant information from the customer during an
interview. It should be used to help assess the customer's entitlement
to payment while outside Australia. The script will correctly code the
absence from Australia onto a customer's record, and issue a letter if
requested by the customer providing information about the possible
effect on their entitlement while outside Australia.

If the Portability Script - Departures and Returns is unavailable there
are a number of procedures which can assist a Service Officer to
determine if payments are portable during an overseas absence and for
how long. See Contents below.

Returning to Australia

In most cases a customer who returns from a short trip overseas, and
their payment remains current, does not need to notify that they have
returned to Australia.

When they return, contact is required if:

-   a payment or concession card was stopped while they were away and
    was not automatically restored when they returned to Australia
-   they are returning to live in Australia after living overseas
-   they are receiving their payment under an international social
    security agreement, or
-   they have been asked to provide evidence for their reason for travel
    or other documents

If the customer or child has an active Department of Home Affairs
datalink their return date should automatically update when they return
to Australia. If it does not update automatically, then it will need to
be recorded manually. Department of Home Affairs datalink activities
should not be cancelled.

If the departure was not recorded, then the Portability Script -
Departures and Returns must be run, and the departure coding completed,
before the return to Australia can be recorded and assessed.

Restoration of payment on return to Australia

If a customer or child remains outside Australia after their payment has
stopped for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on
their return to Australia may be possible. Generally, their payment can
be automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within
13 weeks of their payment stopping.

Payments that are portable

Most payments can be paid to a customer or for a child who is
temporarily overseas; that is, most payments are 'portable', at least in
some circumstances.

The rules are complicated about:

-   a payment's portability
-   how long a payment will be paid, and
-   what rate will be paid

Some payments are portable indefinitely; and are paid for as long as the
customer is overseas. This is the case even if the customer has chosen
to leave Australia to live in another country.

The rate of these payments may change after the customer has been
overseas for a while.

Many payments are portable for a limited time. The rate of these
payments will not usually change. They cannot be paid at all if the
customer has chosen to leave Australia to live in another country.

Families-related payments are generally affected if the customer's child
leaves Australia, even if the customer stays in Australia. These
payments are portable for a limited time. The rate of these payments
will not usually change. They cannot be paid at all if the child has
left Australia to live in another country.

Some payments are only portable if the customer leaves Australia for a
particular reason. For example to attend the funeral of a parent.
Specialist Centrelink International Services staff will talk to the
customer about their circumstances. Portability for these payments will
only be approved for a limited period. The rate of these payments will
not usually change.

Concession cards are usually portable for a limited time. The card will
be cancelled if the customer has chosen to leave Australia to live in
another country. However, while temporarily overseas, customers may be
able to gain benefit by presenting their Australian concession card. The
overseas agency decides which benefit they can receive.

If the customer goes to an agreement country and meets the transfer
requirements, they may be able to transfer to an international social
security agreement. They can then continue to receive payment. This is
relevant to customers with payments:

-   that are not portable for any of their absence outside Australia or
-   after the maximum portability period has been reached

Loans under the Home Equity Access Scheme (the HEAS) are not social
security payments. They are not subject to portability rules or
proportional portability. Payments under the HEAS can be paid overseas
as long as the customer meets and maintains eligibility for the HEAS.

It is possible for a customer to receive:

-   a pension or allowance, and
-   the HEAS loan payments

The pension or allowance is subject to the normal rules of portability
and proportional portability of the pension or allowance they receive.

If the rate of payment is reduced due to proportional portability, the
HEAS loan payments continue to be paid while the customer is outside
Australia. This is the case even if the primary payment suspends or
cancels due to the proportional rate being nil.

The fortnightly loan rate automatically increases to compensate for the
reduced rate of payment. This is the case unless the customer has chosen
to receive a fixed loan amount each fortnight.

All payments continue to be affected by the rules and conditions that
apply inside Australia. For example, if an Age Pension customer (who has
been indefinitely portable at maximum rate) has a big lotto win their
pension may be reduced or cancelled by the means test.

Paying customers outside Australia

Once portability is established, payments may be made while the customer
is outside Australia:

-   into an Australian bank account, or
-   into an overseas bank account (for some countries)

The method of delivery may vary depending on the length of the absence,
whether the departure is temporary, the country to which they are
travelling, and the type of payment the person is receiving.

The Resources page contains links the Services Australia website for
information about payments while outside Australia and travelling
overseas with Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) medicines.

Contents

Portability script - recording overseas travel

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Leaving Australia long term or permanently

Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional rate

Customer is going overseas long term – entitlement check and record
transfer

Transfers to international social security agreements

Portability of payments under special circumstances

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences when
customer has special circumstances

Overseas absence for acute family crisis

Overseas absence for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Overseas absence for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absence for humanitarian reasons

Age Pension customer leaving Australia

Age Pension customer going overseas

Carer or care receiver leaving Australia

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) overseas absences

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer leaving Australia

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Assessment of Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas
under the no future work capacity provisions

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer overseas absence for
terminally ill customers

Disability Support Pension (DSP) severely disabled assessment for
International Agreements

Families and/or Parenting Payments customers leaving Australia

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer and/or child going overseas

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer and/or child going overseas

Student leaving Australia

ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas

Austudy customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Student studying outside Australia

Assessing a tertiary student studying overseas for Youth Allowance (YA)
at the away from home rate

Coding for approved Overseas Full Time Study (OFS) payments

Customers on other income support payments leaving Australia

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) overseas absences

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer going overseas

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Special Benefit (SpB) customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Add on payments when going overseas

Portability of Add-ons

Mobility Allowance (MOB) customer going overseas

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) overseas absence

Remote Area Allowance (RAA) overseas absence

Rent Assistance (RA) portability

Concession cards when going overseas

Portability of concession cards

Generic information

Discretion to extend portability period

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
going overseas

Proof of Life Certificate (AUS061) enquiries

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Historical portability information

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Customers overseas on 1 July 2004

Customers assessed under pre 1 July 2014 Australian Working Life
Residence (AWLR) rules

Related links

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Former resident provisions

myGov Access - Code Generator app

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
