
Proof of Life Certificate (AUS061) enquiries 061-19120306

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for staff answering Proof of Life
Certificate (AUS061) phone enquiries.

Proof of Life Certificate (AUS061)

The AUS061 is used to ensure that a customer is still alive and entitled
to receive their pension. The form helps us confirm a customer's
identity and continuing eligibility while they are living overseas.

Proof of life interventions

From December 2019, customers will need to provide a Proof of Life
Certificate every 2 years, if all the following apply:

-   They receive Age Pension, Disability Support Pension, or Carer
    Payment
-   They are 80 years old or above
-   They reside permanently overseas

A Proof of Life letter is sent to the customer requesting them to
complete and return a Proof of Life Certificate to Services Australia
within 91 days.

If the customer fails to respond to the request, the customer's payments
may be suspended pending a response. If the customer fails to respond
after a further 91 days the customer's payments may be cancelled and the
intervention finalised.

The AUS061 and Proof of Life intervention are processed by Compliance
Officers (COs).

Customer contact

Customers will be provided the Centrelink International Services (CIS)
number on the letter issued with the AUS061. If a customer requests help
in completing a Proof of Life Certificate, CIS staff may assist and
should follow the instructions on the form.

Warm transfer the customer to the compliance team for enquires
regarding:

-   extensions to lodge the certificate
-   suspensions or cancellations if the certificate has not been
    returned
-   or where updates are required as a result of the AUS061 (for
    example, customer has returned to Australia

Life certificates for Chilean pensioners in Australia

Chilean pensioners must provide life certificates to the Chilean
authorities, but forms are not sent to customers in Australia.

As agreed with the Chilean authorities, customers who contact Services
Australia regarding suspension of Chilean pensions or requests for life
certificates from Chilean authorities may complete the Australian Proof
of Life Certificate 'Certificado de Supervivencia' (AUS061ES) form. The
completed AUS061ES intended for the Chilean authorities must not be
scanned and should be returned to Centrelink International Services
(CIS) via the internal mail. In this case, the original AUS061ES form
with an Australian liaison form must be sent by CIS staff to Chile. See
the Resources page for a link to the forms.

Customer contacts in relation to the AUS061

AUS061 issued due to the Proof of Life intervention - staff can assist
customers to complete the form - using the form as a guide and advise
customers how to return the form. All other queries including requests
for extensions to lodge the form, death advice notifications, suspension
or cancellations are to be warm transferred to the Compliance Team.

Life certificate for Chilean authorities - CIS staff are to complete the
customer's query.

The Resources page contains links to the AUS061ES in Spanish, the
Australian liaison form for Chile, and the Services Australia website.

Related links

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Assisting customers to maintain an existing foreign pension

Chile Agreement and foreign pension information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
