
Age Pension cancellations, suspensions, rejections and restorations 065-03080000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the cancellation, suspension
and restoration of Age Pension.

Cancellation of Age Pension

Cancellation represents a loss of entitlement to payment. This can occur
for a variety of reasons but often is the result of customer information
about a change in their circumstances. Some of the cancellation reasons
can be used to cancel Age Pension manually, or the system will
automatically cancel Age Pension when the new information is updated on
the customer's record.

Suspension of Age Pension

A customer may not be entitled to Age Pension temporarily as a result of
changes in their circumstances or pending investigation by Centrelink
into their eligibility for payment. In these cases, their payment can be
suspended. Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of
entitlement, and full arrears are issued if payment is subsequently
restored.

Rejection of Age Pension claim

A customer who has lodged a claim for Age Pension may not be entitled to
payment because they do not meet the basic qualification, payability or
recipient obligation provisions for payment. In these circumstances,
claims have to be rejected.

Restoration of Age Pension

Restoration of a suspended pension may occur as a result of a change of
circumstances, or a favourable review of the department's decision to
stop payment. When restoring payments, it is important to establish the
customer's ongoing eligibility and to recommence payments from the date
the customer became eligible again.

Reason codes

Codes are used when a decision to cancel or suspend a payment, or to
reject a claim, is recorded on the computer system. Codes are not used
in correspondence with customers.

Contents

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Age Pension

Cancellation of Age Pension

Suspension of Age Pension

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Restoration of Age Pension

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
