
Transfer to Age Pension 065-03010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how eligible income support customers of Age
Pension age can transfer to Age Pension. It explains when a claim or
other documentation is required and factors to consider. It also
contains information on the automatic transfer to Age Pension for some
Identified Indigenous customers.

Transfer process for eligible customers

[] Customers eligible to complete the online transfer to Age Pension can
access the online transfer from 13 weeks before reaching Age Pension
age. A correspondence nominee (individual or organisation) can submit a
Transfer to Aged Pension on behalf of their principal.

The Aged Pension transfer will be available if the customer is:

-   subscribed to online services, they will be sent an online letter to
    their myGov inbox to complete the transfer to Age Pension. The
    letter will include a hyperlink to the Services Australia website
    and direct link to their online transfer task
-   not subscribed to online letters or Electronic Messaging, they will
    be sent a letter and a Transfer to Age Pension (SA383) form by mail,
    with the option to complete the transfer online rather than return
    the form

A customer’s payment may be suspended or cancelled from the date they
turn Age Pension age, if the customer does not:

-   submit the Transfer to Age Pension online, via Assisted Customer
    Claim (ACC), or
-   return the completed SA383

If their current payment does suspend or cancels, the Transfer to Age
Pension task will remain available on the Centrelink online account
landing page for up to 13 weeks after the suspension or cancellation
date.

Payment should only be restored once the customer has submitted the
transfer online via the ACC workflow or lodged a SA383 including
required documentation.

Customers who are in receipt of Carer Payment or Disability Support
Pension who do not want to transfer to Age Pension still need to
complete the Transfer to Age Pension process. This will allow the
customer to decline the transfer but will ask for their superannuation
details which become assessable at Age Pension age.

When a customer has identified as an Indigenous customer they may be
automatically transferred to Age Pension without the need to complete an
online transfer or SA383.

Straight through processing

Some online transfers do not need Service Officer intervention and will
automatically complete once submitted by the customer. Straight through
processing may occur where the transfer is straightforward, for example,
there are no updates required, no documentation to be provided, and no
adverse impacts on the entitlements of the customer (or their partner).

Where transfers to Age Pension cannot auto complete, the status of the
activity will change to 'In Process' and the activity will be assigned
to a Service Officer for manual processing.

Contact about transfer to Age Pension

[]

If an income support customer contacts about transferring to Age Pension
because they have not received an invitation to transfer and they are
within 13 weeks of Age Pension age, offer an online transfer first.
Explain the benefits of using the transfer online, including:

-   early warnings if claimants may not be eligible, for example, not
    residentially qualified
-   there will be less information to provide, as information from
    Centrelink records will be pre-populated into the online transfer
-   for Carer Payment and Disability Support Pension customers, detailed
    messaging will populate within the online transfer process. This
    outlines the customer's circumstances including the advantages and
    disadvantages of transferring from their respective payment to help
    them make an informed decision about whether to transfer to Age
    Pension or remain on their current payment
-   the ability to monitor the progress of a transfer through Centrelink
    online account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

If customers decline or are unable to use the online transfer, offer the
Aged Pension via the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) process.

If a correspondence nominee enquires about transferring to Age Pension
on behalf of a customer, Service Officers can run the ACC workflow. ACC
allows for the Verbal Declaration to be made by the customer (or their
correspondence nominee).

A declaration is required prior to submitting the transfer. When a
Service Officer reads the Verbal Declaration to the customer (or
correspondence nominee), they must tick the Declaration box on the
Review your claim page. This confirms that the Service Officer has read
the declaration script and the customer (or correspondence nominee)
accepts it. Once the Verbal Declaration is accepted and ACC submitted a
DOC containing this information displays in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First super case
-   the Customer Claim Summary

Service Officers must not submit the transfer without the customer
accepting the Verbal Declaration. Advise the customer of any outstanding
documents, or action required to submit the transfer.

Note: identified Indigenous customers may be eligible for an automatic
transfer without the need to complete an online transfer or SA383.
Remind customers of their notification requirements, including advice
that any money invested in superannuation is assessable as a financial
investment from Age Pension age. See Assessing superannuation.

Qualification for Age Pension

A person qualifies for Age Pension if they have reached Age Pension age
and they satisfy the residence qualification for Age Pension.

Customers who do not satisfy the residence requirements for Age Pension
but have:

-   lived or worked in an Agreement country may be qualified under an
    Agreement
-   not lived or worked in an Agreement country, advise of the likely
    date they will meet the residence requirements so they can contact
    again at that time. Consider offering the customer an alternative
    income support payment where eligible. Payment and Service Finder on
    the Services Australia website can be used to determine any support
    the customer may be eligible for. The Resources page has a link to
    the Payment and Service Finder

A datalink with the Department of Home Affairs will automatically
populate visa subclass details for most customers from 1 September 1994
to date. Where available, the datalink will also advise citizenship and
movement information from 1 September 1994. This information has been
available from 8 December 2008 to assist in assessing residence periods.

When transfer to Age Pension provisions do not apply

An Age Pension online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) will be
required from customers receiving ABSTUDY or Farm Household Allowance.

See Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension.

Backdating of Age Pension claim

If an online, Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), Transfer to Aged Pension
(SA383) form or full Age Pension claim is lodged after becoming
qualified for Age Pension and the transfer provisions apply, the date of
effect may be backdated up to the later of:

-   13 weeks before the date of the decision to transfer
-   the date the person qualified for Age Pension

The References page contains more information on backdating provisions
(section 12, deemed claim in certain cases).

Documents or information that may be needed

-   Proof of age if not previously supplied, unless they are an
    identified Indigenous customer. This will be requested online or on
    the transfer form. If unable to provide proof of age, their age may
    be verified by another method
-   Documents confirming their identity if the Identity Confirmation
    status is not showing as Confirmed or the identity on record is not
    sufficient
-   Details of superannuation investments, for example, approved deposit
    funds, deferred annuities or superannuation funds. These must be
    recorded for all customers who have these investments.
    Superannuation is assessable at Age Pension age whether they
    transfer to Age Pension or not. Note: if the partner is over pension
    age, the superannuation details of the partner must also be recorded
-   Information about their home property to see if they are eligible
    for the extended land use test curtilage concession if the principal
    home and adjacent land is on one title or multiple titles and is
    over 2 hectares
-   They may have to meet Comparable Foreign Payment (CFP) requirements
    if they were born overseas or lived overseas
-   They may require a valuation of assessable real estate

Choice to remain on current payment or transfer to Age Pension

Those customers who receive the below payments have a choice to transfer
to Age Pension or remain on their current payment:

-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment (single)

The Resources page contains information about the effect on their
payments and the advantages and disadvantages of transferring to Age
Pension.

Customers receiving CP or DSP who lodge a transfer to Age Pension online
will be presented with personalised circumstance data including the
advantages and disadvantages of transferring from their respective
payment to help them make an informed decision about whether to transfer
to Age Pension or remain on their existing payment.

Customer does not wish to transfer to Age Pension

Except for identified Indigenous customers who are excluded from the
transfer process, customers must still complete the transfer to Age
Pension online, or via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or return their
Transfer to Age Pension (SA383) form even if they do not wish to
transfer to Age Pension.

Customers who do not wish to transfer to Age Pension are not required to
provide identity documents.

Superannuation

Superannuation is assessable at Age Pension age whether the customer
chooses to transfer to Age Pension. Superannuation details must be
provided for customers who are Age Pension age for all superannuation
investments, for example approved deposit fund, deferred annuity, or
superannuation fund.

If the customer has a partner who is Age Pension age, their
superannuation details are also required even if they are not receiving
a payment from Services Australia.

Transfer treated as claim

Where a customer loses entitlement to their previous income support
payment they may still be able to claim Age Pension by:

-   completing the transfer to Age Pension [] online via Assisted
    Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   using the Transfer to Age Pension (SA383) form

If the customer's income support payment was cancelled after the
Transfer to Age Pension process has commenced, they may need to complete
an Income and Assets form (SA369) to ensure Age Pension entitlements are
assessed based on the customer's current circumstances. A link to the
form is available on the Resources page.

Customers over Age Pension age

If the customer is already Age Pension age, paid an income support
payment and satisfies Age Pension qualification, they may be eligible to
transfer to Age Pension if they:

-   contact and enquire about transferring from another payment (for
    example Carer Payment), or
-   are Age Pension age and were not initially residentially qualified
    for Age Pension

They can complete the transfer to Age Pension [] online or via Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC).

Customers unable or unwilling to use the online transfer to lodge a
claim for Age Pension. ACC should be used to help the customer to lodge
their claim.

Customers may not have contacted but have a Manual Follow-up (MFU)
maturing which is visible on the Activity List (AL) screen and requires
staff to contact the customer and inviting them to apply for Age Pension
online via ACC or by issuing a paper claim.

Section 12 of the SSAA (deemed claims provision) applies to customers
who were granted their current income support payment before or after
qualifying for the Age Pension.

Comparable foreign payment

If a customer or their partner has worked or lived outside Australia,
they may need to meet the comparable foreign payment requirements.

Customers may ask Centrelink for information about foreign pensions
available from other countries.

Notices to customers advising of a possible entitlement to a foreign
pension are issued based on information recorded on the Country of
Residence (CRES) and Foreign Claim Details (FGD) screens.

Blind customers

For customers who want to transfer and who have not previously been
assessed as blind, follow additional steps about assessment of blindness
and whether or not their income and assets need to be assessed.

Deceased customers

The system generated grant and rejection letters for deceased customers
are not addressed correctly and contain text that is inappropriate to
send to a deceased estate. The grant or rejection letter must be
addressed to:

-   the 'Executor of the Estate' (if applicable), or
-   to the 'Estate of the Late <customer's name>'

For examples of pension grant letters for a deceased customer, see the
Processing transfers to Age Pension.

Urgent transfers to Age Pension

Ensure that customers who will soon lose qualification of their existing
payment (for example, JobSeeker Payment) are processed as a priority and
at the earliest touch point to avoid placing the customer in financial
hardship.

If staff are unable or not skilled to process Transfer to Age Pension,
and urgent processing is required, create a Fast Note:

for Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC):

-   Select Auto Text use Older Australians > Claims > Age Transfer
    Online Urgent processing request

for SA383:

-   Select Auto Text use Older Australians > Claims > Age Transfer SA383
    Urgent processing request

Leave Fast Note DOC open. This will ensure that the transfer is
correctly prioritised for allocation.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
contact details for International Services (CIS), Age Pension versus
current payment information to help customers choose whether or not to
transfer to Age Pension, and changes to payments when customers reach
Age Pension age. It also contains information to help calculate a
person's Age Pension age date.

Related links

Processing transfers to Age Pension

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Qualification for Age Pension

Qualification for Aged Pension (Blind)

International Social Security Agreements

Former resident provisions

Foreign pensions

Identity Confirmation

Age Pension (Blind) transfer provisions

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Recording legal residence status

Pensions income and assets tests

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessing superannuation

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
