
Workforce Supplement for aged care services 065-13040080

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Workforce Supplement for aged care services.
The supplement improves the capacity of the aged care sector by
attracting and retaining staff by offering higher wages, enhanced
training and education opportunities and improved career development for
members of the aged care workforce.

Aged care reform

On 20 April 2012, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Mental Health
and Ageing released a comprehensive 10 year package to reshape aged
care. The Living Longer Living Better aged care reform package will
build a better, fairer, sustainable and nationally consistent aged care
system to meet the social and economic challenges of the nation's ageing
population.

The reform package included an announcement that up to $1.2 billion
would be made available through the Addressing Workforce Pressures
initiative to better support the people who work in aged care. This
initiative will be delivered in two parts - through the Aged Care
Workforce Compact and Supplement, and the Aged Care Workforce
Development Plan developed during 2013.

Timeframes for Workforce supplement file

The Workforce supplement file is sent to Services Australia Aged Care
Help Desk via email each month as needed.

Department of Social Services (DSS) only emails a file if a change has
been recorded to the Workforce Supplement eligibility for one or more
services for that particular month.

Note: the file must be loaded before the start of the next claim month.

Leave enough time to ensure that any errors can be dealt with before the
next month's run.

DSS emails the Aged Care Helpdesk a Comma Separated Value (CSV) file.

The following lines represent the details of the entry, the:

-   first value is the service ID
-   second value is start date in the format DDMMYYYY
-   third value is the end date in the format DDMMYYYY
-   fourth value is for comments (generally blank)

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Aged Care,
question and answers, information about responsibilities and error
resolutions for the Workforce Supplement and a link to the Department of
Social Services' website.

Related links

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
