
Manage aged care recipient details 065-13070030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers manage aged care recipient
details in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) and Aged Care Management
Payment System (ACMPS).

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Aged care recipient records

Care recipient records are created:

-   automatically, from data being exchanged between systems, or
-   manually

Care recipient records are automatically created during the process of
National Screening Assessment Form (NSAF) being received via the My Aged
Care Gateway. Care recipient information is auto populated based on the
information from the NSAF.

NSAFs are:

-   automatically matched to existing care recipient records, or
-   held for manual processing by the Aged Care and Allied Health Branch
    (ACAH)

If NSAFs are held, ACAH will determine if a new record is to be created
or has been matched to an existing care recipient profile. The NSAF
contains the approval details for the care recipient. All updates to a
care recipient’s personal details (for example, name, address, date of
birth) are also received via NSAFs.

Service Officers will need to view a care recipient’s record in the aged
care payment systems to answer aged care services’ queries.

Care recipient notes

Care recipient notes must be recorded if manual action has occurred on a
care recipient record. Action can be requested by the Department of
Health, the aged care service or by the Service Officer. For example, an
aged care service can request a change to a hospital leave’s start date.

The Aged Care Staff Portal manages all care recipient notes. For
example:

-   registered
-   deleted
-   updated, or
-   viewed

Deleting events on a care recipient record

While a care recipient record cannot be deleted, events recorded on the
care recipient record may be deleted. For example, entry events may be
deleted.

Note: requests to delete Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) appraisals
and National Screening Assessment Form (NSAF) approvals must be directed
to the Aged Care Programmes Branch for action. See the Multiple ACMPS
records remediation for the email referral process.

Leave

For both home care and permanent residential care purposes, care
recipients are entitled to take leave. Their access to aged care service
is not affected while they are on leave. The leave impacts on aged care
subsidy and supplements depends on the leave type and leave duration.

For home care recipients, leave may be taken for:

-   a hospital stay
-   transition care following a hospital stay
-   residential respite care, and/or
-   social leave (this includes any other reason)

Home care recipients must notify their aged care service that they are
choosing to take leave from their package and specify a date that leave
commences, or they will be liable to pay the service for that period.
Notification to the aged care service is not required to be in writing.

For permanent residential care recipients leave can be taken for:

-   help with moving in (pre-entry leave)
-   a hospital stay
-   transition care following a hospital stay
-   social reasons (this includes any reason not listed above)
-   emergency leave

Leave balances for both home care and permanent residential care reset
each year on 1 July for the relevant care recipients. If the care
recipient transfers to another aged care service, the care recipient's
leave balance will transfer with them.

The exception to this is emergency leave. Emergency leave is not counted
towards the care recipient’s social leave entitlement. Permanent
residential care recipients who take emergency leave do not use any of
their social leave entitlements. This ensures both the care recipient
and the aged care service are not disadvantaged during the emergency
leave period. For more information about the emergency leave, see
Emergency events and aged service providers.

Note:

-   Home care services may also refer to leave as suspension
-   Home care recipient leave balance will also reset if their package
    level changes at any time
-   Extended hospital leave is treated differently for the 2020-2021
    financial year

Short-term Restorative Care (STRC) recipients may take up to 7 days
unpaid leave from the STRC Programme during their 56 days of care. For
example, a care recipient may require leave to travel interstate for an
event. There are no leave provisions for the Transition Care Programme.

Aged care compensation

The most common forms of compensation are:

-   payments made in respect of personal injury
-   physical and/or emotional suffering, or
-   property damage

Compensation payments can be:

-   Workers’ Compensation
-   Third Party, and
-   Common Law

The Resources page contains:

-   information about the leave impacts on the home care subsidies and
    supplements
-   information about the leave impacts on the residential care
    subsidies and supplements
-   a link to the Aged Care Programmes Branch
-   links to external websites on leave types for home care and
    residential care

Related links

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Emergency events and aged care service providers

Home Care Packages program

Multiple ACMPS records remediation

Non-claimable leave for permanent residential aged care recipients

Residential care monthly claim form

Residential Care program

Short-term Restorative Care (STRC) Programme

Transition Care Programme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
