
Residential care monthly claim form 065-13060040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the residential care monthly
claim form.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Monthly claim forms

Residential aged care services must submit a claim for each month. The
form must include details of each care recipient the residential aged
care service is claiming for in that month. There are 2 ways to submit a
claim:

-   Online via the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)
-   Complete a manual form and send to Services Australia via post or
    email

Leave from a residential aged care service

Residential care recipients can take leave for any reason. This does not
affect their access to residential aged care services. Their place with
the residential service is secure while they are on leave. A care
recipient’s leave can affect:

-   the subsidy amount the aged care service receive on behalf of the
    care recipient
-   the fees that the aged care service can charge

For permanent residential care recipients, leave can be taken for:

-   help with moving in
-   a hospital stay
-   transition care following a hospital stay
-   social reasons (this includes any reason not listed above)
-   emergency leave

Leave balances for permanent residential care will reset each year on 1
July for the relevant care recipients. If the care recipient transfers
to another aged care service, the care recipient's leave balance will
transfer with them.

The exception to this is emergency leave. Care recipients who take
emergency leave do not use any of their social leave entitlements. Aged
care services can register emergency leave in the Aged Care Provider
Portal (ACPP) after 23 July 2022. Prior to this date, aged care services
used claimable social leave for permanent residential care recipients
during the emergency leave period. This ensures both the care recipient
and the aged care service are not disadvantaged during the emergency
leave period. For more information about the emergency leave, see
Emergency events and aged service providers.

Residential entry events

Residential entry events can be received via the following channels:

-   online via the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)
-   manual via email with the Aged Care Entry Record (ACER) (AC021) form

The AC021 form is used to advise about new care recipients entering
permanent residential care and must be submitted with all manual
residential entry events. It is not required when using the ACPP.

See Aged Care Entry Record (ACER) form for more information on checking
and processing the AC021 form.

Residential extra service

Aged care services with extra service places provide a significantly
higher standard of residency, meals and services for which care
recipients are charged a higher daily care fee than a mainstream general
place.

Related links

Emergency events and aged care service providers

Forms in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
