
Cancellation of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06060020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines cancellation of a CSHC. Entitlement to the CSHC
may be cancelled for various reasons. Most cancellations will be due to
new information from the customer under their obligation to notify of
changes. Others may be due to a failure to comply with the Services
Australia notification provisions.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Notification of intended departure and return to Australia

Customers leaving Australia temporarily from 1 January 2015 will keep
entitlement to a CSHC for the maximum portability period of 19 weeks
from departure. After this the system will cancel their CSHC.

CSHC holders will keep entitlement to the quarterly supplement for the
maximum portability period of 6 weeks from departure, and then these
payments will cancel.

In most cases CSHC customers do not need to advise they are leaving
Australia temporarily for less than 6 weeks or when they have returned
from a temporary absence. However, there are situations when customers
should advise departure before leaving Australia or contact when they
have returned to Australia.

If the customer has an active link with the Department of Home Affairs,
their return date will be automatically updated when they return to
Australia. For those customers who do not have an active Department of
Home Affairs link, the date they returned to Australia will need to be
manually recorded.

Imprisonment

Customers whose CSHC is cancelled following their imprisonment lose
their entitlement to it and will not be able to claim the CSHC while in
prison.

Processing

Some cancellation reasons can be coded manually. The system will
automatically cancel CSHC if the correct information was updated on the
appropriate CSHC screen. If a cancellation can be processed by the
system, this is the preferred option. This will make it easier if the
customer contacts, as all the information is available without the need
for the file/paperwork at the first contact.

Following ‘Death action’ processing, the automated OLA/Advice
‘GCANSHCDEA’ may be created. This advice is a shell and has no generated
text. See Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing
activity to delete this shell advice.

Income estimates

A customer's income for the previous reference tax year plus any deemed
income from account-based income streams might be over the CSHC income
limit. However, if it is likely to be lower in the current financial
year, they can provide an estimate of their income.

The department will not accept an estimate unless the customer can
demonstrate a change in circumstances and is an acceptable condition for
using an estimate of income for the CSHC income test.

If the estimate is accepted the customer's CSHC entitlement may be
continued. This will be based on the current year adjusted taxable
income (ATI) estimate plus any deemed income from account-based streams.

The estimated income should be the amount coded on the customer record
in lieu of the previous year's income. Any estimate must be provided in
writing along with a statement of fact from the customer and other
appropriate supporting evidence.

Notification requirements

Under subsection 68(4) of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999,
a CSHC customer is required to inform the Department if a specific event
or change of circumstance is likely to occur.

A customer’s CSHC should only be cancelled under section 104 of the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 if the event or change of
circumstance has actually occurred. This means the person is required to
inform the department if they expect their adjusted taxable income to
exceed the limits. However, their CSHC should only be cancelled when the
customer has notified, or it is known that their income has exceeded the
limits.

Under section 122 of the Social Security (Administration) Act, an
adverse determination (a decision to cancel) relating to concession
cards takes effect from the day on which it is made (with provision for
a later date). The 14 day notification rule does not apply and the date
of receipt will be the date from which the card is cancelled.

For example, a customer advises on 16 February 2012 of income over the
CSHC income limit on 15 January 2012 when customer received Notice of
Assessment (NOA). This is coded on the SHC Income Details (SHID) screen
with a Date of Event (DOE) 15 January 2012. The CSHC will be cancelled
from Date of Receipt of the information 16 February 2012.

Related links

Cancellation and rejection codes for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC)

Changes in customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Raising Pension Supplement and Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP) debts

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
