
Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications 065-08020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess if a Home Equity Access Scheme (the
Scheme) application is ready for processing. Complex Assessment Officers
(CAO) from the Home Equity Access Scheme National team assess
applications.

The Scheme applications

Customers can apply for the Scheme by:

[] (preferred option) submitting an online claim via their myGov
Centrelink online account, with help from a Service Officer running
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

lodging a paper application, see below. The preferred channel for
lodgement of the Scheme applications is online, see above:

-   Home Equity Access Scheme partnered application form (SA310)
-   Home Equity Access Scheme single application form (SA496)

If both a customer and partner want to apply online for the Scheme, they
can apply jointly or separately.

See Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan for more details on how to
help customers apply for the loan.

Customers must lodge applications for the Scheme when in Australia.

Work items for Scheme applications

A Social Application (SOA) generates on the customer record when they
lodge a Scheme application. A Work Item is allocated to a Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) in the Home Equity Access Scheme National team
for assessment and processing. Regardless of the lodgement channel, all
Scheme applications are processed in Process Direct.

Service Officers can see customer applications via the Claim Overview in
Process Direct for applications lodged:

-   via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   online

Service Officers can see lodged paper application forms (SA310/SA496) in
the Documents section of Process Direct.

For combined partner online claims, there is 1 Work item to process for
both the customer and partner’s loan applications.

If a Scheme application needs to be reindexed (for example, rejection
decision overturned), create the SOA manually via the Process Direct
launch pad.

On rare occasions, a customer may have 2 Work Items for a Scheme
application created on their record that requires manual intervention to
resolve.

For issue resolution details see the Resources page for links.

Claim assessment

Scheme CAO conduct assessments to determine:

-   The eligibility criteria for the Scheme has been met
-   Required documents for the Scheme have been provided
-   A recent valuation of the real estate asset(s) offered as loan
    security has been completed

There are no early claims for the Scheme. Applications reject if a
customer applies before they are qualified. Process applications once
the initial assessment is conducted.

See Processing claims for the Home Equity Access Scheme for details
about processing the Scheme applications.

Eligibility and qualification for the Scheme

To receive payment under the Scheme, a customer must meet all the
eligibility criteria including being in receipt of or qualified for a
Scheme qualifying payment. For information on the Scheme eligibility
criteria see Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme.

If the applicant is over Age Pension age and not getting a qualifying
payment, their eligibility is assessed against the qualification rules
for Age Pension. The customer is not required to actually submit an Age
Pension claim for the purposes of their loan application.

Applicants who are under Age Pension age can only qualify for the Scheme
if they are partnered to a person who is Age Pension age. Applicants
under Age Pension age must submit a claim for a qualifying payment
unless they:

-   currently get a qualifying payment, or
-   have had their qualification assessed. For example, where the
    person’s qualifying payment has been cancelled or rejected for a
    payability-based reason in the last 13 weeks

If a customer is required to submit a new claim for a qualifying
payment, they must submit the claim at the same time as the loan
application. The customer's eligibility for the Scheme is assessed once
the pension claim assessment is complete.

Documentation for the Scheme applications

The customer and (if applicable) partner must supply identity documents
if they do not have a Confirmed Identity status as well as provide proof
of age if not already verified. Partners must also complete linkage. For
more information see Identity Confirmation.

All Scheme applicants are required to provide the following documents
(at a minimum) in relation to the real estate offered as security for
the loan:

-   A copy of a recent title search
-   The latest rates notice(s)
-   A copy of the current insurance policy, or certificate of currency
    covering the real estate
-   Loan agreement(s), contract(s) and most recent mortgage statement(s)
    if there is a loan, mortgage or other encumbrance on the real
    estate.

Where the applicant is a member of a couple, their partner must sign the
loan application, even if they don't have ownership of the real estate
being offered as security. The applicant and partner's consent is
obtained via an online task or Part A of the SA310 or SA496.

Where a third party (other than the applicant's partner) has an interest
in the real estate being offered as security for the loan, the applicant
is also required to provide signed consent from the impacted party and
provide it with their loan application. This includes where the real
estate is the asset of a trust or company. The signed consent is
obtained via Parts C to F of the SA310 or SA496.

Additional documents relating to the real estate may be required to
establish adequate loan security. For example, if the real estate
offered as security is a retirement village unit, the agreement(s) with
the retirement village are usually required. This is determined on a
case by case basis.

Upon receipt of documentation to support a customer's application, scan
the document to Document Tools on the customer's record. If an
associated task exists, use the Request and Manage Customer Tasks guided
procedure to mark the corresponding task as 'Provided'.

See Documents required for Home Equity Access Scheme applications for a
full list of required documentation and guidance on classification codes
for the Scheme documents.

Real estate valuations

Every property offered as security for the Scheme has to be valued. A
recent and up-to-date valuation is required to enable accurate
assessment of the applicant's equity in the Australian real estate
asset(s) offered as security for the Scheme loan and the correct
calculation of the Maximum Loan Amount (MLA). The assessment of a Scheme
application includes the determination of whether a real estate
valuation is required and, where appropriate, the submission of the
valuation request. A new valuation may not be required if the property
has been formally valued within the last 12 months.

In addition to enabling the loan security to be assessed based on the
current market value, the valuation also ensures payment accuracy for
Scheme applicants who are also income support payment recipients and
reduces risk to recovering the Scheme loan.

Withdrawal of application

Customers can voluntarily withdraw their Scheme application at any time
while it is in progress. If the customer wishes to withdraw an
application, they must do so either in writing, verbally or online.
Where the application was submitted online or via Assisted Customer
Claim (ACC), the customer can withdraw the application via their
Centrelink online account. If a paper application was lodged, the
customer can request withdrawal by contacting the agency.

Service Officers who receive contact from a customer requesting
withdrawal of their Scheme application should advise the customer that
once their claim has been withdrawn, it cannot be reinstated or appealed
against. Advise the customer how to withdraw their online application
via their Centrelink online account. For assistance see Cancel or
withdraw an online claim. If the Scheme claim was not lodged online or
the customer is unable to withdraw the claim themselves, request
withdrawal action by the Scheme team using the Fast Note. Select Auto
Text use > Complex Assessment > Request for CAO action> CAO Home Equity
Access Scheme.

Pre-existing Scheme loans

A customer can only have one current Scheme loan at a time. Any existing
Scheme loans must be settled before a new loan can be granted, If a
person has an existing loan and lodges a new application, determine if
loan payments can be restarted under the existing loan instead of
granting a new loan. Consideration may be given to increasing the loan
security value for the existing loan (for example, adding another real
estate asset), or adjusting a previously recorded Nominated Amount or
Deduction. If the customer seeks to change the real estate asset used as
security for the existing loan, see Security for the Home Equity Access
Scheme.

Assets hardship provisions

The Scheme customers may have entitlement to an income support payment
under the assets hardship provisions.

A person can be paid under the Scheme, or an income support payment
under assets hardship provisions, but not both. If a Scheme customer
starts being paid an income support payment under the assets hardship
provisions, their Scheme payments must stop.

It may be appropriate to investigate whether a customer has entitlement
to income support under the assets hardship provisions before proceeding
with a request for payment under the Scheme.

Signature and lodgement requirements

It is a legal requirement per Section 1136(1B) (2) of the Social
Security Act 1991 that Scheme applications are signed by the applicant
and, if they are a member of a couple, their partner. Services Australia
do not accept Scheme applications lodged or signed by another person or
organisation unless the person has been appointed as the legal
representative for applicant (for example, under a Power of Attorney or
court order) and is a correspondence nominee for the applicant.

Assessing risk of fraud or elder abuse

Caution should be applied where the Scheme application has been:

-   lodged by a person other than the applicant, for example by a
    partner, family member, nominee or legal representative e.g. Power
    of Attorney
-   signed by someone else on behalf of the applicant or their partner
-   submitted via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) and there is doubt over
    who provided the verbal consent and declaration

Scheme loan applications lodged or signed by a person other than the
applicant may indicate that the applicant is not entirely aware of the
application, or may not have a full understanding of the scheme and the
associated terms and conditions. For assurance that an applicant's
consent is fully informed, an interview is conducted with the applicant
prior to granting the Scheme loan. In extreme cases, it may be
identified that an applicant may be the victim of fraud or affected by
elder abuse. Elder abuse is the abuse and neglect of older Australians
and is a form of family and domestic violence. Elder abuse can include
(but is not limited to) economic (financial) abuse. It can be
unintentional or deliberate and occurs within a relationship of trust.

Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) are not expected to be experts in
elder abuse. The role of the CAO is to identify family and domestic
violence concerns and respond appropriately by offering referrals to
available resources, social workers or other service providers. For
assistance in identifying and supporting older customers affected by
abuse, see Abuse of older Australians.

The Resources page contains:

-   Issue resolution information
-   Documents required for Scheme applications

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme loan amounts

Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme outstanding loan
amount

Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Home Equity Access Scheme reviews

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Home Equity Access Scheme cancellations and rejections

Processing claims for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Types of Centrelink records

Assets hardship for pensions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
