
Income Tested Care Fee (ITCF) remediation for pre-delimiter and/or deceased care recipients for aged care services 065-20081135

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to action specific Income Tested Care Fee
(ITCF) queries requiring manual remediation for:

-   the pre-delimiter period (before 1 January 2020), and/or
-   deceased care recipients

These processes apply to Aged Care Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied
Health Branch) Service Officers only.

Income Tested Care Fee (ITCF) for home care recipients

For home care, an aged care means assessment is the assessment of a care
recipient’s income. When an aged care means assessment is complete, fee
notification letters issue to the:

-   home care recipient, and
-   aged care service

Fee notification letters advise:

-   Basic Daily Fee (BDF) - care recipients can be asked by their home
    care service to pay the BDF
-   Income Tested Care Fee (ITCF) - care recipients who have the
    financial capacity to pay will be asked to contribute towards the
    cost of their care. This extra amount is known as an ‘income tested
    care fee’ and is in addition to the BDF

Note:

-   Only care recipients who have completed the pre-entry means
    assessment before the start of their care will be issued a letter.
    The letter will not be issued to the aged care service
-   The letter can be issued to the care recipient and their nominee
-   If the care recipient has a Power of Attorney (POA), the letter will
    only be issued to the POA and not the care recipient. This is
    because the care recipient has given all of their rights to the POA

See Related links for further information about aged care means
assessment.

A home care service may contact the Aged Care Payments Team (Aged Care
and Allied Health Branch) as the amount on the letter may be different
to the amount displayed in the Aged Care Management Payment System
(ACMPS). Home care services should apply the ITCF amount based on the
ITCF amount on the letter.

Due to a system limitation, ACMPS is unable to automatically apply the
fees before 1 January 2020 (the delimiter date). A manual adjustment
calculation may need to be applied to ensure the correct ITCF is
applied. This process apply to periods of home care before 1 January
2020 and/or deceased care recipients.

Subject Matter Experts (SME) or Team Leader must check if the manual
adjustment calculations and evidence are correct before they create the
manual adjustment. A different SME or Team Leader must verify the manual
adjustment created and then advise the Service Officer that the manual
adjustment has been approved.

The care recipient’s annual and lifetime caps may be affected due to the
manual adjustment created to apply the correct ITCF amount. The SME or
Team Leader must advise the Aged Care Programmes Branch via the Care
Recipient section positional mailbox requesting:

-   they update the care recipient’s annual and lifetime caps record,
    and
-   provide the correct ITCF amount and the manual adjustment breakdown

The Resources page contains contact details and links to the Department
of Health and Aged Care website.

Related links

Aged Care means assessment

Aged Care - fees and charges

Aged care reviews - ad hoc reviews

Aged care reviews – reassessments and updates

Aged care reviews – discharge and departure reviews

Aged care reviews - quarterly reviews

Aged Care fees and charges - care subsidy reduction to zero

Process manual adjustments for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
