
Dementia and Cognition Supplement for aged care services 065-13040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Dementia and Cognition
Supplement for home care services in the Aged Care Management Payment
System (ACMPS). The Dementia and Cognition Supplement is not applicable
to care recipients in residential aged care services.

On this Page:

The Dementia and Cognition Supplement

Extended Aged Care at Home Dementia (EACH-D) care recipients

Eligibility

Claiming

Related links

The Dementia and Cognition Supplement

The Dementia and Cognition Supplement was introduced on 1 August 2013.
This supplement:

-   provides additional funding to acknowledge the extra costs of caring
    for care recipients with cognitive impairment associated with
    dementia
-   is available in all levels of the Home Care Packages program. It is
    for care recipients with moderate to severe levels of cognitive
    impairment associated with dementia

The Dementia and Cognition Supplement rate is 11.5 per cent of the care
recipient’s basic subsidy. Prior to 20 March 2019, the supplement rate
was 10 per cent of the care recipient’s basic subsidy. Current and
historical rates of the Dementia and Cognition Supplement are published
on the Department of Health and Aged Care’s website. See the Resources
page has a link to the schedule of subsidies and supplements.

Note: in cases where the care recipients are eligible for both the
Veterans’ Supplement and the Dementia and Cognition Supplement the
service provider will only receive the Veterans’ Supplement. If care
recipients move to another service, their Dementia and Cognition
Supplement and package level will continue in the new service. The care
recipients will not need to be reassessed.

Extended Aged Care at Home Dementia (EACH-D) care recipients

The Dementia and Cognition Supplement and the top-up supplement are paid
to home care services. They are paid for existing EACH-D care recipients
who were receiving services under the EACH-D package on 31 July 2013.

For moves to different home care services after 1 August 2013, the
top-up supplement is paid to the new service if:

-   the period between ceasing their previous service and commencing the
    new service is not more than 28 days

These EACH-D care recipients receive a higher Level 4 Basic Subsidy and
Dementia and Cognition Supplement rate. This is to ensure they are not
disadvantaged due to the commencement of the Home Care Packages program.

The higher rate is calculated using a formula which includes:

-   the Level 4 basic subsidy
-   the Level 4 Dementia, and Cognition Supplement amount, and
-   the top-up supplement amount

For further information see the Resources page.

Eligibility

Care recipients may be eligible for the supplement when one of the
following criteria is provided:

the care recipient scores 10 or more on the Psychogeriatric Assessment
Scales (PAS) using either the:

-   Cognitive Impairment Scale, or
-   Cognitive Decline Scale - suitable if the care recipient is
    non-verbal, has reduced fine motor skills or is visually impaired

for care recipients from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds the care recipient scores 22 or less using the Rowland
Universal Dementia Assessment Scale (RUDAS)

for care recipients who are Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander people
living in a rural or remote area scoring 33 or less using the Kimberley
Indigenous Cognitive Assessment (KICA-Cog)

Note: for both RUDAS and KICA-Cog purposes, care recipients who have a
score of 0 are eligible for the Dementia and Cognition Supplement.

See the Resources page for links to the Department of Health and Aged
Care’s website.

Claiming

Home Care providers have responsibility for making sure the assessment
of cognitive impairment is carried out and documented prior to claiming
the Dementia and Cognition Supplement.

To claim the supplement, the Aged Care Application for the Dementia and
Cognition Supplement in Home Care (AC014) must be completed by the Home
Care provider and submitted to Services Australia. The Resources pages
provides a link to the form.

The Resources page contains:

-   FAQ about the Dementia and Cognition Supplement in Home Care
    packages
-   a link to contact details for Aged Care
-   a link to the Aged Care Application for the Dementia and Cognition
    Supplement in Home Care (AC014) form
-   links to external websites

Related links

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
