-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details relating to the benefits available to a
CSHC holder. The CSHC is issued for 12 months ending on 30 September
each year. All CSHC cards expire on the same day.

Government intent

The CSHC gives older Australians access to cheaper medicines, Australian
government medical services and other Government concessions.

Eligibility

To qualify for a CSHC the customer must:

-   have reached Age Pension age, and
-   not be receiving a Centrelink or Department of Veterans' Affairs
    payment. See Resources page for a link to the Services Australia
    website for Income support payment, and
-   provide details of their tax file number (or be granted an exemption
    from doing so), and
-   meet residence requirements, and
-   meet the CSHC income test. See Resources page for a link to the
    Services Australia website for Income test for a Commonwealth
    Seniors Health Card

Entitlements

From 3 June 2023 the CSHC will transition from a 1 year to 2 year
validity, with expiry dates aligning to the customer’s birth month. New
CSHC customers will be issued with a card valid for a period of 15 to 26
month. These cards will expire on the last day of the customer’s birth
month.

Current CSHC customers with a card due to expire on 30 September 2023
will be issued a new card in the 2023 annual bulk issue of CSHC. These
cards will be valid for a period of 15 to 26 months, with the card
expiring on the last day of customer’s birth month.

CSHCs will continue to be automatically reissued to eligible customers
4-6 weeks prior to the card expiring.

The Commonwealth Government issues the CSHC. Some States and Territories
may offer more concessions to holders of both CSHCs and State Seniors
Cards.

CSHC holders may be entitled to:

-   pharmaceuticals listed under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
    (PBS) at the concessional rate
-   bulk-billed General Practitioner (GP) appointments
-   a reduction in the cost of out-of-hospital medical expenses above a
    concessional threshold through the Medicare Safety Net

In some instances, extra health, household, transport, education and
recreation concessions may be offered by:

-   state or territory,
-   local governments, and
-   private providers

Add on payments administered by Centrelink

Energy Supplement

The Energy supplement stopped for all new CSHC claimants from 20 March
2017. Only CSHC holders who are grandfathered for Energy Supplement will
get the payment from 20 March 2017 onwards. For details, see Energy
Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders.

Economic Support Payment

CSHC holders are entitled to get the Economic Support Payment if they
were eligible during the target period(s). For more details, see
Economic Support Payment.

To get these payments, the customer must have a SHC payment destination
recorded on the Payment Destination Summary (PAS) screen.

[] Current CSHC Customers can add or update their payment destination
using their Centrelink self service.

Non-income tested concession card

Because of changes to the asset test, customers who had their pension
cancelled (CAN/ASS) with a 1 January 2017 date of effect, were
automatically issued non-income tested concession cards. If they were:

-   Age Pension age or over on 1 January 2017, a non-income tested Low
    Income Health Care Card (LIC) and a non-income tested CSHC were
    issued
-   under Age Pension age on 1 January 2017, a non-income tested LIC was
    issued. The customer can apply for the non-income tested CSHC when
    they reach Age Pension age

From 9 October 2017, a non-pensioner Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
replaced the non-income tested LIC.

For more details, see Non-income tested (NOI) concession cards.

Customers paid under the Home Equity Access Scheme

Customers who get their entire payment as a loan via the Home Equity
Access Scheme (the Scheme) and do not receive any other components of
the qualifying social security pension:

-   are not eligible for a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
-   these customers should be encouraged to claim a CSHC

The exception to this is for customers who had their pension cancelled
(CAN/ASS) on 1 January 2017 as a direct result of changes to the pension
assets test. The Home Equity Access Scheme only customers who are
grandfathered (GRF) for the grandfathering type 2017 Rebalance Assets
Cards (RAC), as per the Grandfathering Summary (GFS) screen:

-   are automatically eligible for a non-income tested CSHC from 1
    January 2017, and
-   a non-pensioner PCC from 9 October 2017

For more details, see Non-income tested (NOI) concession cards.

Digital card

Customers can see a digital copy of their CSHC in the digital wallet via
their Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or the myGov app wallet. See
Resources page for a link.

It allows customers to use their concession card using their smart
device. It is at the discretion of the concession provider whether they
accept the digital card. It is important that customers have their
physical card with them.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   Medicare Safety Net information
-   digital wallet and using the myGov app on the Services Australia
    website, and
-   the Guide to Centrelink Concession Cards publication

Contents

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Completing claims and forms for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Eligibility for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) concessions

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card cancellations and restorations

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) annual bulk issue

Quarterly Supplement

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

Initial contact by customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC)

Related links

Non-income tested (NOI) concession cards

Fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
