[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the accommodation supplements payable to
residential aged care services. Accommodation supplements are payable to
residential aged care services on behalf of eligible permanent
residential care recipients.

Accommodation supplement

The accommodation supplement is paid to residential aged care services
on behalf of care recipients to whom all of the following apply:

-   They entered care on or after 20 March 2008
-   They cannot pay for some or all of their accommodation costs, and
-   They are eligible for assistance with accommodation costs based on
    an assessment of their financial circumstances

Permanent residential aged care recipients will contribute to the cost
of their accommodation if they can afford it. Services Australia
assesses the care recipient’s financial circumstances effective for the
date they enter care, including means not disclosed (MND). This is done
as part of the aged care means assessment process. Services Australia
and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs will do the aged care means
assessment by using 1 of the following methods:

-   An assets assessment for care recipients who entered care between 20
    March 2008 and 30 June 2014
-   A combined assets and income means assessment for care recipients
    who entered care on or after 1 July 2014

Prior to 1 July 2014, a means assessment was known as a Residential Care
Assessment (RCA). The RCA covered 2 different assessment types
(Residential Care Income Assessment and Residential Care Assets
Assessment). See Aged care means assessment for more information on
these assessment types and who conducted them.

The care recipient’s resident status (for example, low means or not low
means) determines whether the care recipient is entitled to any
assistance with their accommodation costs. Residential aged care
services may be eligible to receive the accommodation supplement where
the care recipient is assessed as low means. See Aged care - correction
to resident status for more information on care recipients’ resident
status.

There is no application process. Services Australia automatically pays
the accommodation supplement to the aged care services in respect to
eligible care recipients.

Accommodation-related supplements

Services may receive the following accommodation-related supplements
based on the permanent residential care recipients’ circumstances
including when they entered into care:

-   Accommodation supplement (all schemes)
-   Accommodation charge top-up supplement (Post 2008 scheme)
-   Higher accommodation supplement (Post 2008 scheme)
-   Transitional accommodation supplement (Post 2008 scheme)
-   Pensioner supplement (Pre 2008 scheme)
-   Concessional resident supplement (Pre 2008 scheme)

Accommodation-related supplements are indexed twice a year on 20 March
and 20 September. Current and historical rates are available on the
Department of Health and Aged Care’s Schedule of subsidies and
supplement website. See the Resources page for a link to the Schedule.

Accommodation supplement

The accommodation supplement paid for an eligible care recipient can be
reduced if:

-   the care recipient entered care between 20 March 2008 and 30 June
    2014, and had net assets over the threshold amount on the day they
    entered care
-   the care recipient entered care from 1 July 2014 and have either net
    assets or income over the relevant threshold

See Aged Care means assessment for more information on these
assessments.

Accommodation charge top-up supplement

Services are eligible to receive an accommodation charge top-up for care
recipients who entered care between 20 March 2008 and 19 March 2020, and
at the time:

-   were high-care recipients
-   were on income support
-   had to pay an accommodation charge on entry
-   the charge would have been higher if the care recipient was not in
    receipt of an income support payment

Higher accommodation supplement

Eligible residential aged care services for higher accommodation
supplement applies to:

-   new residential aged care services that was built on or after 20
    April 2012
-   existing residential aged care services that were significantly
    refurbished on or after 20 April 2012

The intention of the higher accommodation supplement is to encourage
residential aged care services to improve their amenities’ quality.

Residential aged care services not built or significantly refurbished
after 20 April 2012 may be eligible for the standard accommodation
supplement. Residential aged care services refurbished status can be
viewed via the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP). See the Using the Aged
Care Staff Portal to view a residential care service’s Refurbished
status (Service in Context) table for the process on how to view this.

Note: the Department of Health and Aged Care automatically sends
residential aged care services’ Refurbished status information to
Services Australia.

Transitional accommodation supplement

The transitional accommodation supplement is payable to residential aged
care services for permanent residential care recipients getting
low-level care.

It is paid by making up the difference between the accommodation
supplement and the higher pensioner supplement that it replaced.

Residential aged care services are eligible for the transitional
accommodation supplement if the care recipient meet all of the following
criteria:

-   they entered permanent residential aged care after 20 March 2008 and
    before 20 September 2011
-   they are eligible to pay an accommodation bond
-   the level of the accommodation supplement for them would be lower
    than the level of pensioner supplement it replaced

Pensioner supplement

The pensioner supplement is paid to a service to help cover eligible
care recipients’ accommodation costs.

A service is eligible for a pensioner supplement for a care recipient
where they are a pre-2008 reform care recipient and either:

-   have a dependent child
-   are getting an income support payment but have not agreed to pay a
    large accommodation bond

A service will not receive payment for ineligible care recipients if
they:

-   do not have a dependent child, and
-   entered care before 20 September 2009 and paid, or agreed to pay, an
    accommodation bond that was more than 10 times the basic aged
    pension at the time they entered care, or
-   entered care on or after 20 September 2009 and paid, or agreed to
    pay, an accommodation bond that was more than 9 times the basic aged
    pension at the time they entered care

Accommodation bond amounts are rounded up to the nearest $500 for
calculation purposes.

Concessional resident supplement

Residential aged care services are eligible to receive the concessional
resident supplement for care recipients if:

-   they entered permanent residential aged care between 1 October 1997
    and 19 March 2008
-   at the time they entered care, the service was certified
-   they were concessional care recipients based on an assessment of
    their financial circumstances at the time they entered care

At the time they entered care, concessional care recipients could not be
asked to pay an accommodation bond or accommodation charge. The
supplement is not available for respite care recipients.

The concessional resident supplement rate depends on whether the
residential aged care service is new or significantly refurbished since
20 April 2012. The rate is also dependent on the aged care service’s
supported resident ratio.

Supported resident ratio

A permanent residential care recipient is considered to be a supported
care recipient when they are:

-   assessed under the pre 2008 or post 2008 means assessment scheme
-   either Concessional, Assisted, Supported or Low Means care
    recipients
-   receiving hardship assistance for their accommodation costs

The ratio does not apply to respite care recipients and care recipients
in extra service places.

The number of supported care recipients who reside in residential aged
care service is then compared to the total number of care recipients.
This determines when the maximum rate of accommodation supplement is
used, to calculate the amount payable to aged care services, prior to
taking into account a care recipient’s contribution amount.

Up to 30 September 2022, aged care services must have over 40% supported
care recipients in care on any day to get the full accommodation
supplement amount.

If they do not have over 40% supported care recipients in care on any
day, the maximum rate of accommodation supplement payable is reduced by
25% on each day the service did not have over 40% supported care
recipients.

From 1 October 2022, the 40% supported resident ratio was simplified so
that the 25% reduction is calculated over a calendar month rather than
on individual days.

This means, over a calendar month, the 25% reduction will not apply in
that month if the residential aged care service had 40% or more
supported care recipients on average.

Aged care services can view a breakdown of the Supported resident ratio
via their payment statement. See the Using the Aged Care Staff Portal to
view and download payment statements (Service in Context) table for the
process on how to view this.

The Resources page contains information on the:

-   current and historical accommodation supplement rates
-   higher accommodation supplement for aged care in the Department of
    Health and Aged Care’s website

The Resources page contains links to external websites.

Related links

Aged care fees and charges - accommodation payments

Aged Care means assessment

Payment statements for aged care services

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
