-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about advance payments of loans under
the HEAS.

Overview

Customers can apply under the HEAS to get advance payments of a loan
secured against their Australian real estate. The most customers can
advance in a 26 fortnight period is 50% of their annual maximum pension
rate. There is a limit of 2 advance payments in a 26 fortnight period.

The HEAS also provides the option for customers to get fortnightly loan
payments, however the customer does not need to get fortnightly payments
to apply for an advance payment.

Advance payments of the loan:

-   will reduce the maximum fortnightly loan amount available to the
    customer for 26 fortnights (364 days from the date the advance is
    granted), and
-   are added to the customer's loan balance, which must be repaid to
    the Commonwealth. Interest calculates on the loan balance,
    compounding fortnightly

See Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) for more details and associated
costs.

Advance payment eligibility

To be eligible for an advance payment, customers must meet all the
eligibility criteria required to participate in the HEAS. See
Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) for more details.

Eligibility for an advance payment of the loan is determined when a
customer submits a request for an advance payment.

Customers:

that meet the eligibility criteria can get an advance payment unless:

-   they have already received 2 advance payments through the HEAS in
    the previous 26 fortnights
-   their loan balance has reached their maximum loan amount (MLA), or
-   they have already received the maximum advance payment amount in the
    current 26 fortnight period. That is, 50% of the maximum pension
    rate

Customers can apply for (or continue to receive) fortnight payments if:

-   they are not eligible to get an advance payment, and
-   have not reached their MLA

Maximum advance amount and frequency of advance payment

Customers can access up to 2 advance payments of their loan in any 26
fortnight period.

The most a person can advance in any 26 fortnight period is 50 per cent
of their annual maximum pension rate. For example, if a customer's
maximum pension rate is $25,677.60 per annum, the most they can advance
in a 26 fortnight period is $12,838.80.

Repaying the advance payment amount during the advance period:

-   does not allow for any additional advance payments to be claimed at
    an earlier date, where the customer has accessed 2 advance payments
    in the preceding 26 fortnights
-   does not entitle the customer to automatically start receiving
    fortnightly payments again

Advance impact on fortnightly loan payments

Advance payments of the HEAS proportionally reduce the maximum rate of
fortnightly loan payments the person can get. For example, if:

-   a customer applies for an advance of $2,600, the maximum fortnightly
    loan available to them will reduce by $100 per fortnight for 26
    fortnights
-   6 weeks later the customer receives another advance of $2,600, then
    at that point in time, their available fortnightly loan rate reduces
    by a further $100 per fortnight for 26 fortnights

The reductions will not cause a customer's maximum fortnightly loan
amount to go below their maximum pension rate.

A loan calculator is available to help customers estimate their advance
amount, including the effect on their fortnightly loan payment.

Customers can access the calculator via:

-   their Centrelink online account, or
-   the Services Australia website

Staff can help customers to get an estimate through their online account
by using Customer Online View to access the loan calculator through the
Home Equity Access Scheme summary page.

The Resources page contains example calculations.

Pensions income and asset test impacts

Advance payment of loans that are secured against a property that is the
customer's principal home, are treated in the same way as a home equity
conversion agreement. This means the advance payment is:

-   subject to deeming provisions under the income test from the date
    the advance payment is issued, and
-   assessed under the assets test after 90 days

The advance payment is recorded on the customer's record as an
investment via the Direct Investments (SVDI) screen.

Customers can view and update the details at any time via their myGov
Centrelink online account under Income and Assets Summary > Banking.

Applying for an advance payment

Applying for an advance payment differs for:

-   current HEAS customers, and
-   new applicants

Current HEAS customers

Customers already participating in the HEAS can request an advance
using:

-   their Centrelink online account via myGov. Customers must select
    Request advance from the Home Equity Access Scheme summary page in
    their Centrelink online account. Staff can help customers with their
    request via Customer Online View
-   a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form SA497

New applicants

Customers not already participating in the HEAS must submit a new claim
to apply for an advance payment. A nominee can also do this, on behalf
of the customer. They can submit a HEAS claim:

-   online, via their myGov Centrelink online account, or
-   using a paper form

See Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loan for more details.

Staff must:

-   encourage customers to apply use their Centrelink online account,
    and
-   help customers with their application by using Assisted Customer
    Claim (ACC), if required

Consent

-   If a customer is partnered and requests an advance payment, their
    partner must provide written consent
-   If a correspondence nominee submits a request on the customer's
    behalf, the customer and their partner (if they have one) must
    provide written consent

Consent can be provided online, see Home Equity Access Scheme consent
for more details.

Pension customers

Customers that get an actual rate of their qualifying pension for the
HEAS, may choose to apply for an advance payment of their pension rather
than (or in addition to) their loan.

See Advance payments for pension customers for more details.

Identifying fraud

If a staff member identifies suspected fraud with a HEAS claim, they
must report it.

See:

-   Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption, and
-   Identity fraud

The Resources page contains:

-   advance payment calculation examples
-   links to the Service Australia website, including the loan
    calculator, and
-   documents required for advance requests

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Change of circumstances – Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Advance payments for pension customers

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Identity fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
