-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of Home Equity Access Scheme National
team upon receipt of advice of settlement of a HEAS debt.

Background

HEAS customers wanting to settle their loan must be placed in contact
with the Home Equity Access Scheme National team to initiate settlement.

Settlement can occur for the below reasons:

-   Sale of the security property
-   Customer is deceased and there is no surviving partner
-   The surviving partner would like to settle
-   Recovery from the surviving partner’s estate
-   The customer and/or partner have decided they no longer require this
    service and have the funds to repay the loan
-   Transmission of title if a separation occurs, or partner is deceased

Changes to land title details

Payments made to customers under the HEAS, are a loan:

-   secured by Australian real estate

A secured charge or caveat is lodged by the Commonwealth over the real
estate to:

-   protect Government outlays, and
-   make sure Services Australia is advised of any changes to the land
    title details

For example, via an impending sale of the real estate used to secure a
HEAS loan. If this occurs, the Home Equity Access Scheme National team:

-   cancel the loan as appropriate
-   can arrange settlement
-   renegotiate the loan security

If a customer wants to offer another property as security, see the
Resources page for the Substitute Security Tasking request template.

See also, Process steps in Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)
applications for documents and valuations details.

Customer obligation to contact the agency before settlement

If a customer intends to sell the real estate securing a HEAS loan, they
must:

-   contact the agency before settlement to arrange for renegotiation of
    the loan security, or
-   repay the outstanding loan balance upon settlement of the sale

No Negative Equity Guarantee (NNEG)

If a customer contacts about settling their HEAS loan, the NNEG must be
considered.

A NNEG applies when a customer settles their HEAS loan. This means they
will not need to repay more than the current market value of the
property used as security. The NNEG will not apply if a customer:

-   intentionally increases encumbrances (such as mortgages) on the
    secured property which limits the Commonwealth’s ability to recover
    the full amount of the loan balance
-   misrepresents their circumstances while participating in the HEAS,
    or
-   commits fraud

When the customer is first granted under the HEAS, the equity in the
property that secures the HEAS loan is calculated using information from
the HEAS Details (PLS/HEAS) screens

At settlement however, if the NNEG is to be applied an ‘adjusted real
estate value’ needs to be determined. The adjusted real estate value is
the current market value minus any non- HEAS encumbrances or loans.

There is a ministerial determination that sets out how the ‘adjusted
real estate value’ is calculated:

The Commonwealth cannot recover more than the ‘adjusted real estate
value’

If a customer settles their HEAS debt and repays the total amount owing
via electronic banking, and it is later found the NNEG applied to their
circumstances, a:

-   full, or
-   partial refund is required

If possible, determine if the NNEG applies before a customer makes
repayment.

The Resources page contains examples of how to calculate the adjusted
real estate value for NNEG.

Settlement of loan before release of the security

If a customer or nominee contacts requesting release of the security
property, they must settle their loan first.

-   If they would like know the balance of their current loan details,
    see Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) > Resources page > FAQs
-   The Settlement letter, that can be issued from Home Equity Access
    Scheme letters (HEASL) in Process Direct, and provides projected
    payout figures
-   See Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans for more
    details about repayments, and options on how to repay the loan

Customers must settle their HEAS debt in full if:

-   their deceased partner owned 100% of the secured property, or
-   they become a tenant in common with their surviving partner, and
    they have willed all or part of their share of the property to a
    third party, or
-   a third party or parties request that their share of the property be
    transferred into their name/s

See Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) reviews for more details.

Repayment of loan when customer has died

The loan must be repaid from a customer's estate after their or their
surviving partner's death. In the case of the death of a single
customer, the agency will usually enforce the charge on the real estate
and recover the outstanding loan balance immediately from the estate.

See Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)
outstanding loan amount for more details.

Identifying fraud

If a staff member identifies suspected fraud with a HEAS claim or
activity, they must report it.

See:

-   Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption, and
-   Identity fraud

The Resources page contains:

-   Examples of adjusted value calculation for No Negative Equity
    Guarantee
-   Tasking request templates
-   HEAS Future Settlement calculator
-   Contact details
-   Forms

Related links

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans

Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) outstanding
loan amount

Assets hardship for income support payments

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Identity fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
