
Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire 065-01010000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines payments and services available to older
Australians contacting Services Australia for assistance.

Planning for retirement

Customers who are planning for retirement or who have already retired
may need help to make the best use of their savings and investments to
maintain their standard of living. They may also require income support.
When they attend Services Australia, the primary outcome for both the
person and the Services Australia partner agency is to ensure that those
who are unable to provide for themselves have adequate income in
retirement.

Services Australia also aims to enhance the quality of life of older
Australians through support for positive and healthy ageing and the
provision of a cohesive framework of high quality and cost effective
care services for frail older people and their carers.

A person making initial contact about a claim should be invited to lodge
this claim even if there is doubt that they may be eligible.

Age Pension

Age Pension is a non-contributory income support payment for people who
are Age Pension age and meet Australian residence and means test
qualifications. It is a Services Australia payment and provides income
support and a range of concessions for eligible older Australians.

Age Pension (Blind)

An Age Pension paid to a person who is permanently blind is commonly
referred to as a 'Blind' Pension. However, there is no payment called
'Blind Pension'. Older Australians wanting to be assessed for Age
Pension (Blind) should be issued the Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013).

Age Pension (Blind) recipients receive certain concessions not provided
to other Age Pension recipients.

Pension bonus

This is a tax free lump sum which may be payable to registered members
of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) who have deferred claiming Age Pension
and stayed in paid work. The PBS is closed to new registrations from 1
July 2014, but members may remain in the scheme and claim their bonus in
due course, in line with existing arrangements.

At initial contact, PBS registered members must be offered a referral to
a Financial Information Service (FIS) contact and details of the
member's response recorded.

A registered member of the PBS must claim the Pension bonus when
claiming Age Pension.

Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment

This is a tax free payment to the surviving partner of a deceased member
of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) who did not make a claim for Age
Pension or bonus before they died.

No payment is made to the estate of a single person who died before
claiming Age Pension and the Pension bonus.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Older Australians who have reached Age Pension age but are not eligible
for the Age Pension due to the means test may qualify for a CSHC.
Eligibility for a CSHC is subject to an income test (see Resources page
for a link to information on the Services Australia website)

The CSHC will give entitlement to prescription medicines at a reduced
price under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). CSHC holders are
also entitled to Quarterly Supplement.

Home Equity Access Scheme

-   The Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) is a voluntary
    arrangement that provides financial support in the form of a
    government funded loan that is repayable to the Commonwealth
-   The Scheme is available to older Australians and their partners who
    wish to supplement their income with a loan secured against their
    Australian real estate
-   The loan is paid in fortnightly instalments or can be paid in lump
    sum advance payments (or a combination of both)
-   The loan accrues interest which compounds fortnightly until the
    customer repays the balance in full

Customers should seek independent financial or legal advice before
making a decision to apply for the Scheme.

See Home Equity Access Scheme for more details.

Aged Care Means Test Assessment

A care recipient receiving a home care package may require an income
assessment, and care recipients entering permanent residential aged care
may require a combined asset and income assessment.

Before July 2014, Aged Care Means Test Assessments were known as
Residential Care Assessments (RCA) which covered 2 different types of
assessments; Residential Care Income Assessments (RCIA) and Residential
Care Assets Assessment (RCAA

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information about payments and services for older Australians.

Contents

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment
(PBBP)

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Initial contact by customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC)

Initial contact by customers registering for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Related links

Claiming Age Pension

Home Equity Access Scheme

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Help for grandparents caring for children

State Seniors Cards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
