
Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Age Pension 065-03080010

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines a list of codes used for the cancellation,
suspension and rejection of Age Pension. The Centrelink system uses
codes when a decision to cancel or suspend a payment, or to reject a
claim, is recorded on the computer system. A description of the code is
used in correspondence with customers.

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reasons

Suspension and cancellation reasons can be recorded manually via the
Benefit Action (BA) screen, or automatically by the system. Automatic
cancellations can occur when the customer is assessed as not qualified
or payable based on the information they provided. For example, if the
customer provides income details that exceed the income limit, then the
system will cancel the Age Pension with reason code INC as the income is
too high.

Where possible, Service Officers should allow the system to
automatically cancel Age Pension after updating the customer's
information on the relevant screens. This enables Service Officers to
determine the reason for cancellation without requesting further
information, should a customer contact us or request a review.

If a vulnerable and at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.
Note: customers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative. Cancel any MFUs generated for customers in this situation.

The Resources page contains a table of cancellation, suspension and
rejection reasons for Age Pension.

Related links

Suspension of Age Pension

Cancellation of Age Pension

Restoration of Age Pension

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Compensation Preclusion Period

Former resident provisions

Foreign pensions

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Employment income nil rate period

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Common types of Australian visas

Assessing permanent blindness

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Identity Confirmation

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Australian residence requirements for payment

Returning to Australia

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
