
Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to claim a Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC). Customers can claim online, using Assisted Customer
Claim (ACC) or by a paper claim form.

Eligibility and when to claim

A person may qualify for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card on the day
they submit or lodge a claim if they:

-   have reached Age Pension age, and
-   meet Australian residence, and
-   not in receipt of a precluding DSS/DVA payment, and
-   provide a Tax File Number (TFN) or been granted an exemption from
    suppling a TFN, and
-   meet identity confirmation requirements, and
-   meet income test requirements

For details about payments and services available, see

-   Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire
-   Initial contact by customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
    Card (CSHC)

Customer contacts to claim

If a person contacts to claim Commonwealth Seniors Health Card:

Online claim

[] Offer an online claim first. Explain the benefits of claiming online:

-   help to apply for the right payment. The service will ask streaming
    questions and provide early warnings if they may not be eligible
-   less details for them to provide. The details from their Centrelink
    record will pre-fill into the online claim
-   monitor the progress of their claim through their Centrelink online
    account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
-   If both members of a couple want to claim, both will need to lodge a
    separate claim online

Assisted customer claims

If they decline the online claim offer, Service Officers can use ACC
with the customer or correspondence nominee, to collect claim details
from a customer. They can do this over the phone or face-to-face.

If both members of a couple wish to claim and require an ACC, This needs
to be completed on both records.

To submit their claim, the customer must:

-   Answer all mandatory questions
-   Provide all required documents
-   Verify their identity if there is no Identify Confirmation (ICI)
    recorded
-   Accept a verbal declaration

Exceptions apply for some vulnerable customers.

If a customer declines to make a verbal declaration, invite the customer
to log on to their online services, accept the declaration and submit
their claim. If the customer fails to submit their claim, the claim will
expire after 13 weeks.

Paper claim form

If the customer is unable or unwilling to claim online or use ACC, run
the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow. This will send out a
pre-populated SA443 Claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card. If both
members of a couple want to claim a CSHC, run FCSO for both members of
the couple.

Customers may complete an SA296 Claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (Note: the SA296 claim form, can be used to claim for both customer
and partner if eligible)

Reclaims

If the customer's CSHC has been cancelled for:

-   less than 13 weeks (with the exception of cancelled due to income).
    The customer may be able to have their CSHC restored
-   less than 26 weeks the customer can complete a re-claim or [] a full
    new claim
-   more than 26 weeks will need to have a full new claim. See the
    Process page for information on how to assist a person to claim a
    CSHC

For previous SHC claimants who were SHC-NOI (non-income tested) see
Non-income tested (NOI) Concession cards for more information.

A change in a customer's circumstance may include, but not limited to
their relationship status, income, address or telephone number. If a
customer reclaim includes any changes see Changes in a customer's
circumstances and effect on concession card entitlement.

Portability cancellation

Customers may be able to re-claim verbally to have their CSHC restored
if all of the below conditions are met:

-   the CSHC cancels due to a temporary departure overseas
-   they have returned to Australia and contact within 13 weeks of the
    cancellation
-   they have previously provided income details from their TNA for
    either of the previous 2 years, or they are ‘not required to lodge’
    an income tax return, and
-   any account based income streams owned, have been coded on the SUPS
    (Pensions /Annuities) screen

The Resources page contains links to forms, the Services Australia
website and factsheets. It also contains the verbal declaration script
to read to the customer and the privacy notice for CSHC customers.

Contents

Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal
re-claims) after a portability cancellation

Related links

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Tax File Number (TFN) for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
