
Assessment of entry contribution 065-11010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of entry contributions for a
retirement village. It describes what the amount paid covers, if the
amount is assessed as an asset and if the customer is considered a
homeowner.

Entry contribution

The contract or agreement entered into by the customer and the
retirement village will state the entry contribution amount and the
ongoing maintenance or service fees payable. The contract or agreement
must be sighted to verify the entry contribution amount.

The entry contribution is always the total amount (or sum of amounts)
paid or agreed to be paid under one or multiple contracts for the right
to live in the retirement village. That is, unless the customer can
provide evidence proving an amount paid does not relate to the purchase
of accommodation.

If the customer has moved into a retirement village, and still owns
their former home, it is an assessable asset. The former home is
assessed from the date the customer enters the retirement village.

Additional costs for fixtures

Some retirement villages give residents options in the building and
decoration of their home. In these cases there would be a base cost for
the standard, unfinished unit, and an additional cost for what may be
called a 'chattels package'.

This includes items that would be required to make the home suitable for
habitation, for example, skirtings, architraves, bench-tops, light
fittings, paint, door fittings, flooring, tiling, bathroom vanities
etc.. These are included in the calculation of the entry contribution
and added to the base cost if the customer buys these types of fixtures.

Purchase of a garage

The purchase of a garage under a separate contract is assessed as part
of the entry contribution if there is a garage allocated or attached to
each unit. However, if purchase of a garage is not one of the conditions
of entry to the retirement village then the amount paid for the garage
is not part of the entry contribution and the garage is assessed as an
asset.

Ongoing costs

Ongoing costs such as general service or maintenance fees which are
payable on a regular basis are not part of the entry contribution.

Deductions for fixed amounts

Some retirement villages deduct fixed amounts from the entry
contribution. If this is the case, the terms and details of the amounts
to be deducted, and when they are to be deducted, will be set out in the
entry agreement signed by the resident. This should be taken into
account if the customer is assessed as a non-homeowner and being paid
under the assets test as the amount assessed as an 'other asset' would
be reduced.

Determining homeownership status

The amount paid for the right to live in the retirement village is
compared to the extra allowable amount at the time the right was created
to determine the customer's homeownership status. The extra allowable
amount is the difference between the:

-   single homeowner allowable asset level, and
-   single non-homeowner allowable asset level

If the entry contribution at the time the arrangement:

-   is greater than the extra allowable amount, the customer is
    considered to be a homeowner and is not eligible for Rent Assistance
    (RA). The amount the customer paid as an entry contribution is not
    included as an asset under the assets test
-   is equal to or less than the extra allowable amount, the customer is
    considered to be a non-homeowner and may be eligible for RA. The
    amount the customer paid as an entry contribution is assessable
    under the assets test, but is not subject to the deeming provisions
    and should be coded as 'other assets'

The extra allowable amount applies to singles and each member of an
illness separated couple.

For couples who are not illness separated, the extra allowable amount is
half each.

A customer is considered illness separated if one or both partners live
in a retirement village and they receive a substantial level of care
from the retirement village service provider.

The Resources page contains current and historical rates of the EAA.

Retirement village providing a substantial level of care

In situations where the customer is receiving a substantial level of
care provided by the retirement village for a period of more than 14
days, the customer may be considered to be in a care situation for the
social security assets test. The customer meets the definition of being
in a care situation as the retirement village is considered to be a
private residence.

If the customer owns their own home and vacates it permanently to enter
a care situation in a retirement village, the former home will be exempt
from the assets test for 2 years from the date the customer first
entered care. The References page contains more information.

Amount paid by another person

If the entry contribution (or part thereof) is paid by another person
(for example, a relative) and the amount paid is a gift, and
non-homeowners will have the total entry contribution assessed as an
asset.

If the amount paid is a loan the customer must repay, it is a debt owing
and not included as an asset. The assessable amount of the entry
contribution will not include the loan.

However, when determining the homeownership status of the customer, the
amount paid by another person does not reduce the entry contribution
payable by the customer. The Resources page contains an example of this.

Entry contributions with an associated loan agreement

There are some circumstances where the entry contribution paid to the
retirement village is contracted as a loan to the retirement village.

Department of Social Services (DSS) have determined these cases should
be assessed under the special residence rules and not as a financial
investment. If the amount paid is above the extra allowable amount then
it is an exempt asset. If the amount paid is at or below the extra
allowable amount then it is a non-financial asset and no deeming
applies.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions about retirement
villages and the extra allowable amounts and an example of determining
homeownership if someone else pays the entry contribution.

Related links

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
