-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can re-claim a Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card online, via an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) or via the form
(SA296A). Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card can be used
where a customer's Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) has been
cancelled for less than 26 weeks.

CSHC Re-claim

If the customer's CSHC has been cancelled for less than 13 weeks (with
the exception of cancellation due to income), check Cancellation of
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card or Restoration of Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card to see if the Re-claim is actually required.

[] In the first instance the customer should be advised to complete a
re-claim online.

Alternatively customers may wish to:

-   make a verbal re-claim, completed via an Assisted Customer Claim
    (ACC) or
-   complete the form Claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
    (SA443) issued by running the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)
    workflow or
-   download and complete the form SA296A Re-claim for a Commonwealth
    Seniors Health Card

Note: the CSHC re-claim form is not used for any other purpose.

Estimate of income

All questions should be answered, except the current year estimate of
income question, which should only be completed if:

-   the adjusted taxable income for last financial year plus deemed
    income from any account-based income streams were above the income
    limit for the CSHC (see the Resources page for a link to Services
    Australia website for the current income limits), and
-   there has been a decrease in adjusted taxable income since then
    which is an acceptable condition for using an estimate of income for
    the CSHC income test

In this case an estimate of the current financial year’s adjusted
taxable income may be provided.

If the customer's claim or entitlement has already been rejected or
cancelled as the estimate of their current financial year adjusted
taxable income is over the limit, the customer cannot lodge a second
claim using adjusted taxable income from a previous financial year. The
customer is required to lodge a revised estimate for the current year
and must supply details of why their estimate has changed. The Service
Officer has the delegation to accept or reject the new estimate based on
whether the reduction seems reasonable.

The form must be signed, or if claiming online, the declaration
completed which replaces the requirement to sign.

Note: when a customer provides an estimate, a superannuation withdrawal
under the First Home Super Saver (FHSS) Scheme is not counted towards
their taxable income.

Tax File Number

Customers who re-claim CSHC are required to provide a Tax File Number
(TFN) or be granted a TFN exemption for themselves and their partner (if
applicable). If no TFN or exemption is provided then the CSHC re-claim
will be rejected.

Assessment

When a claim is submitted online or a paper form is lodged it will be
assessed by a Service Officer to determine if the qualifications for the
CSHC are met.

Customers who have a grandfathered Energy supplement status, are paid
either the single or partnered rate of the quarterly supplement
depending on their relationship status. When coding claims for CSHC it
is essential that the correct relationship status be coded. If a
customer has supplied bank account details but indicated on their
reclaim that they wish to decline quarterly supplement, staff should
contact the customer to confirm their request to decline receipt of
quarterly supplement. See Suppression of quarterly supplement payment.

The Resources page contains a link to the Re-claim for a Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card form (SA296A) and to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Quarterly supplement

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
