
Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) form 065-13060020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the Aged Care Funding Instrument
(ACFI) form.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

ACFI

The Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) is a tool used by residential
aged care services to assess care recipients’ ongoing care needs. The
ACFI determines the amount of subsidy paid and can affect how much a
care recipient pays in fees. ACFI only applies to permanent resident
care recipients.

The ACFI consists of 12 questions about a care recipient’s assessed care
needs and 2 diagnostic sections. Care needs are classified under the 3
funding domains of:

-   Activities of Daily Living (ADL)
-   Behaviour (BEH), and
-   Complex Health Care (CHC)

The 4 levels of funding for each domain are:

-   nil
-   low
-   medium
-   high

The amount of subsidy paid is the combined amounts payable for the level
of each domain (ADL + BEH + CHC).

Types of ACFI Appraisal

There are various types of ACFI Appraisals depending on the care
recipient’s circumstances:

-   Initial
-   Voluntary, and
-   Mandatory

Initial ACFI Appraisals

New from home (NEW)

NEW appraisals apply to care recipients entering into residential care
from home care or directly from their residence.

Residential aged care services must submit the NEW ACFI appraisal no
earlier than 28 days and no later than 2 months after the care recipient
enters into care.

Note: NEW ACFI appraisals can be submitted within 28 days from the date
of entry if the care recipient is in respite care and has moved into
permanent residential care with the same service, on the same day.

New from Hospital (NEH)

NEH appraisals apply to care recipients entering into residential care
directly from hospital.

Residential aged care services must conduct the NEH ACFI appraisal no
earlier than 28 days and no later than 2 months after the care recipient
enters into care.

A mandatory reappraisal will be required after 6 months from the date of
entry into care (under Care Needs Reassessed (CNR) appraisal type.

Note: NEH ACFI appraisal can be submitted prior to 28 days from the date
of entry into care if the care recipient is deceased or has departed
care.

Voluntary ACFI Reappraisals

Major Change Appraisal (MCA)

A MCA appraisal can be submitted at any time except during the
reappraisal period. It is valid up to 6 months. MCA ACFI is required to
have 2 category increase across all 3 domains. This may be a 2 level
increase in one domain or a single level increase across 2 domains.

Exception: a reappraisal may be submitted at any time to reclassifying
the care recipient to high in Complex Health Care (CHC) where:

-   the care recipient is categorised as high on ADLs , and
-   medium on CHC

This is permitted even if there is no change in the BEH levels.

Care Needs Reassessed (CNR)

CNR appraisals can be submitted as a reappraisal 12 months after the
previous appraisal. This requires a reassessment of the care recipients
care needs.

Note: CNR appraisals must be submitted once the NEH or return from
hospital (RFH) appraisal expires after 6 months. See Mandatory ACFI
Reappraisals for further information.

There is no expiry for this appraisal type.

Transfer from another facility (TRA)

Submit TRA appraisals when:

-   the care recipient transfers to another service within 28 days and
    the new facility identifies a need for a reappraisal of existing
    ACFI, or
-   if the previous service has not provided the details of the current
    ACFI

Appraisals must be submitted within 2 months from the date of admission
to the new facility.

There is no expiry for a TRA ACFI.

Reappraisal of lowest classification (NNN ACFI)

The lowest ACFI category (NNN) can be submitted at any time. This
appraisal applies for an ACFI score of nil for all 3 domains.

Mandatory ACFI Reappraisals

Return From Extended Hospital leave (RFH)

Submit a RFH appraisal within two months after a return from hospital
leave.

RFH ACFI:

-   takes effect from the day after the hospital leave ends, and
-   expires 6 months after that date

Under the CNR appraisal, a mandatory reappraisal will be required after
6 months.

If the current classification expires whilst care recipient is on
extended hospital leave, the reappraisal period is 2 months from the day
the care recipient returns from hospital leave.

Note: extended hospital leave includes periods where a care recipient:

-   has consecutive hospital leave
-   has transition care, and
-   the combined period of hospital leave and transition care is 30 days
    or more

Major Change Reappraisal - 6 months from MCA (MCR)

Complete a MCR appraisal no earlier than 5 month and no later than 7
months after the MCA date. A MCR ACFI has no expiry date.

Care Needs Reassessed (CNR)

These appraisals must be submitted once NEH (New from Hospital) or RFH
(Return from Hospital) appraisal expires after 6 months. Reappraisal
period commences one month before and ends one month after the expiry
date of the existing NEH or RFH classification. There is no expiry for
CNR ACFI.

Department of Health’s Secretary (SEC) reappraisals

SEC reappraisals are made at the request of the Secretary, Department of
Health.

Note: the References page contains legislation relevant to the care
recipients’ ACFI classification.

Updating ACFI

After an ACFI is lodged, services may make changes. These changes are
due to administration errors made by the services. In these
circumstances, the changes are accepted as long as the ACFI reflects the
correct assessment of the care recipient’s care needs.

Update the ACFI data in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP). All requests
must be made in writing from the service before an update is made. This
is regardless of the ACFI lodgement method. After updating an ACFI, a
care recipient note must be left in the ACSP.

Delete care recipient appraisal

A care recipient may have multiple appraisals depending on their length
of stay in permanent residential care. Delete the most recent appraisal
in the first instance. Previous appraisals must be deleted from the most
recent receipt date.

Note: deletion of an appraisal will affect subsidies previously paid in
respect of the care recipient. Subsidy adjustments will occur with the
processing of the next monthly claim.

Backdating ACFI

Aged care services may request an ACFI to be backdated. These requests
are a result of aged care services receiving reduced subsidy payments
relating to the ACFI classification.

All ACFI backdating requests must be in writing and include supporting
documentation, regardless of the ACFI lodgement method.

When the ACFI has been entered online and the service has a history of
ACFI online lodgement, this document can be used as a valid record for
ACFI backdating. Once the ACFI backdating has been approved and updated
in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP), the ACFI subsidy is back paid
accordingly.

If a service requires further assistance to lodge an ACFI or any other
online claiming issue, they can refer to Services Australia website for
information, see Resources.

ACFI backdating can occur when:

-   the Department of Health’s Secretary is satisfied that the ACFI
    appraisal was submitted and received within the relevant appraisal
    period and
-   the aged care service has provided supporting documentation to
    support the request

There is no legal discretion to consider any backdating requests on
compassionate grounds.

The following are not grounds for backdating:

-   The service is unable to lodge the ACFI due to a staff member being
    absent or change of staff
-   The requirement to submit a second form as the original form
    submitted used the incorrect scheme (prior to 1 January 2017 and on
    or after 1 January 2017)
-   The last day of the ACFI appraisal falls on a public
    holiday/weekend. The general rule is services are to submit before
    the last day and factor in weekends and public holidays

Default ACFI subsidy rate

Default Rate (DR)

A default subsidy rate applies for the first 2 months where an ACFI is
not received from the date of admission due to the relevant appraisal
period rules. The default subsidy is paid at a reduced rate. A Default
Non Appraisal (DNA) is applied after:

-   2 months of the default rate, and
-   an ACFI has not been received

Default Non Appraisal (DNA)

Apply a DNA appraisal when an ACFI is not yet received after the initial
2 month reappraisal period. No subsidy is paid under DNA.

The ACFI’s interaction with the Aged Care Means assessment process and
setting the Means Testing Subsidy Reduction/Means Testing Care Fee
(MTSR/MTCF)

There are 2 different outcomes relating to ACFI and Aged Care Means
assessment:

Where a care recipient’s means assessment has been completed and their
entry has matched before the receipt of the ACFI, the MTSR/MTCF is set
at either:

-   the means assessment amount, or
-   the maximum ACFI subsidy + primary supplement amount where MND
    (Means Not Disclosed)

Where the ACFI is then received, the MTSR/MTCF is adjusted at the next
Quarterly Review or when an Ad Hoc review is completed. See Aged care
reviews – quarterly reviews for information on the aged care quarterly
review process

Or:

-   Where the ACFI is received before the means assessment amount, the
    MTSR/MTCF amount is applied as per the ACFI appraisal

Note: the MTSR/MTCF should not be greater than the cost of care (ACFI
subsidy + the primary supplements).

ACFI review

The Department of Health Review Officers undertake an onsite review to
validate the ACFI classification. The Review Officers visit residential
services and use information in the Aged Care Act 1997 as part of the
review process. Classifications can change or remain the same. See
References for further information on the review process.

From 1 January 2017, ACFI Reviews which result in classification changes
are applied from the date of the ACFI under review. This can potentially
result in changes to previous subsidies over multiple years.

The approved service:

-   is formally advised by the Department of Health of the review
    outcome, and
-   has a period of 28 days to appeal the decision of the Department of
    Health

After the appeal period ends, Services Australia is notified that the
review took place and its outcome.

From 25 September 2017 notification of ACFI reviews occur electronically
via the My Aged Care Gateway.

ACFI Subsidy Rates

Refer to the current and historical rates listed on the Department of
Health - Schedule of Subsidies and Supplements for Aged Care.

The Resources page contains:

-   a link to the conversion chart
-   an FAQ table with questions and answers about ACFI
-   a link to the ACFI form
-   links to the internal and external websites

Related links

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)

Aged Care Staff-Assist Portal (ACSAP)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Service in Context

Manage aged care recipient details

Reports in Aged Care program for service providers

Return or redirect forms for aged care services

Using Standard Letter Templates (SLT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
