
Aged Care 065-05000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on aged care services which provide
nursing and care for older people in their own home through home care
packages or in a residential setting in aged care homes.

Government intent

Services Australia aims to enhance the quality of life of older
Australians through support for positive and healthy ageing and the
provision of high quality and cost effective care.

Accreditation

Aged care services can be paid Australian Government subsidies if they
have received accreditation under the Aged Care Act 1997. An 'accredited
service' can have both 'funded' (for example, government subsidised)
places and 'unfunded' places.

Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT)

A person who receives a home care package or government-funded aged care
in an aged care home must have their care needs assessed by an Aged Care
Assessment Team (ACAT) assessor. ACAT assessors are funded by the
Department of Health and administered by My Aged Care.

My Aged Care is the entry point to access Australian Government-funded
aged care services. The phone line and website can help older
Australians, their families and carers get the help and support they
need. ACAT assessors conduct assessments of the care recipient’s needs
and help them access the most suitable types of care and services. Care
recipients are assessed for eligibility for care under the Aged Care Act
1997, with approval subject to a decision by an ACAT delegate.

After the assessment, ACAT assessors will complete a National Screening
Assessment Form (NSAF). This outlines the type and level of care the
care recipient is eligible for. See National Screening Assessment Form
(NSAF) for more information.

An ACAT assessment can be requested by:

-   a family member
-   friend
-   carer, or
-   professionals advocating on behalf of the care recipient, for
    example social workers or doctors

An ACAT assessment is requested by:

-   face-to-face appointment with an Aged Care Specialist Officer (ACSO)
-   the My Aged Care website
-   online form
-   telephone

Means assessments (calculation of your cost of care)

Home care income assessment and permanent residential aged care combined
income and assets means assessments (calculation of your cost of care)
are provided by the agency and the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
on behalf of the Department of Health. There are grandparent provisions
for existing care recipients, who will continue to be assessed under the
pre-1 July 2014 rules unless they:

-   leave care (home or residential) and enter a different care type on
    or after 1 July 2014
-   leave care and within 28 days commence the same care type on or
    after 1 July 2014 and choose to 'opt in' to the new assessment rules

Care recipients that enter care on or after 1 July 2014 will be assessed
under the current rules.

See Aged care means assessment for more information. The Resources page
outlines additional grandparent provisions for the various aged care
reforms.

National Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care Program

Residents in the National Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Flexible
Aged Care Program (NATSIFAC) are considered residential care recipients
in a Commonwealth funded place and are not funded under the Aged Care
Act 1997.

Rent Assistance (RA) is payable to NATSIFAC residents who:

-   get an eligible social security payment
-   pay rent as a component of their aged care fees, and
-   pay rent above the rent threshold

For more information see Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers.

The Resources page contains an aged care reforms summary, information on
the roles of government in aged care, links to the aged care letter
templates, letter codes and descriptions table, task cards, Department
of Health and My Aged Care websites, legislation and privacy
information.

Contents

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Aged care – consent and disclosure

Aged Care - fees and charges

Aged care financial hardship assistance

Aged care – initial contact

Aged care letters

Aged Care means assessments

Aged care reviews

My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO)

Rent Assistance (RA) and change of address to and from aged care

Related links

Accepting and disclosing information

Aged care fees and charges - accommodation payments

Aged Care means assessment – Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 – assets
assessment

Aged care reviews – manual follow-ups

Aged Care Specialist Officer (ACSO)

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

National Screening and Assessment Form (NSAF)

Retirement villages

Vacation of home to enter care situation (INH) reviews

Vacation of principal home due to illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
