
Residential respite supplement for aged care services 065-13040090

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the respite supplement for aged
care services.

On this Page:

Respite supplement

Residential aged care services may receive respite subsidies and
supplements for eligible residential respite care recipients. The
respite supplement is payable for each eligible day a respite resident
is in care, in acknowledgment of the higher administration and care
costs of respite care.

To receive the respite care subsidies and supplements, a residential
aged care service must have allocated places to provide respite care.
The Department of Health and Aged Care provides all allocations. These
allocated places are respite days. If the service has no more allocated
days available, the service cannot claim respite subsidies for a day.

Residential aged care services can claim the higher respite supplement
rate when they use an average of 70 percent or more of their respite
care allocation over 12 months. This is the respite incentive supplement
for high-level respite care. See the Resources page for further
information on respite care and the different supplement rates.

There are 3 levels of respite care:

-   Low level
-   High level (less than 70 percent respite care allocation over 12
    months)
-   Second High level (70 percent or more respite care allocation over
    12 months)

Eligibility

To access residential respite, care recipients must be assessed as
eligible by an Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT). Care recipients are
entitled to 63 days of subsidised respite care in a financial year,
however care recipients may apply to an ACAT for extensions of up to 21
days for various reasons.

A residential care service may be paid a subsidy and supplement for
providing respite care to an eligible care recipient on an allocated
respite day, providing the:

care given by the residential care service:

-   was respite care, and
-   met any rules specified in the Subsidy Principles

days in respite care during the financial year do not equal or exceed
the number in the Subsidy Principles

care recipient’s ACAT has been approved for an extension

Amounts

The supplement for a day is an amount decided by the Minister in
writing. The different amounts (including nil amounts) can be based on:

-   the different levels of care assessed
-   the usage of respite allocation days
-   whether a care recipient continues with residential care after
    ceasing the service
-   any other matters specified in the Subsidy Principles 2014

The References page contains links to the legislation.

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
