
Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment 065-07030050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Pension Bonus Bereavement
Payment (PBBP), the requirements for payment, claim processes and
coding. PBBP is a tax free lump sum that may be payable to the surviving
partner of a deceased member of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS), who died
on or after 1 January 2008 and had not previously been paid Age Pension
or Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) before they passed away.

PBS closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014

The Pension Bonus Scheme is closed to new registrations from 1 July
2014. Applications to register in the PBS that were lodged, or deemed to
be lodged, before 1 July 2014 can be processed as usual.

As part of the Government's Secure and Sustainable Pension Reforms, the
PBS was closed to new entrants who do not qualify for Age Pension before
20 September 2009. All existing members may remain in the scheme and
claim their pensions in due course, in line with existing arrangements.
The closure of the scheme does not prevent the surviving partner of a
PBS member from claiming a PBBP.

Granting PBBP

PBBP can be granted to the claimant only if all of the following are
met:

-   the claimant is eligible for the PBBP
-   the deceased person for whom the PBBP is claimed was qualified for
    PBP, and
-   the PBBP is lodged within the allowable period of 26 weeks or longer
    if discretion is applied

Claims for PBBP are processed by a centralised processing team.

Factors that affect the amount payable

Where PBBP is granted the PBBP amount payable will depend on all of the
following:

-   the notional Age Pension rate of the deceased person, affected by
    the combined assessable income and assets owned by the couple
    immediately prior to the death of the deceased person, excluding
    PBBP employment income and regular or lump sum compensation payments
    (of either the deceased or surviving partner)
-   the overall qualifying bonus period of the deceased, and
-   whether the marital status of the deceased had changed during the
    deferred period

Invitation letter

The processing of the death action will trigger an invitation to the
surviving partner to claim PBBP if they meet the requirements listed
below. There will be cases where Services Australia is not aware the
person is a member of a couple, therefore an invitation letter will not
always be sent. If the surviving partner has a correspondence nominee
the letter will be issued to the nominee.

An invitation letter will be sent when the deceased person:

-   died on or after 1 January 2008
-   was a member of a couple at the time of death
-   was registered with the PBS and had not claimed a Pension Bonus
    prior to death
-   since reaching Age Pension age, was not paid an income support
    payment, except for Carer Payment

Verification

The following additional documents must be provided when a claim for
PBBP is lodged. The customer will need to provide all of the following:

-   verification of partner's date of death and date of birth
-   their partner's Evidentiary Certificates or work records, and
-   if the customer does not have evidentiary certificates or for any
    periods the Evidentiary Certificates do not cover, a record of all
    work performed to show they had met the work test

Calculation

The PBBP is based on the amount of Pension Bonus that would have been
payable had the deceased partner claimed Age Pension and the Bonus
immediately prior to their death. PBBP employment income and regular or
lump sum compensation payments (of either the deceased or surviving
partner) are not included when calculating the PBBP.

The Resources page contains the PBBP manual calculation, scenarios and a
link to the claim form which includes relevant Information.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment
(PBBP)

Completing the claim for Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (SA388)

Calculating a Pension Bonus

Accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Non-accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Issue of evidentiary certificate for the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Exemptions from income and assets tests for superannuation investments

Cancellation of membership for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Types of Centrelink records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
