
Registration for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) 065-07010010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for customers to be registered
as members of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS). To be eligible for a
Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) a person must first be registered as a
member of the PBS. Registration is compulsory. To register, a customer
must have completed and lodged the Registration for the Pension Bonus
Scheme (SA319).

On this Page:

Closed to new registrations

The Pension Bonus Scheme is closed to new registrations from 1 July
2014.

Service Officers must not register customers in the PBS unless the
customer reached Age Pension qualification before 20 September 2009 and
lodged or can be deemed to have lodged an application to register before
1 July 2014.

As the PBS is closed to new registrations, The Registration for the
Pension Bonus Scheme (SA319) form is no longer available. Forms lodged
by customers after 1 July are to be accepted and processed. The system
will read contact dates from the Customer Contact (CCD) screen and the
lodgement date of the Registration for the Pension Bonus Scheme (SA319)
form and automatically reject registrations when appropriate.

Eligibility for PBP

To be eligible for a Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) a person must be a
registered member of the PBS.

If the customer is dissatisfied that they cannot register in the PBS
they may test their eligibility to a Pension Bonus they may apply for a
bonus when they claim Age Pension. If they are not a registered member
of the PBS, the Pension Bonus claim will be rejected, however this will
allow them to seek a review of the decision if they wish.

Registrations before 1 July 2014

The remaining information on this page is provided to assist with
registration applications made before 1 July 2014.

As part of the Government's Secure and Sustainable Pension Reforms, the
PBS was closed to new entrants who are not eligible for Age Pension
before 20 September 2009. Service Officers must not register customers
in the PBS unless the customer reached Age Pension qualification before
20 September 2009. Service Officers must recommend customers who wish to
register to contact the Centrelink Financial Information Service (FIS).

All existing members may remain in the scheme and claim their pensions
in due course, in line with existing arrangements, including customers
who took advantage of early registration provisions and registered
before 29 June 2009, when Royal Assent was given.

For a customer enquiring about the PBS it is mandatory that the Service
Officer recommends an appointment be made with a FIS Officer. They will
explain the scheme in detail and discuss all options available to the
customer.

No identity confirmation needs to be lodged to register for the PBS,
only proof of age and residency is required. To register for the PBS an
applicant can use an International Social Security Agreement to meet the
residence qualification. However, the applicant will need to be eligible
for an autonomous Age Pension when they eventually claim the bonus. That
is, a customer cannot be paid a bonus if they are granted Age Pension
under the provisions of an International Social Security Agreement. If
they are granted Age Pension autonomously, the applicant can be paid for
the full period of registration - including the period they were under
an International Social Security Agreement.

Registration date

A person's Age Pension qualification date is the date that the person
meets age and residence qualifications for Age Pension. A person must
also be an Australian resident on this date.

If a person applied to register for the scheme more than 13 weeks after
their age pension qualification date then the:

-   period between their qualification date for Age Pension, and
-   date they lodge the SA319 (the pre-application period)

must be examined to determine if they would have been either accruing
and meeting the work test or non-accruing for that entire period (if
they had been a member of the scheme).

If the person did not meet the rules of membership for that
pre-application period, they were not eligible to register at all, from
any date.

If the person did meet the rules in the pre-application period, they
were eligible to register from the date the application is received, and
they may be entitled to have their registration date backdated to the
date they were qualified for Age Pension.

Backdating

To enable their registration date to be backdated, a person must have an
acceptable reason for not registering on time.

If the customer does not have an acceptable reason for not registering
on time (for example, was advised by a FIS Officer or Service Officer to
register but declined), registration would start from the date the SA319
was received (or CCD date if within 14 days).

Customers who had no expectation of being eligible for an Age Pension
under the income and assets tests but who have benefited from the
extended curtilage changes from 1 January 2007 or the asset taper
changes from 20 September 2007 have an acceptable reason for not
registering on time.

Members of a couple

For members of a couple, each person would have been required to lodge
their own registration form, if they both intend to participate in the
Scheme and, even if only 1 of them was meeting the work test
requirements. The non-working partner must have also registered for the
scheme if they intended to claim the bonus. Note: if 1 member of a
couple was already in receipt of Age Pension, that person would not need
to register for the PBS in order for the other person to register for
the scheme and accrue bonus periods (unless that person is the working
member of the couple).

A person who has received any amount of Age Pension in the past is never
eligible to receive a bonus. However, they may become registered members
of the scheme to enable their partner to receive a bonus.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)

DVA has a similar scheme to PBS and eligible customers may register in
either or both schemes. Eligibility ages for veterans with qualifying
service and widow/ers are 5 years lower than for Age Pension. Ex-service
members can register to join the PBS with Centrelink or the DVA. A
member of the PBS registered with DVA may, if eligible, transfer their
registration to Centrelink. Social Security rules would then apply and
only those bonus periods that have accrued while eligible under the
social security rules would be transferred.

New Zealanders

Only those New Zealanders who are Australian residents under social
security law can use the provisions of the International Social Security
Agreement with New Zealand to register for the PBS. That is, if the
applicant holds a permanent visa or holds a 'protected' special category
visa then they are an Australian resident and can register for the PBS.
If the applicant does not have a permanent visa or a 'protected' special
category visa, then they are not an Australian resident and cannot
register for the PBS. If the applicant is a woman, then they must be at
least 65 years of age to be able to use the New Zealand agreement to
register for the PBS as under the New Zealand agreement the pension age
for women is 65.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Although the customer may not wish to claim Age Pension they may qualify
for the CSHC. To claim CSHC the customer can [] claim online or a Claim
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (SA296) may be completed.

Registration changes from September 2008

From 6 September 2008, the following changes occurred:

-   Where a PBS registration has been recorded incorrectly (i.e. on the
    wrong customer's record), the registration is able to be deleted
    without preventing the customer from registering in the future
-   A PBS registration can be manually rejected when a customer fails to
    reply to correspondence (FRC)
-   Where a claim for a PBP has been determined, the PBS registration is
    automatically cancelled Pension Bonus Claim (PBC) regardless of the
    outcome of the claim for payment (that is, where the claim for
    payment is either paid or rejected). This ensures that the PBS
    membership has ceased but will not prevent the customer from being
    re-registered if required

The Resources page contains a link to the Claim for Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (SA296), examples of meeting the work test requirements for
backdating a customer's registration date for PBS and information on
possible consequences if a registered member of the PBS claims a
comparable foreign payment from New Zealand.

Related links

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Residence requirements

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Qualification for Age Pension

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Assessing house and curtilage

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
