
Aged care means assessment – home ownership and real estate estimates 065-18120416

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Some older Australians may be at risk of abuse. For information on how
to identify abuse of older Australians and the referral options
available, go to Abuse of older Australians. If the customer is with
another person or on speaker phone, continue the current business
conversation as usual.

This document outlines information on completing real estate estimate
checks. It includes requests for property valuations to complete an aged
care means assessment.

Real estate assets

The value of a care recipient’s real estate assets is included in their
aged care means assessment. The care recipient or nominee must provide a
reasonable estimated value. Real estate includes:

-   the former principal home (unless it's occupied by a carer or close
    relative)
-   any real estate the care recipient has an interest in

The asset value must be included in the means assessment if a protected
person:

vacates the home

is not considered a protected person

-   at the initial assessment, or
-   due to a change in circumstances

For Social Security purposes, the principal home is an exempt asset and
is not recorded as real estate unless:

-   it has been more than 2 years since the home was vacated due to
    illness, or
-   rent is currently being received

Post 1 July 2014 means assessment

The former principal home is assessed as an asset

Its value is capped to the equivalent value of the first asset threshold

The capped value remains in place for as long as the care recipient owns
their former principal home

-   See the Department of Health and Aged Care - Schedule of Fees and
    Charges post 1 July 2014 on the Resources page for current first
    asset threshold values

The estimate check is accepted if the care recipient provides an
estimated value of their home that exceeds the threshold

An estimate check or valuation is required for all other real estate
assets

-   This includes where they provide an estimated value below the
    threshold

Pre 1 July 2014 means assessment

The former principal home is assessed as an asset and its value is
combined with the value of all other assets:

If the total asset value is less than the asset cut-off, the care
recipient is assessed as being a supported resident

-   See the Department of Health and Aged Care - Schedule of Fees and
    Charges pre 1 July 2014 on the Resources page for current asset
    cut-off level values

An estimate check or valuation is required for all real estate assets
including the former principal home:

-   The exception is where the former principal home is occupied by a
    protected person and is considered an exempt asset

Prior to 20 March 2008, care recipients were only assessed as
concessional or assisted when they:

-   were receiving an income support payment, and
-   had not been a homeowner for 2 years or more, or
-   owned a home that was occupied by a protected person

Determining who is a homeowner

A care recipient is considered a homeowner if they and/or their partner:

-   have a title to their property, or
-   will have an amount refunded to them when they vacate the property

This definition also applies when they own a dwelling such as a caravan.
They do not have to own the land the dwelling sits on. See Assessing
caravans, boats and park homes:

-   For Social Security purposes the value of a principal home is an
    exempt asset
-   For aged care purposes the value of the principal home is included
    in a means assessment

When they have created a granny flat interest and do not have legal
ownership of their property, further investigation is required to
determine if:

they have a partner remaining in the home affecting the home owner
status

it has been less than 5 years since the granny flat interest was created

-   See Granny flat provisions including scenarios for more information

A care recipient who does not own their principal home and is not a
member of a couple is a homeowner if:

-   they have a right or interest in their principal home, and
-   their right or interest in their principal home gives them
    reasonable security of tenure in the home

As an investment property is not the care recipient’s principal home,
the care recipient is not considered a homeowner for aged care purposes.

Assessment of principal home before probate of partner’s estate

Assessment of the principal home for a surviving partner may be affected
in the period before probate of their deceased partner's estate.

The value of the home is excluded from the means assessment if the care
recipient’s name is not on the title.

If the care recipient is a joint tenant with their deceased partner on
the principal home title:

they are a 'homeowner'

the net value of the home is included in the means assessment

the principal home may still be exempt due to a protected person
residing in the home

-   Refer to Aged care means assessment - protected person for more
    information

For aged care means assessment

A care recipient with their principal home in a retirement village has
the value assessed based on the refund amount expected when leaving the
retirement village:

-   Assessment of homeowner or non-homeowner status is not required

For Social Security assessment

A care recipient whose principal home is in a retirement village, has
the value assessed based on the value of the entry contribution paid
when they moved in to their retirement village:

An assessment of homeowner or non-homeowner status is required

-   See Retirement villages for further information

House and curtilage

The former principal home includes house and curtilage (land adjacent to
the house) up to 2 hectares.

If the care recipient meets the criteria for the extended land use test,
all the land on the same title document as the former principal home is
considered as house and curtilage and treated as the principal home:

Any land in excess of the 2 hectares is assessed as real estate and
recorded on the Real Estate/Business Summary (REBS) screen

-   See Assessing house and curtilage for further information

Real Estate/Business Summary screen (REBS)

All real estate other than the former principal home will be recorded on
the REBS screen. The former principal home is also recorded on the REBS
screen where rental income is currently being received.

Care recipients in receipt of an income support payment (ISP)

Two years after a care recipient has vacated their former principal home
due to illness (and a home vacation review is completed) the former
principal home becomes assessable as an asset for Social Security
purposes. Its value is recorded on the REBS screen.

For aged care purposes, the value of the former principal home remains
capped. The asset value recorded on the REBS screen is not included as
an asset for the means assessment.

Once a property is recorded on the REBS screen a risk based model is
used for assessment:

-   The property undergoes an annual real estate indexation review
-   If a property value provided is more than 10% higher or lower than
    the current assessed value, a review of the property value should be
    undertaken

A list of properties not included in the risk based model is contained
within Valuation of real estate and other assets. See Maintaining the
value of real estate assets on customer records for further information
regarding real estate indexation reviews.

Care recipients not in receipt of an ISP

Any property that is not the former principal home is recorded on the
REBS screen but is subject to a manual valuation. It will not undergo an
annual real estate indexation review.

Water licences and water allocations on a property

Water licences and water allocations may be assessed as assets. Their
value is included in the total real estate value, even if they have
their own title and can be traded as personal property.

Whether the water licence or water allocation is assessable depends on
whether the land it relates to is exempt from the assets test. If 100%
of the property is exempt from the assets test, the water licence or
water allocation relating to the exempt property has no assessable
value.

Details of water licences and water allocations need to be included in
any valuation request where relevant. See Assessing house and curtilage
for further information regarding water licences and water allocations.

The Resources page contains links to external websites, intranet links,
and contact details.

Related links

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Assessing house and curtilage

Assessing a life interest in a home

Granny flat provisions

Retirement villages

Assessing and coding the Real estate details Mod R

Aged care means assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
