
Transfer to Age Pension (Blind) 065-04010000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how to transfer a customer already on Age Pension
or another payment to Age Pension (Blind). It covers eligibility and the
procedures required for the transfer.

Eligibility criteria

Customers currently receiving most social security payments can be
transferred to Age Pension (Blind) when they meet all of the
qualification criteria for Age Pension and the social security
definition of permanent blindness. See also, Qualification for Age
Pension (Blind).

When transfer provisions apply

Transfer to Age Pension (Blind) provisions apply to customers eligible
to transfer to Age Pension and meeting the social security definition of
permanent blindness.

This procedure also applies to customers currently receiving Age Pension
who wish to have their rate assessed under Age Pension (Blind)
provisions. The date of effect in such instances is the date the
customer requests this assessment, provided they are qualified on that
date and they submit verification of blindness within a reasonable time.

Manual investigation is required if the customer's entitlement will
change to a lesser rate or no additional payments are payable if they
transfer to Age Pension (Blind). For example, Age Pension (Blind)
customers are no longer exempt from sharers' measures for Rent
Assistance and no longer entitled to Pensioner Education Supplement
payments.

Currently receiving Age Pension

Customers receiving Age Pension and requesting to be assessed under the
Age Pension (Blind) provisions need to meet the social security
definition of permanent blindness. A claim or transfer form is not
needed.

Verification of blindness

Verification is required to determine if the customer can be assessed as
permanently blind, except for customers already in receipt of Disability
Support Pension (Blind).

The customer must provide a report from their treating ophthalmologist.

A Request for Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013) is preferred.
However, any report which provides the information requested by the
SA013 is acceptable.

An optometrist can complete the report but it must clearly state it is
supported by a report from the treating ophthalmologist and provides
details about this ophthalmologist report.

Transfer to Age Pension

Customers currently receiving most social security payments can be
transferred to Age Pension without a full claim form when they reach Age
Pension age by submitting a completed online Transfer to Age Pension up
to 91 days before they reach Age Pension age. [] Customers also have the
option of returning the completed transfer to Age Pension SA383 form.
Existing information on the customer’s record will be pre-populated in
the online or paper transfer. Partner details will be pre-populated if
available and the customer is a person permitted to enquire (PPE) on the
partner’s record.

A customer may also request to be transferred to Age Pension (Blind)
from another payment when they reach Age Pension age.

When a customer is an identified Indigenous customer they may be
automatically transferred to Age Pension without the need to complete an
online transfer or SA383.

Members of a couple

If the customer is partnered and both are on an income support payment
and turning Age Pension age, each needs to complete a separate Age
Pension transfer. If subscribed to online services or electronic
messaging they will receive an invitation to transfer 91 days before
turning Age Pension age. If unable or unwilling to use the online
transfer, Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) should be run on both records.
Alternatively they will both be issued with an SA383. See Transfer to
Age Pension. [] Both need to submit or return a completed online
transfer or SA383.

Not currently receiving an income support payment

Customers who do not have a Centrelink record and/or do not currently
receive an income support payment need to claim Age Pension to be
assessed for Age Pension (Blind). See Qualification for Age Pension
(Blind).

Identity confirmation

Customers who are transferring to Age Pension (Blind) do not need to
provide identity documents if they already have a confirmed identity
status and linkage. They may need to provide proof of age if not
previously supplied.

From 1 July 2010, Indigenous customers eligible for transfer to Age
Pension do not need to supply identity documentation or proof of age if
they are current on an income support payment. If the customer has
supplied full identity documentation on their previous payment, the
system will automatically update the customer’s Identity confirmation
requirements when the transfer to Age Pension (Blind) activity is
processed.

Other requirements

Customers transferring to Age Pension (Blind) are subject to comparable
foreign payment requirements if they were born overseas or lived
overseas.

Customers do not need to disclose their income and assets unless:

-   they wish to receive more than the basic pension and the Pension
    Supplement, i.e. Rent Assistance (RA)
-   they have a partner who is on or applying for an income support
    payment (other than a Blind Pension) or RA. Details of customer's
    income and assets are needed to determine their partner's
    eligibility. In such cases they will be required to complete the
    appropriate form

Work Bonus

Once an income support customer reaches Age Pension age, they are no
longer covered by the Working Credit initiatives but may be entitled to
the Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age if they
have employment income.

Letters

Customers in receipt of Age Pension (Blind) can choose to receive their
Centrelink letters in an alternative format.

The Resources page contains a link to the Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report form (SA013).

Contents

Age/Disability Support Pension on the basis of blindness: Request for
Opthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013)

Related links

Transfer to Age Pension

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

Foreign pensions

Commencement of Identity

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

https://ourblueprint.internal.dept.local/content/older-australians/065-04010000.gif

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
