
Processing claims for the Home Equity Access Scheme 065-19060355

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process loan applications under the Home
Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme). The claims are processed by Complex
Assessment Officers (CAO) in the Home Equity Access Scheme National
team.

Initial claim assessment

Before a Scheme application is processed, an assessment must be
conducted to determine if:

-   customer meets the basic eligibility criteria, and partner for
    combined claims
-   all required information has been provided
-   a valuation has been completed in the last 12 months for the real
    estate asset offered as security for the loan

To conduct the initial assessment see Assessing Home Equity Access
Scheme applications. Once the assessment has been completed, processing
can commence.

Processing the Scheme applications

Process Direct is used to review and process the Scheme application once
all required information is available.

Process Direct:

-   is used to check and record claim progress
-   contains information provided by the customer online or recorded
    using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   displays documents the customer has provided or been asked to
    provide
-   pre-populates customer and partner information into a Scheme
    application activity, if the claim was lodged online or via ACC
-   contains functionality to request information from the customer
    and/or partner via Request Documents
-   lists tasks that need to be completed by staff or the applicant/s
    before the application can be finalised

See Process Direct for general guidance on using Process Direct. See
Resources for information about the specific screens that require coding
in a Scheme application.

Note: a limited number of tasks need to be actioned outside of Process
Direct, including:

-   running Fast Notes
-   submitting requests for real estate valuations, and
-   uploading documents

These functions are conducted in Customer First but do not restrict the
application from being processed in Process Direct. The Scheme
applications should not be processed in legacy systems.

Pension claims

If a Scheme applicant has lodged a separate claim for a pension (for
example, Age Pension, Disability Support Pension or Carer Payment), the
pension claim must be processed first. The Scheme application is placed
on hold pending the outcome of the pension claim.

Streamline rejections should not be applied to pension claims if a
Scheme application has also been lodged. The pension claim must undergo
full assessment to enable the customer’s qualification to be determined
for the Scheme purposes.

Start date for the Scheme applications

Fortnightly loan payments

Fortnightly loan payments can commence once the application has been
assessed and it has been confirmed the applicant is qualified. The loan
starts being paid from the first fortnight after the application is
granted, unless a customer requests otherwise. For example, the customer
may request a future start date or for the loan start date to be
backdated.

The earliest date to which a loan can be backdated is the date the
application was submitted. If the person was not qualified on the date
of lodgement (for example, they were not qualified for a Scheme
qualifying payment on that date), the Scheme application is rejected.

Advance payments

The grant date for an advance payment issued through a claim:

-   is the day the claim is finalised, or
-   is an earlier day in the same entitlement period where the person’s
    daily rate is the same

The advance payment grant date cannot be:

-   earlier than the claim lodgement date, or
-   the Entitlement Period Start Date (EPSD) for the entitlement period
    in which the claim is finalised

The advance period starts on the advance grant date and continues for 26
fortnights (364 days). The customer is no longer in an advance
preclusion period on day 365.

See Advance Payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans for more
details.

Loan interview

A loan interview must occur for every Scheme loan applicant before the
loan commences. Unless medically unable, the applicant and partner, if
any, must attend the interview. The purpose of this interview is to
describe the loan available to the customer once their eligibility and
rates have been assessed and seek their agreement to proceed. The
interview includes providing a loan projection to the customer and gives
the opportunity for them to reconsider whether the loan is appropriate
to their circumstances before incurring any costs. If the applicant is
unable to attend the interview, consideration should be given to their
capacity to understand the loan conditions and the relationships of any
appointed nominees or legal representatives.

The partner is included in the interview to ensure they are aware of
their role in repaying the loan in the case they survive the applicant.

The Resources page contains:

-   Level 2 Policy Helpdesk - About Us link
-   mySupport link
-   the legal tasking template to register a caveat or charge, and
-   details about screens and coding for the Scheme applications
-   details about the pre-grant interview

Related links

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Home Equity Access Scheme reviews

Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
