
Qualification for Age Pension 065-03040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the qualification criteria for Age Pension.

On this Page:

Qualification

A customer qualifies for Age Pension if they have reached Age Pension
age and they satisfy the residence requirements for Age Pension.

The qualifying age for a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Service
Pension is earlier than the qualifying age for Age Pension. For issues
relating to customers in receipt of a DVA payment, the Resources page
for links to DVA fact sheets.

Residence

Customers who do not satisfy the residence qualification for Age Pension
should be advised of the likely date they will meet the residence
requirements so they can contact the Services Australia at this time.
Consideration should be given to offering the customer an alternative
income support payment where eligible.

Customers who are over Age Pension age and receiving an alternative
income support payment because they do not satisfy Age Pension residence
requirements should have a manual review recorded for 9 or 13 weeks
before the date expected to meet the requirements. The customer can go
online and complete the transfer to Age Pension. If the customer is
unable to complete the online transfer to Age Pension staff will be
required to run Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

[] Note: for customers to complete a Transfer to Age Pension online
claim they need to be registered with an online account.

Identity Confirmation requirements

Customers claiming Age Pension are required to satisfy the identity
requirements for that payment. If a customer does not have a 'Confirmed'
Identity Confirmation Indicator (ICI), they will be required to provide
documents that establish commencement of identity and use of identity in
the community. The link between the identity and the individual will
then be established via an approved photographic identity document.

If a customer has an existing ICI of 'Confirmed', they should not be
asked to provide further identity documents. Identity Confirmation
should not be confused with Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO). Customers
will still need to answer PoRO questions that confirm they are the
person identified in the record.

For a full list of approved identity documents, see Identity documents A
to Z.

The Resources page contains a link to Age Pension eligibility basics on
the Services Australia website and links to the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) fact sheets.

Contents

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Related links

Claiming Age Pension

Early claims

Transfer to Age Pension

Assessing Age Pension claims

Australian residence requirements for payment

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Coding identity documents

Identity Confirmation

Payment rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
