
Residential Care program 065-13020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the information and processes for the Aged Care
Residential Care program.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Residential aged care subsidy and supplement

The Australian Government pays eligible aged care services an amount of
residential aged care subsidy for residential care recipients. The
Australian Government also pays residential aged care supplements to
help with the cost of meeting specific care needs and accommodation
costs, if care recipients cannot afford them.

The subsidy and supplement are paid monthly and is calculated by adding
the amount due for each care recipient for each day of the month.
Residential aged care services submit a claim each month, including
details of each care recipient for whom they are claiming the subsidy
and supplement for in that month.

Aged care services can be paid the residential aged care subsidy and
supplement in the following circumstances:

-   only approved services are eligible for the subsidy and supplement
-   on any day, for the number of places allocated to the residential
    aged care service
-   if another person is operating the aged care service, for example
    under a contract or lease arrangement, the approved aged care
    service retains the subsidy
-   for a care recipient’s first day of care

The residential monthly claim form (can be online or paper) is how the
aged care services:

-   claim the subsidy and supplement, and
-   advises of new and changed details for their care recipients within
    a claim period

These details include:

-   new entry
-   departure
-   leave
-   oxygen and enteral feeding
-   extra service room

The Resources page contains external links to the Department of Health
and Aged Care’s website with details on residential care subsidy, and
supplements.

Department of Health and Aged Care schedules

The Department of Health and Aged Care maintains:

-   the Schedule of Fees and Charges for Residential and Home Care, and
-   the Schedule of Subsidies and Supplements for Aged Care

The Department of Health and Aged Care publishes schedules for the
current and previous calendar years on their website. Historical
versions are available on the National Library Web Archive.

Subsidy and care-related supplement rates and thresholds are indexed on
1 July each year.

Indexation for accommodation related supplements and some home and
residential aged care fees are indexed on 20 March and 20 September each
year.

The Resources page contains a link to the Schedule of Subsidies and
Supplements for Aged Care.

Funding changes for extra service in residential aged care

There is scope for care recipients to purchase extra services, which are
hotel-type services. For example, better accommodation, food and
services.

Since 1 July 2014, residential aged care services can apply for extra
service status for 1 or more rooms in the service.

The Resources page contains questions and answers about the funding
changes for extra service. These help Service Officers respond to calls
from services regarding residential care approvals.

Removal of high/low categories from residential aged care approvals

Previously there was a distinction between high and low residential aged
care approvals. All residential approvals, including those for existing
care recipients are now known as 'residential care approvals'. This
change was introduced to improve the availability and quality of care
for aged care recipients.

The Resources page contains questions and answers about the removal of
high/low categories from residential aged care approvals.

Resident Classification Scale form

A Resident Classification Scale (RCS) determines the level of eligible
subsidy entitlement that an approved aged care service gets for a care
recipient in permanent residential care.

This still applies to pre 1 July 2014 care recipients.

Care recipient's concessional status

A care recipient with a concessional resident status is referred to
having a ‘pre 2008’ assessment scheme when they:

-   first entered permanent residential care on or after 1 October 1997
    but before 20 March 2008 (including pre-entry leave); and
-   have not subsequently departed from care for a continuous period of
    28 days or more

Concessional status applies to care recipients who:

-   were in receipt of an Australian income support payment, and
-   was considered not to have owned a home in the past 2 years under
    the Aged Care (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997, and
-   had net assessable assets equal or less than the minimal asset
    amount

Service Officers can view a care recipient’s concessional resident
status via the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

Update care recipient subsidy details

Adjusted subsidy reduction is applicable to care recipients who occupy
an adjusted subsidy residential care service place (S bed). Only
state/territory government operated services are subject to this
reduction.

To vary the classification of a residential care place, an approved
residential care service must apply in writing to Department of Health
and Aged Care using the approved application form available on the
Department of Health and Aged Care website.

Any aged care places affected by the adjusted subsidy reduction that are
transferred to non-government sector will need to have the reduction
removed effective from the date of transfer.

The Resources page contains:

a table with questions and responses for Service Officers on:

-   funding changes for extra service in residential care, and
-   the removal of high/low categories from residential aged care
    approvals

relevant links to the Department of Health and Aged Care

a link to the Aged care external, and internal contact details

Contents

Respite residential care

Non-claimable leave for permanent residential aged care recipients

Aged care COVID-19 support supplement for residential aged care services

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Aged care residential care support supplement

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Service in Context

Non-claimable leave for permanent residential aged care recipients

Respite residential care

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
