-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to restore a customer's Age Pension when
qualification has been re-established after cancellation or suspension
of payment.

Re-establishing qualification or payability

Restoration of Age Pension may be possible when a customer's
qualification or payability for payment has been re-established after
the payment has been cancelled or suspended. Unless the customer is in
an extended employment suspension period, and Age Pension qualification
and payability must have continued since the date of
suspension/cancellation. When restoring payments it is important to
establish continuing qualification for payment. If there have been any
changes in the customer's circumstances, these must be recorded before
restoring payment to avoid incorrect arrears being generated.

Extended employment suspension period

If an Age Pension customer loses payability because they have employment
income which precludes them from payment, the customer will initially
enter an employment income nil rate period. From 1 January 2023, if the
customer’s Australian employment income still precludes them from
payment at the end of the employment income nil rate period, their
payment will be suspended and can remain suspended for 2 years from the
first day their rate of payment reduced to zero. This includes where the
customer’s employment income nil rate period commenced before 1 January
2023. If they have a partner who receives Age Pension, Disability
Support Pension or Carer Payment, their partner’s payment will also be
automatically suspended for 2 years. These records will have a benefit
status of SUS-ESP or SUS-EPP. An Age Pension customer may also become
suspended with reason EPP if their partner receives DSP or an eligible
DVA payment, and their partner enters an extended employment suspension
period.

Eligible DVA payments are DVA Age Pension, Invalidity Service Pension,
Income Support Supplement and Veteran Payment.

If the customer and their partner (if applicable) becomes payable again
within the 2 year suspension period, they can request to have their
payment restored instead of completing a new claim. If the customer
requests a restoration but is still not payable for any reason (for
example, income or assets over the limit) they are still eligible to
remain suspended for the remainder of the 2 year period. Both the
customer and the partner (if applicable) must individually request a
restoration, unless one member of the couple has the appropriate
authority to request a restoration on behalf of the other member of the
couple.

If a customer (and their partner if applicable) have not had their
payment restored before the end of the 2 year suspension period, their
payment will automatically cancel with reason ESP or EPP. If they want
to receive payment again, a new claim is required.

Customers released from prison

Before restoring payment for a customer released from prison, the
Service Officer must first confirm the date of release with the
appropriate state authority. Contacts for confirming release are
included in the Resources tab of Confirming prison admission and release
dates.

Cancellation or suspension reason Whereabouts Unknown (WUK)

As long as the customer has continued to be qualified and payable during
the entire period of suspension/cancellation (or eligible for an
employment income nil rate), their payment may be restored with full
arrears.

This can occur when the customer contacts more than 13 weeks after the
suspension/ cancellation decision. The customer would not have received
advice of the decision to suspend or cancel, if they were not at their
known address and/or advice of the decision was returned to Services
Australia.

Some Age Pension customers admitted to residential aged care are unable
to advise their change of address. Customers living in residential aged
care will have a current RCA benefit status. The name of the aged care
home will display on the RCA Institution Summary (RIS) screen. Take care
to check these details when reviewing suspended WUK cases.

Restoring payment

The date of effect is usually the date of the original suspend/cancel
decision when a customer has a favourable determination (restoration)
resulting from a review of the decision. This includes when payment
cancels after it has been suspended for 13 weeks, because the
cancellation date of effect is the same as the suspension date of
effect. Customers who have entered an extended employment income
suspension period may have their payment restored from a later date. See
the References page.

If the customer contacts within 13 weeks of the decision to suspend or
cancel, and they are not in an extended employment suspension period,
check their circumstances to determine if full arrears are payable.
Payment can be restored from the date of effect of suspension or
cancellation if they:

-   retained qualification from the date of effect of the decision, and
-   they were payable or eligible for an employment income nil rate
    period

If they contact more than 13 weeks after the later of the decision to
suspend or cancel, check if it is possible they may not have received
advice of the decision to suspend/cancel. If so, payment can be restored
from the date of effect of the suspension or cancellation, providing the
customer retained qualification and they were payable or eligible for an
employment income nil rate period.

If the customer's payment was cancelled incorrectly, it can be restored
when the error has been corrected. For example, CAN-NSR due to
incomplete or wrongly recorded residence details.

A customer is required to reclaim if their payment cannot be restored.
For the reclaim process, see Initial contact to claim Age Pension.

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Age Pension

Cancellation of Age Pension

Suspension of Age Pension

Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes

Customer initiated review of decision

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Extended suspension periods for pension payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
