
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines permanent residential care – corrections to
resident status associated manual calculations and letters.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 11 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Correction to care recipient’s resident status

The care recipient’s resident status (for example, low means or not low
means) determines the fee structure including accommodation costs. It is
set based on the care recipient’s circumstances on the date they enter
permanent care. See Aged care means assessment.

Once the resident status is determined and fees set in the Aged Care
Staff Portal (ACSP), initial fee letters are issued. Initial fee letter
advise the care recipient of their aged care fees which include
accommodation payment arrangements.

See Aged care letter codes and descriptions for details of letters sent.

Fee arrangements by resident status

Pre 1 July 2014 Resident Statuses

Concessional or Fully Supported

-   Basic daily care fee (BDF)

Assisted or Partially Supported

-   Basic daily care fee (BDF)
-   Accommodation Bond or Daily Accommodation Charge – depending on
    level of care or extra service status
-   Income tested care fee (ITF or ITCF) – depending on income

Neither Concessional or Assisted or Not Supported

-   Basic daily care fee (BDF)
-   Accommodation Bond or Daily Accommodation Charge – depending on
    level of care or extra service status
-   Income tested care fee (ITF or ITCF) – depending on income

Post 1 July 2014

Low means status

-   Basic daily care fee (BDF)
-   Accommodation contribution (MTC or AC), and
-   Means tested care fee (MTCF or MTF) for care recipients with
    increase in means over the thresholds

Not low means status

-   Basic daily care fee (BDF)
-   Accommodation payments, and
-   Means tested care fee (MTCF or MTF) – depending on means (income and
    assets)

Correction to care recipient’s resident status – post 1 July 2014 assessment scheme

If a reassessment of income and/or assets from the date of entry into
permanent care, changes the care recipient’s resident status, the Aged
Care Payment Systems:

adjusts the fees for the care recipient

-   either from an ad hoc review or at the next quarterly review (QR)

calculates any refunds due at the next QR

adjusts subsidies and supplements paid to the provider in their monthly
claim. This is from the month the resident status correction updates in
the Aged Care Payment Systems

-   for example where a resident status correction occurs 15 May, the
    subsidy and supplement adjustment will occur from 1 May. This is
    when the May claim is lodged from 1 June onwards

does not automatically send new initial fee letters

Resident status change from low means to not low means

When the resident status changes to not low means due to reassessment of
income and/or assets, the care recipient is not entitled to any
assistance with their accommodation costs. The service provider is not
eligible to receive an accommodation supplement payment for that care
recipient.

If the change in resident status is identified:

at QR:

-   a new initial fee letter is manually sent to advise the care
    recipient and provider of the corrected resident status
-   the care recipient is liable to negotiate their own accommodation
    costs

outside of QR:

-   a request for a manual letter is escalated to QR skill tagged staff
    for completion
-   a Means tested care fee (MTCF) is not backdated
-   see the Resources page for a link to the Operations team –
    escalation form to send a request for a manual letter

Resident status change from not low means to low means

When the resident status changes to low means due to reassessment of
income and/or assets, the care recipient may be eligible to receive
assistance with their accommodation costs from their date of entry.

If the change in resident status is identified:

at QR, a new initial fee letter is manually sent to advise the care
recipient and providers of the corrected resident status. The care
recipient is:

-   eligible for assistance with their accommodation costs, and/or
-   required to pay an accommodation contribution from date of entry
    which will be manually calculated

outside of QR:

-   any accommodation contribution will be backdated to the date of
    entry into care
-   a manual calculation will need to be completed to determine any
    liability

Correction to care recipient’s resident status – pre 1 July 2014 assessment schemes

If a new or reassessment of assets (effective on the date of entry into
permanent care), changes the care recipient’s resident status, the Aged
Care Payment Systems:

-   requires a manual update of the changed assessed assets amount
-   adjusts any accommodation charge for a care recipient
-   adjusts subsidies and supplements paid to the provider in their
    monthly claim from the month the change updates in the Aged Care
    Payment Systems. For example, where a resident status correction
    occurs on 15 May, the subsidy and supplement adjustment will occur
    from 1 May. This is when the May claims is lodged from 1 June
    onwards
-   may automatically send a letter advising of daily accommodation
    charge changes

See also, Aged Care means assessment - Residential Care pre 1 July
2014 - assets assessment.

The Resources page contains examples of corrections to resident status,
links to the ACPB escalation form, Aged Care fee calculator, task cards,
letter codes and relevant websites.

Related links

Aged Care

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Rent Assistance (RA) and change of address to and from aged care

Aged care means assessment

Aged care reviews – quarterly reviews

Aged care reviews - manual adjustments for care recipients – overview

Aged care letters

Aged Care means assessment - Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 - assets
assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
