
Aged care request for a nominee 065-13060060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Some older Australians may be at risk of abuse. For information on how
to identify abuse of older Australians and the referral options
available, go to Abuse of older Australians. If the customer is with
another person or on speaker phone, continue the current business
conversation as usual.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speakerphone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how Service Officers check and process an aged
care request for a nominee. It applies to appointing nominees for
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) care recipients or aged care
recipient not in receipt of a Centrelink income support payment.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Changes from 5 December 2020

Centrelink and aged care nominee arrangements changed on 05/12/2020.

-   The AC019 form, formerly known as Aged Care Appointment of a Nominee
    was renamed Aged Care Request for a nominee for Department of
    Veterans' Affairs customers
-   Where nominees for Centrelink and aged care were the same, the
    Centrelink nominee became the aged care nominee from 5 December 2020
-   Where nominees were different, the Centrelink nominee became the
    aged care nominee on 2 March 2021. Note: mail outs to
    customers/nominees occurred between 2 March 2021 and 12 March 2021
-   A nominee is considered grandfathered when only listed in ACMPS and
    not listed in Customer First

There are separate processes and forms to appoint:

-   a Centrelink correspondence nominee (including aged care), or
-   an aged care only nominee (grandfathered or DVA)

Care recipients and nominees were sent letters about the changes from 11
November 2020.

Aged care nominee, power of attorney or guardian

An aged care nominee is a person appointed to deal with Services
Australia about aged care on behalf of a care recipient. A nominee can
act on behalf of more than 1 care recipient.

If the nominee is located in:

-   ACMPS only (no nominee links recorded in Customer First) this file
    is applicable
-   Customer First - Centrelink nominee rules apply. See Appointing
    nominees

Aged care nominees are appointed under legislation:

-   Aged Care Act 1997
-   Aged Care (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997

The legislation does not provide specific information about nominees or
nominee obligations.

An aged care nominee can:

-   get information from Services Australia about the care recipient's
    aged care means assessments and costs
-   give income and asset information to Services Australia or DVA
-   get aged care letters

If an aged care nominee was coded before 5 December 2020 and is a court
appointed nominee or power of attorney (POA), aged care letters are sent
to the aged care nominee and service provider (not care recipient).

From 5 December 2020 aged care letters are sent to the care recipient
and nominee:

except when the below arrangement reason codes are recorded in ACMPS

-   Power of Attorney: Involuntary. Care recipient is not able to manage
    their own affairs and a POA has been appointed by a court or
    guardianship board. May also be an Enduring Power of Attorney (EPOA)
    lodged with medical evidence
-   Court Appointed: Involuntary. Nominee has been appointed by order of
    a Court, Guardianship Board or Administrative Tribunal to administer
    the care recipient's affairs.
-   Security Notice Issue: Centrelink only. This is coded when the
    Attorney General's office issues a security notice for a carer, and

the nominee has requested letters not be sent to the care recipient (for
example, requested the suppression of letters). See Resources page for
Reasons for Nominee Arrangement

Note: for DVA care recipients a DVA arrangement reason code is
available.

-   DVA code only (care recipient and nominee will receive letters)
-   DVA code and the suppress advice indicator is ticked (only the
    nominee will receive letters)

Power of attorney (POA)

A POA is a legal document

-   An individual (known as the principal), appoints a person or
    organisation to manage their assets and financial affairs by choice.
    For example, because of illness, an accident or absence

The principal can appoint more than 1 person in the POA document and
state if the POA can act:

-   together (jointly)
-   individually (jointly and separately), or
-   as a majority (for example, 2 out of 3 POA)

Guardianship or administration order

A court or tribunal can make orders to appoint a legal guardian or
administrator to manage all or some of a person's affairs. This includes
making decisions about:

-   accommodation
-   health care
-   access to services
-   finances

The legal guardian or administrator may be:

-   an individual
-   two or more people appointed together or separately
-   a legal entity such as a public trustee

POA types

POA types applicable for aged care means assessments and enquiries are:

General

-   A general POA is voluntary and becomes invalid if a person becomes
    unable to make decisions

Enduring

-   Allows a POA to make financial, medical or personal decisions even
    if the person becomes unable to make decisions (dependant on the
    terms in the POA)

Guardianship or administrative orders/court orders

POA, guardianship or administrative conditions

A POA, guardianship or administrative order document details the
conditions of the arrangement.

Some documents can be for a limited, specified period and/or subject
matter and may not cover obtaining Services Australia information.

Common conditions may include:

-   Appointment of more than 1 person. Required to act jointly (all
    together)
-   Medical evidence is needed to activate the POA. See POA and medical
    evidence - extra information on the Resources page for more
    information
-   Authority that starts after a specified time or event occurs (for
    example, illness or injury. Also when the main POA is no longer able
    to act, a secondary POA may be listed in the document)

Services Australia must receive a copy of the full POA document with
any:

-   evidence needed to prove the POA is valid, and
-   additional obligations/terms outlined in the document to ensure they
    are met

All documents are photocopied and stored on the customer's record.

Appointing an aged care nominee

A care recipient can only have 1 aged care nominee at any time.

The aged care nominee can:

get information (verbal/written) from Services Australia relating to the
aged care services the care recipient receives

-   For example, the care recipient's aged care means assessment letters

give information to Services Australia about the care recipient's income
and assets

Care recipients who retain decision-making capacity are able to choose a
nominee (individual or third party including an organisation).

Centrelink correspondence nominees and aged care

From 5 December 2020, if the care recipient has a Centrelink
correspondence nominee, that nominee automatically becomes the aged care
nominee. Note: the care recipient cannot elect to have a different aged
care nominee.

Care recipient has a POA in place

The power of attorney (POA) is able to nominate themselves as the aged
care nominee

The POA has the authority to appoint a professional service organisation
as an aged care nominee when:

-   the POA is acting within the scope of their authority, and
-   there are no conditions in the POA document that prevents the
    engagement of professional services

The POA can nominate the following professional services as an aged care
nominee:

-   retirement or financial advisors
-   lawyers
-   accountants and tax agents

The professional service must be a registered member of a professional
body or organisation, unless they are a state, territory or commonwealth
government agency

Care recipient has no POA in place

Services Australia may accept a nominee arrangement (organisation or
individual) if:

-   medical evidence is given, and
-   the Aged Care Request for a nominee for Department of Veterans'
    Affairs customers form (AC019) is signed by the appropriate third
    party

Death

The legal authority of the nominee arrangement and POA stop at the care
recipient's time of death. The nominee or POA do not automatically
become the executor or administrator.

If a care recipient is deceased, only disclose the care recipient's
information to:

-   the executor as named in the will
-   a Public Trustee
-   a court
-   the administrator of the estate
-   state and territory government departments assessing burial/funeral
    assistance

Partners as nominee

Partners of care recipients can appoint themselves as the nominee with
additional documentation where:

-   the care recipient is mentally impaired, and
-   is unable to complete the Aged Care Request for a nominee for
    Department of Veterans' Affairs customers form (AC019)

Lodging a nominee request

Nominee requests for DVA care recipients are done by completing the Aged
Care Request for a nominee for Department of Veterans' Affairs customers
form (AC019).

All other new nominee requests are done by completing the Authorising a
person or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf form (SS313).
See Appointing nominees.

Aged Care - Calculation of your cost of care forms also include the
Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf
(SS313) form. Note: use this file to process old AC019's (AC019-1407 or
lower), including those in Aged Care - Calculation of your cost of care
forms.

Evidence needed to appoint an aged care nominee

Care recipient has decision-making capacity:

Signatures:

-   care recipient, and
-   appointed nominee

Power of attorney (POA) appointed and the POA is effective upon signing
without the requirement for an incapacity

Note: the care recipient does not need to sign the form if there is a
valid POA in place.

Care recipient no longer has decision-making capacity:

Evidence the care recipient no longer has decision-making capacity. For
example, a medical certificate:

-   A medical letter is only needed if specified in the POA document, or
-   If there is no authorising document

Authority documents for the nominee

-   For example, the POA or court order

All signatures

-   For example, all POA signatures where POA appointed jointly

Any documents specified in the POA

-   For example, certificate of medical incapacity

If an appointed POA is unable to act and a substitute POA is acting for
the care recipient, documents are needed as evidence of the POA's
resignation or incapacity to act

Note: an aged care nominee cannot appoint another person as an aged care
nominee.

See the Resources page for more information on POAs and medical
evidence.

Aged care nominee processing

Aged care nominee information is recorded in ACMPS.

A nominee has an individual record in ACMPS that is linked to the care
recipient's record

Recording the aged care nominee in both systems assists Service Officers
to give information to the aged care nominee. For example, the aged care
nominee requests information about the care recipient's home care
package but the care recipient is now in residential care.

An aged care nominee Fast Note in Customer First assists non-aged care
skill tagged Service Officers with enquiries from aged care nominees.

New aged care nominee requests for DVA care recipients or grandfathered
aged care nominees replace any existing nominee arrangements, except
where the existing nominee is an involuntary arrangement appointed
through a tribunal or court, for example, a State Trustee.

Ending a nominee arrangement

When a Centrelink nominee arrangement is ended for a current aged care
customer (RCA/CUR) in Customer First, a message is sent to ACMPS to
automatically end the nominee arrangement immediately

When an aged care benefit status is cancelled (RCA/CAN) in Customer
First, a message is sent to ACMPS to automatically end the nominee
arrangement:

-   40 days after discharge, ensuring the nominee receives the discharge
    review letters
-   The exception is when an Executor message is also sent to ACMPS and
    the nominee arrangement is ended immediately

My Aged Care Representative (Nominee)

A customer may have a ‘nominee’ recorded at Services Australia. This
does not mean they are also a representative for that same person at My
Aged Care. My Aged Care use the term ‘representatives’. A customer can
register someone as their representative to speak and act on their
behalf to My Aged Care about their aged care services and needs.

Service Officers can help potential representatives use the self-service
options on the My Aged Care website.

Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSOs) have the authority to set up
potential representatives for My Aged Care. An appointment may be booked
with an ACSO to have a representative role created if one is available
in the customer’s area. Alternatively the customer can be warm
transferred to My Aged Care.

The Resources page contains:

-   Reasons for Nominee Arrangements
-   Organisation nominee ID list
-   Naming conventions
-   POA medical evidence information
-   Links to Aged care forms and letter templates
-   External websites and contact details

Related links

Accepting and disclosing information

Aged care forms for service providers

Aged care letters - creating manual letters

Aged care means assessment

Appointing nominees

Authorised representatives and nominees

Disclosing information to third parties

Nominees

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised
Representative for Medicare

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning call or leaving
messages on answering machines

Requests for information after someone has died

Searching for a customer on the system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
