-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the HEAS to help Service Officers answer
enquiries from customers, and escalate questions that are more complex.

Government intent

Customers and self-funded retirees who are Age Pension age (or partnered
to a person who is) can access equity in their Australian real estate
asset(s) under the HEAS to supplement their retirement income.

What is the HEAS

The HEAS is a voluntary arrangement that provides financial support to
customers in the form of a non-taxable, government funded loan.

The loan:

-   accrues compound interest each fortnight, currently 3.95% per annum,
    until repaid in full
-   is secured against Australian real estate owned by the customer
    and/or partner

Customers:

can repay the loan electronically in full or in part at any time (even
though there are no mandatory repayments) via:

-   their Centrelink online account
-   BPAY®, or
-   Post Billpay

must settle the loan:

-   at the sale of the secured property, or
-   through the deceased customer’s estate

The HEAS loans are paid as an advance lump sum, fortnightly payments or
a combination of both for a short or indefinite period until their loan
balance reaches their maximum loan amount (MLA).

The MLA is based on the age of the customer and partner (if applicable)
and how much equity there is to offer as security.

Customers should seek independent legal or financial advice before
applying for a loan under the HEAS.

Background

The original Scheme was set up in 1985 when the assets test was
introduced.

On 10 July 1996, a new scheme commenced and new applications were no
longer accepted under the old provisions.

On 1 July 2019, the current scheme expanded:

-   to increase the maximum fortnightly loan rate, and
-   the eligibility criteria to allow more people to participate

Before 1 July 2019, to be eligible the customer’s qualifying payment
rate had to be a reduced rate because of their income or assets. Nil
rate customers could apply as long as their pension rate was reduced to
nil by only one (not both) of the income or assets tests. These
requirements were removed from 1 July 2019, enabling maximum rate
pensioners to participate in the scheme, and people who are not eligible
for a pension under both the income test and assets test.

On 1 January 2022, the Scheme was renamed the HEAS.

On 1 July 2022, the Scheme introduced access to lump sum advances and a
No Negative Equity Guarantee.

Service Officer role for the HEAS

The role of Service Officers (frontline and telephony) is to:

answer basic questions about the HEAS using Operational Blueprint

provide information such as the HEAS eligibility

support customers to claim or make changes to their HEAS payments using
digital channels

refer an authenticated HEAS customer to the Home Equity Access Scheme
Summary screen in the Centrelink online account for their loan details

refer customers to the:

-   Home Equity Access Scheme - Services Australia website
-   Payment and Service Finder - Services Australia online tool to see
    if they may be eligible. The Online calculator estimates how much
    customers can borrow

give customers without access to online services their loan balance
and/or issue an itemised statement, if required.
Note: the Resources page contains details about this process, see Table
3 item 14

accept and help customers to lodge the HEAS claims Home Equity Access
Scheme partnered application form (SA310), or Home Equity Access Scheme
single application form (SA496). Scan details to the customer and
partners (if applicable) record to be sent to the Home Equity Access
Scheme National team

print, accept and help customers to complete a Home Equity Access Scheme
variation form (SA497)

if customers want to make changes to their existing loan arrangements or
apply for an Advance, help customers complete a SA497 form

tell customer their appeal rights

for more complex questions:

-   refer the customer to the Financial Information Service (FIS), or
-   escalate to the Home Equity Access Scheme National team (see
    Escalating enquiries to Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) below)

The Resources page contains:

-   Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) and answers for Service Officers
-   links to forms, and
-   Process Direct screens

Changes to the HEAS loan payments

Customers can request variations to their loan.

Customers can use their Centrelink online account to:

Make repayments via:

-   BPAY®
-   Post Billpay, or
-   credit card

Stop fortnightly payments

Change fortnightly payments

Start fortnightly payments

Request an advance

See transactions on their loan, and request an itemised loan statement

Customers can use the Home Equity Access Scheme variation form (SA497)
to request the following:

-   Settle the loan
-   Request an advance payment
-   Stop fortnightly loan payments
-   Start fortnightly payments
-   Add property or change the property the loan is secured against
-   Change fortnightly payments
-   Change or add a maximum loan amount
-   Change or add a nominated amount

Customer requests to start fortnightly loan payments

Customer can:

start their fortnightly loan payment at any time

make a request:

-   online, see Consent required for online requests for more details,
    or
-   in writing by completing a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form
    (SA497)

Customer requests to stop fortnightly loan payments

Customers can stop their loan payments at any time

Requests can be made:

-   online. See Consent required for online requests for more details,
    or
-   in writing by completing a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form
    (SA497).The SA497 must be signed by the customer, and their partner
    (if they are a member of a couple)

Interest continues to accrue on the outstanding loan amount, compounding
fortnightly until fully recovered

Customers wanting to make large repayments on their loan balance may
affect the No Negative Equity Guarantee. See No Negative Equity
Guarantee for more details

Customer requests to change fortnightly loan payments

A customer can change their fortnightly loan payment at any time

The request can be done:

-   online. See Consent required for online requests for more details,
    or
-   in writing by completing a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form
    (SA497). The SA497 must be signed by the customer and their partner
    (if they are a member of a couple)

The Resources page contains a link to the SA497 form.

Processing timeframes and enquiries to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)

Do not escalate general enquires about claim timeliness or the progress
of a claim.

If a customer asks about their HEAS claim, confirm a claim has been
lodged and advise it will be allocated for processing in due course.

Priority Processing or Hardship provisions do not apply to HEAS claims.

Enquiry types that may be escalated include:

-   making a repayment or settling a HEAS loan
-   when instructed by Operational Blueprint

To escalate an enquiry to a CAO, see Home Equity Access Scheme.

HEAS eligibility and applications

See:

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme

HEAS - only customers

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan including:

-   required documentation, and
-   Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) claims

Impact of the HEAS on other income support payments

The loan amount a customer owes under the HEAS can be deducted from the
value of the customer's assessable real estate for social security
payments or benefits.

As the amount owing increases with each payment made under the HEAS:

-   the value of the customer's assessable assets may decrease
    (depending on whether the value of the asset is appreciating)
-   their pension payable under the assets test may increase, and
-   this may lead to the customer’s fortnightly loan amount reducing

No reduction in the overall value of assessable assets occurs where the
person's principal home is the security for the loan as this is an
exempt or non-assessable asset. The only exception is when the principal
home is partly assessable because the house and curtilage exceeds 2
hectares and does not meet the extended land use test.

HEAS only customers

The HEAS is also open to self-funded retirees so long as they qualify
for (but not necessarily receive) one of the qualifying pensions.

This may be because they:

-   are not eligible to receive a pension under the income and assets
    test, or
-   have chosen not to claim a pension

Note: Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers may be eligible to
receive Home Equity Access Scheme (Loan Only). This would apply where
the customer would not otherwise receive the Age Pension because of
their income and/or assets.

Customers who receive their entire payment as a HEAS loan without any
qualifying payment components are ‘the loan-only’ customers. These
customers do not meet the definition of an income support payment (ISP)
recipient, as they do not receive a payable rate of a social security
pension or benefit.

Service Officers can identify a loan-only customer if the HEAS
qualifying payment is Current Zero Rate (CZR) because of nil rate reason
PLS.

The loan-only customers are not entitled to a Pensioner Concession Card
(PCC). However some customers may have a grandfathered entitlement to a
non-pensioner PCC (see Pensioner Concession Cards (PCC) for details).
Customers who wish to test their eligibility for a concession card can
lodge an online claim for the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

Customers that get their income support payment entirely as a loan
payment under the HEAS, can only be transferred to Age Pension.

Before transferring a HEAS only customer to Age Pension, Age Processing
must contact the Home Equity Access Scheme National team to determine if
the transfer is appropriate.

See Step 12 in the Manual reviews table for more details.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) HEAS

-   The HEAS is voluntary for older Australians, including DVA customers
-   See Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loan for more
    details

Payment method

The HEAS loan payments are paid as a rate component of the qualifying
pension

Loan payments display on the Payment Details (PD) screen as:

-   LON for fortnightly payments, and
-   LONA for advance payments

For the loan-only customers, this is the only component that displays

The loan information displays on the Home Equity Access Scheme Summary
screen in the customer’s Centrelink online account

Rate payable

The maximum HEAS rate payable per fortnight is 150% of the maximum
payment rate of the qualifying payment (1.5 times the maximum payment
rate of the qualifying payment)

The maximum payment rate is the sum of the maximum basic rate of
pension, and any supplements (for example, Pension Supplement and Energy
Supplement) and Rent Assistance a person is eligible for

Customers can get:

-   fortnightly payments
-   lump sum advances, or
-   a combination of both

The maximum fortnightly amount available reduces if the customer has
received an advance payment in the last 26 fortnights

Customers can choose the amount of fortnightly payment that they would
like to get

They can choose to get:

-   the maximum amount available (loan type ‘maximum’), being 150% (1.5
    times) the maximum payment rate
-   a percentage that is lower than 150% (loan type ‘percent’). For
    example, 120% p/f (maximum payment rate x 1.2) or 80% (maximum
    payment rate x 0.8), or
-   a fixed flat rate (loan type ‘fixed’) for example, $500 p/f

If a customer gets a pension:

the loan is added to the pension each fortnight

the combined amount of pension and loan can’t exceed 150% of the maximum
payment rate

the loan amount will automatically increase or decrease:

-   if their pension rate changes in order to maintain their chosen
    percentage for that fortnight (which may be 150% or a lower percent)

if a customer does not want their loan amount to increase over a certain
amount:

-   they can choose to receive a fixed loan amount each fortnight

the combined fixed rate of loan and actual pension rate can’t exceed
150% of the maximum rate of pension

If the customer or their partner received a Department of Veterans'
Affairs disability payment before 1 January 2022, their maximum payment
rate for the HEAS purposes would have been affected by any Defence Force
Income Support Allowance (DFISA) they received. The maximum HEAS rate
was reduced by the amount of DFISA received. This was to ensure that a
person could not receive more in income support payments than the
maximum payment rate.

The Resources page has examples of rates payable.

Advance payments

-   Customers can apply under the HEAS to get advance payments of a loan
    secured against their Australian real estate
-   The most customers can advance in a 26 fortnight period is 50% of
    their annual maximum pension rate. There is a limit of 2 advance
    payments in a 26 fortnight period
-   The HEAS also provides the option for customer to get fortnightly
    loan payments, however customers do not need to get fortnightly
    payments to apply for an advance payment
-   Advance payments of the loan may reduce the maximum fortnightly loan
    amount available to the customer for 26 fortnights (364 days from
    the date the advance is granted)
-   Advance payments of the loan are added to the customer’s loan
    balance, and must be repaid to the Commonwealth. Interest is
    calculated on the loan balance, compounding fortnightly

See Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans for more
details.

No Negative Equity Guarantee (NNEG)

The NNEG only applies when a customer settles their HEAS loan

Customers are not required to repay more than the current market value
of the property/s used as security, less any mortgages or encumbrances

The NNEG will not apply if a customer:

-   intentionally increases encumbrances (such as mortgage) on the
    secured property and limits the Commonwealth’s ability to recover
    the full amount of the loan balance, or
-   misrepresents their circumstances while participating in the HEAS,
    or
-   commits fraud

Maximum loan amount (MLA)

The MLA:

is the loan balance at which a person’s fortnightly payments will stop,
and/or they will not be eligible for an advance payment

depends on:

-   the value of their equity in Australian real estate, and
-   their HEAS age component based on the customer’s age, or in some
    cases their partner’s age if they are younger

is not necessarily a fixed set amount

is re-calculated:

-   at least once every 12 months when the person’s age component is
    reassessed on their (or their younger partner’s) birthday
-   when there’s a change in circumstances (for example, changed value
    of the secured real estate, separation)

Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) assess MLA at the time of claim.

The customer:

can ask to change their MLA at any time via by completing a Home Equity
Access Scheme variation form (SA497)

can increase their MLA if they have enough loan security for the higher
amount:

-   if partnered, their partner must give written approval to increase
    the MLA
    Note: even if the partner is not named as an owner in the title
    certificate or title search of the property

Any requests to change the MLA can be done by completing a SA497.

See Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) on how the MLA is
calculated.

The Resources page contains links to the SA497 form and to the Payment
and Service Finder on the Services Australia website. This is where
customers are asked questions to see if they qualify for the HEAS.

The HEAS loan balance, legal costs and compound interest

The HEAS loan balance

The amount the customer must repay to the Commonwealth.

It is:

-   the sum of the principal loan payments made to the customer
-   plus legal costs
-   plus previously accrued interest
-   less any repayments made by the customer

Compound interest

Interest is charged on the loan balance each fortnight until the
outstanding loan balance is repaid in full.

The interest rate for the HEAS is currently 3.95% per annum –
compounding fortnightly. The last interest rate change occurred on 1
January 2022.

Compound interest:

-   increases the amount the customer must repay to the Commonwealth,
    and
-   may mean the person’s total loan balance increases beyond their
    maximum loan amount (MLA)

The interest rate is set by the Minister for Families and Social
Services, and is published in the Australian Government Gazette.

The Resources page contains the compound interest calculation details.

Itemised statement

Sent to customers around their (or their younger partner’s) birthday and
includes:

-   information about the loan amount paid including any advance
    payments
-   the interest accrued
-   the costs associated (such as legal costs)
-   the transaction (for example, payments, repayments, interest
    accrual) on the loan

Legal costs

Costs incurred by the Commonwealth in registering, changing and removing
the charge and/or caveat on the real estate used by the customer to
secure repayment of the loan.

These costs:

-   depend on the customer’s circumstances (for example, how many
    properties they offer)
-   are payable by the customer
-   get added to their HEAS loan balance
-   accrue compound interest

The agency notifies the customer in writing when the legal costs are
added. The customer can choose to pay the costs immediately or at
another time.

Consent required for online requests

Online claims or change of circumstances submitted through the online
service require consent from the customer and partner, if applicable.

Nominees can also provide consent if they submit a new claim on behalf
of the customer, if the customer is not capable of making their own
decisions. Supporting medical or treating doctor documentation is
required.

See Home Equity Access Scheme consent for more details.

The Resources page contains examples of consent requirements.

Repaying HEAS loans

Customers can make repayments via the Home Equity Access Scheme summary
page on their Centrelink online account using:

-   BPAY®
-   Post Billpay, and
-   credit and debit cards

There are no mandatory repayments over the life of the loan.

The outstanding loan amount must be repaid:

immediately, when the property used to secure the loan is sold, or

in the event of the customers death or the death of their surviving
partner (if applicable)

-   the loan amount will be recovered from their estate unless a
    surviving partner is over Age Pension age, and
-   a Deceased Estate Letter is sent and is followed by a Deceased Loan
    Statement each year to the executor

See Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans for more
details.

Request for an explanation or a formal review

Customers have the right to request an explanation or a formal review of
any decisions made under the HEAS

Requests are assessed by the Original Decision Maker (ODM) which is
usually a Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) in the Home Equity Access
Scheme National team

If a customer requests a review of decision, run the Internal
Review/Explanation script via Customer Record:

-   See SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions
    for more details
-   The Resources page contains Appeal codes for the Original Decision,
    and the Reason for the Original Decision

The Resources page contains:

-   examples demonstrating the different HEAS loan amounts payable,
    including the impact of advance payments
-   customer frequently asked questions
-   link to the Home Equity Access Scheme National team
-   the HEAS forms
-   calculators for customers and staff
-   appeal codes, and
-   Service Australia website links
-   examples of consent requirements, and
-   Process Direct screens
-   compound interest calculations

Contents

Change of circumstances – Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loan

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme
(HEAS)

Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loan amounts

Related links

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Search for existing and adding new records to the Income Security
Integrated System (ISIS)

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) applications

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans

Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) outstanding
loan amount

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) reviews

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) cancellation, restorations and
rejections

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
