
Completing claims and forms for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06020000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to completing claims and
forms for the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

On this Page:

Claiming CSHC

[] If a person contacts to claim a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card they
should, in the first instance, be advised to complete an online claim.
If they decline the online claim option, offer an Assisted Customer
Claim (ACC) to collect information from the customer either over the
phone or face-to-face. Once the ACC is completed, advise the customer of
any outstanding documents they must provide to submit their claim via
their online account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

If the customer is unable to claim online, or use ACC, run the First
Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow to issue a customised Claim for
CSHC (SA443). For partnered customers, only one paper claim form needs
to be completed.

The customised SA443 will pre-populate customer and, when Person
Permitted to Enquire (PPE) rules allow, partner information already held
on the record.

If the customer declines the FCSO process, then they can download an
SA296 claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card from the Services
Australia website. Remind customers the claim will not be accepted as
lodged until all required documents and evidence has been provided. See
Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims for more information

All new CSHC claimants and their partners (if applicable) are required
to provide a Tax File Number (TFN) or be granted an exemption from
providing a TFN.

The customer does not have to supply original copies of the Notice of
Assessment (NOA) and other supporting documents such as payment
summaries and income tax returns, copies are acceptable.

Re-claiming CSHC

If a customer's CSHC has been cancelled for less than 13 weeks (with the
exception of cancellation due to income), check Cancellation of
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) and/or Restoration of
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) to see if a re-claim is
required.

[] Where a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card has been cancelled for less
than 26 weeks, direct the customer, to complete a re-claim online. If
the customer declines an online re-claim, offer an Assisted Customer
Claim. In circumstances where a customer is unable to complete either an
online or an assisted claim, issue a customised Claim for Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (SA443) by running the First Contact Service Offer
(FCSO) workflow or download the SA296a Re-SA296 Claim for Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card.

Customers who re-claim CSHC are required to reauthorise the department
to use their TFN, provide a Tax File Number (TFN) or be granted a TFN
exemption for themselves and their partner (if applicable). If no TFN or
exemption is provided then the CSHC re-claim must be rejected.

Contents

Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)

Related links

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
