
Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan 065-19060359

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer can apply for a loan under the
Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) online with help from a Service
Officer using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) or via paper application
form (SA310 partnered or SA496 single).

Home Equity Access Scheme eligibility and when to apply

A person may be eligible to participate in the Scheme if they meet the
eligibility criteria. Customers can apply for a Home Equity Access
Scheme loan by:

(preferred channel) submitting an online claim via their myGov
Centrelink online account, or with help from a Service Officer running
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

if partnered, and the partner also wants to apply for their own Scheme
loan. The customer and partner can make a joint decision to complete a
combined partner online claim. The customer must meet certain
requirements to be eligible for a combined claim

lodging a paper claim:

-   Home Equity Access Scheme partnered application form(SA310)
-   Home Equity Access Scheme single application form (SA496)

There are no early claims for the Scheme. A person must wait until their
qualification date before submitting an application, for example the
date the person or their partner (if they are a member of a couple)
turns Age Pension age. If the person is not qualified on the date they
apply, the application will be rejected.

To participate in the Scheme the applicants must understand and accept
the terms and conditions.

Initial contact to apply for a loan

If a person contacts to apply for a loan under the Scheme, an online
claim must be offered first. Service Officers should explain the
benefits of applying for the Scheme online, such as:

-   they can submit a combined partner online claim if both members of
    the couple want to apply for a loan
-   help to apply for the right payment through streaming questions and
    early warnings if they may not be eligible less information for them
    to provide, as information from their Centrelink record will be
    pre-populated into the online claim
-   they can monitor the progress of their claim through their
    Centrelink online account

If the customer declines the online claim offer, a Service Officer can
use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to collect claim information from the
customer either over the phone or face-to-face.

If the customer is unable or unwilling to apply online or using ACC,
they can apply using the SA310 partnered or SA496 single application
form which is available via the Services Australia website. See
Resources page for links.

Online claim

[]

Some customers can lodge a combined Scheme application for their
partner, when starting their own online claim.

The option to submit as a combined claim will only appear if specific
criteria is met.

To lodge an online claim, customers must be registered with an 'active'
Centrelink online account.

Once registered, to start an online claim for a loan under the Scheme
they must:

-   sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account.
-   select the My profile link from the home page to update and save any
    changes to their personal details (such as address and relationship
    details)
-   on the Centrelink homepage, select Make a claim via the Payments and
    Claims link, or select Payments and Claims > Claims > Make a claim
    through the menu options
-   on the Make a Claim page select Get started under the Older
    Australians category
-   read the information about the Scheme then select Apply for a loan
    under the Home Equity Access Scheme
-   on the Eligibility Check page answer the streaming questions

If the customer satisfies the streaming questions, a started claim will
be registered once they press Continue.

Depending on the customers circumstances they may not be eligible for
the Scheme. Customers can be referred to the Payment and Service Finder
to see what other payments they might be eligible for. The customer can
select Back to return to the Make a Claim page to begin another claim
type.

Once a claim has been commenced and all questions answered, the Next
steps page advises the customer of any further information or
documentation required for their claim to be submitted.

Customers must provide all their required documents and confirm their
identity to be able to submit their claim. The customer has 13 weeks to
submit the claim, otherwise the Home Equity Access Scheme application
will expire and the customer will be required to re-apply.

Nominees cannot lodge an online claim on behalf of the customer.

Combined online claim

If partnered, the customer will be presented with partner questions,
including a question to check if the partner has agreed to the customer
applying on their behalf. This will help determine if a combined claim
will be offered.

The partner must be registered with an active Centrelink online account
and subscribed to electronic messaging.

Both the customer or their partner can lodge the required documents for
the claim in their own online account and submit the claim for
processing.

When a Scheme combined partner claim is started, the customer will
receive notifications to advise the claim has been submitted.

Additional notifications are sent to the customer and partner to advise
of the claim's progress. These notifications are sent before the claim
is submitted to help with the completion of the required combined claim
tasks.

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Service Officers can run ACC with the customer and applying partner to
obtain and record the claim information.

A nominee can provide information on behalf of the customer and/or
partner but they can’t lodge the application.

ACC is similar to the online claim and contains the same questions to
ask the customer. Service Officers can access ACC via the ACC desktop
icon, enter the customer’s Customer Reference Number (CRN) and run the
workflow.

Start ACC with the customer, showing them how easy it is to claim
online. Encourage them to complete the rest at home in their own time.
By submitting the claim online, they can monitor the progress of their
claim through their Centrelink online account.

To submit their claim, the customer must:

-   answer all mandatory questions
-   provide all required documents
-   verify their identity if they do not have a Confirmed Identify
-   answer all partner questions, if it is a combined claim

Declaration and submitting the claim

Once ACC has been completed by the Service Officer, advise the
applicants of any outstanding document/s they must provide or action
they need to take to submit their application. The customer must either:

-   access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account to
    upload their documents and submit the claim, or
-   accept a verbal declaration and provide all required documents
    before submitting their claim. If the customer is unable or declines
    to make a verbal declaration, do not submit the claim via ACC

Note: claim submission via ACC based on a verbal declaration is not
encouraged for the Scheme. Customers should be encouraged to submit the
claim through their online account wherever possible. Customers who have
their claim application submitted via ACC will be required to provide a
signed SA310 or SA496 Part A before a loan can be approved.

The claim will expire if not submitted within 13 weeks.

Paper application form (SA310 partnered and SA496 single claims)

Claims for the Scheme can be made by completing a (SA310 partnered or
SA496 single) paper application form and submitting it by post or to the
nearest Service Centre.

Lodging a paper application involves 3 steps:

-   completing the form and relevant parts of the SA310 or SA496
-   collecting all documents needed as outlined in the application forms
-   lodging the claim with all required supporting documents

Where a paper application form has been lodged, Service Officers should
scan the form and supporting documentation to Document Tools on the
customer’s record on Day 1 for action by processing staff.

Partnered customers

Where both members of a couple want to apply for a loan online under the
Scheme at the same time, they can make a combined claim:

-   online claim (preferred channel)
-   by phone, or in person with the Service Officer using ACC, or
-   by completing the SA310 form

Members of a couple must make a joint decision for each member to apply
for a Scheme loan.

To verify the joint decision, both customer and their partner must
provide electronic consent through their own Centrelink online account .
Alternatively they can sign the application by reading and signing Part
A (Applicant and partner declarations and authorities) of the SA310.

If only one member of the couple is applying for a loan, their partner
is still required to provide their consent by reading and signing the
SA310 Part A.

Required documentation

Before accepting a claim application form, check the documentation
provided for the customer (and for their partner if applicable) to
ensure all required supporting documents have been provided.

Both the customer and partner (if applicable) must have a Confirmed
Identity Status before a claim application form is accepted. Partners of
Home Equity Access Scheme applicants must also complete linkage. If the
customer and/or their partner do not already have a confirmed identity
status, Service Officers must code the identity details using the
Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.

Upon receipt of supporting documentation to a customer's Scheme
application, Service Officers must scan the document to Document Tools
on the customer’s record on Day 1. If an associated task in the online
claim exists, use the Request and Manage Customer Tasks guided procedure
to mark the corresponding task as ‘Provided’. Identity documents must
only be scanned if they are required for verification purposes other
than identity assurance.

For information about the assessment of required documents see Assessing
Home Equity Access Scheme applications.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to the Retirements Helpdesk
-   SA310 or SA496 forms, and
-   Services Australia website for information about payments and
    services for older Australians

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
