
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Refundable Accommodation
Deposit (RAD)/Daily Accommodation Payment (DAP) financial hardship
assistance. This includes historical processing in the System for
Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC). This process is only
applicable for care recipients who have entered into permanent
residential care from 1 July 2014 and care recipients who have opted
into the post 1 July 2014 means assessment arrangements.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 11 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD)/Daily Accommodation Payment (DAP)

Accommodation payments and contributions are payable by:

-   all permanent residential care recipients who entered into care from
    1 July 2014, and
-   care recipients who have opted into the post 1 July 2014 means
    assessment arrangements

The Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD)/Daily Accommodation Payment
(DAP) financial hardship assistance is available for care recipients
who:

-   have been assessed with a resident status of not low means on the
    date of entry into permanent residential care, and
-   who are experiencing, or would experience financial hardship as a
    result of paying accommodation payments

The RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance is an additional supplement,
which is paid to the aged care service with the service’s monthly
claims. The RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance amount is equal to the
amount the care recipient’s fees are reduced by and cannot exceed the
maximum fee that would have been payable. The RAD/DAP is not applicable
to care recipients who are assessed under the pre 1 July 2014 means
assessment arrangements.

When care recipients are entitled to the RAD/DAP financial hardship
assistance, the fees and/or accommodation payments can be reduced to any
amount including setting the fees to zero. The reduction is dependent on
the care recipient’s financial circumstances. The RAD/DAP financial
hardship assistance can be granted for up to 3 years after Services
Australia receives the RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance
application. Care recipients must submit a new request with updated
evidence to reapply for the RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance.

Due to a system limitation, SPARC was unable to automatically pay the
RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance for care recipients who entered
into a permanent residential care service from 1 July 2014. Manual
intervention was required to ensure the RAD/DAP financial hardship
assistance had been applied correctly.

Historical RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance process

Prior to 1 August 2022, RAD/DAP hardship was:

-   unable to be coded in SPARC
-   payments were made by a monthly manual adjustment
-   maintained manually via a spreadsheet

Current RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance process

From 1 August 2022, RAD/DAP hardship is:

-   coded in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)
-   coded from the start date
-   is an automatic payment from 1 August 2022 onwards

paid as a manual adjustment for any period prior to 1 August 2022

includes care recipients with existing and new RAD/DAP financial
hardship assistance

Service Officers must check to ensure the relevant care recipient is
eligible for RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance prior to coding
RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance in the Aged Care Staff Portal
(ACSP).

The aged care system validates when a care recipient is not eligible for
RAD/DAP financial hardship assistance when a care recipient:

-   has been assessed with a resident status of low means
-   chooses not to have their means assessed and is deemed as means not
    disclosed (MND), or
-   has not completed a means assessment

The Resources page contains links to useful contact details and external
websites.

Related links

Accommodation Supplement for aged care services

Aged care financial hardship assistance – assessment

Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview

Aged care financial hardship assistance – review/cease/revoke

Quality On Line (QOL) checking in the Smart Centre Division

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Residential aged care financial hardship
assistance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
