
Non-claimable leave for permanent residential aged care recipients 065-13020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines non-claimable leave for permanent residential
aged care recipients.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Non-claimable leave

Permanent residential care recipients are entitled to 52 days of
claimable social leave (not hospital leave) in a financial year. These
care recipients can also take extra social leave (non-claimable leave).
However, Services Australia will not pay the aged care subsidy for those
days and this does not affect the care recipient’s right to residential
care services. Care recipients will continue to pay the aged care
service their agreed fees and daily accommodation costs.

The government may also allow permanent residential care recipients to
take emergency leave for a specific period if an emergency has been
declared. Permanent residential care recipients who take emergency leave
do not use any of their social leave entitlements. Care recipients can
move in with their family during the emergency event without losing
their aged care place. For more information and the process, see
Emergency events and aged care service providers.

Non-claimable leave showing on a Payment Statement means the:

-   number of claimable social leave days has been exceeded
-   incorrect leave code was submitted as part of the monthly claim
    form, or
-   an end date for the current leave has not been provided

When an incorrect leave code has been submitted either manually or
online, Service Officers must advise the aged care service to correct
the leave code when they submit their next monthly claim form.

Privacy

Where possible, Service Officers should not discuss care recipient
details with an approved provider over the phone. If a phone call is
required, Service Officers must first ask questions to authenticate the
caller’s identity prior to providing or confirming claim details. See
Perform telephone security checks for aged care services for the
authentication process.

Service Officers must comply with the Australian Privacy Principle (APP)
Guidelines contained in the Privacy Act 1988. Information on the
collection, storage and limits on the use of personal information is in
the Australian Privacy Principles.

Service Officers must take the responsibility to protect data according
to legislative requirements. Aged Care Act 1997 prohibits the disclosure
of protected information in respect of a customer to a third party.

The References page has links to the legislation and Australian Privacy
Principles.

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Service in Context

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Emergency events and aged care service providers

Residential Care program

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
