
Transition Care Programme 065-13030000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines the Transition Care Programme.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Transition care

Transition care provides short-term support and active management for
care recipients after a hospital stay. It allows them to return home
rather than prematurely enter residential care.

Transition care provides time-limited, goal-oriented and therapy-focused
packages of services to care recipients after a hospital stay.

These packages include low intensity therapy - such as physiotherapy and
occupational therapy - social work and nursing support or personal care.

Transition care provides short term care of up to 12 weeks. Care can be
provided at home, a ‘live-in’ setting or a combination of both. Live in
settings can be part of an existing aged care home or a health facility
such as a separate wing of a hospital.

Transition care can only be accessed directly from hospital for up to 12
weeks. Transition care can be extended to 18 weeks if a care recipient
is assessed as needing more help whilst in transition care.

Eligible care recipients

The care recipient must be:

-   an admitted patient of a private or public hospital, and
-   assessed in hospital by My Aged Care. Hospital staff or an Aged Care
    Specialist Officer (ACSO) can arrange this assessment through My
    Aged Care

The 4 week entry period for a care recipient to enter transition care
starts the day after the approval is signed.

The approval to enter transitional care is valid for 4 weeks from date
of signing.

Transition care extension

In exceptional circumstances, a care recipient may require an extension
to a Transition care episode where their care will need to exceed the 12
week maximum. Care recipients are entitled to have only 1 extension for
an episode of care which cannot exceed 42 days.

The application for the extension must be completed within the initial
12 week episode of transition care.

Services Australia automatically receives the extension requests from
the Department of Health from 23 July 2022. From 23 July 2022, if
Services Australia receives the extension requests either from My Aged
Care’s emails or the paper format (the Aged Care Application for an
Extension of Transition Care (AC012) form), they must advise the aged
care service the following:

-   The AC012 form has been decommissioned and Services Australia no
    longer processes transition care extension requests
-   Transition care extension requests are automatically sent from the
    Department of Health to Services Australia
-   Transition care extension requests must be lodged using My Aged Care
    Provider Portal and
-   The aged care service can use the My Aged Care - Provider Portal
    User Guide: Part 2 Team Leader and Staff Member Functions available.
    The Resources page has a link to the Department of Health and Aged
    Care’s website for more information

The Resources page contains links to external websites.

Related links

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Home Care Packages program

Maintain claims in Aged Care Management Payment Systems (ACMPS)

Manage aged care recipient details

Manage work items in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Residential Care program

Return or redirect forms for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
