
Aged care means assessment – residential care pre 1 July 2014 - income assessment 065-19041705

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for completing an aged care income
assessment for residential care recipients assessed under pre 1 July
2014 assessment schemes.

On this page:

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Aged care income assessments

Aged care income assessments:

were previously known as residential care income assessments (RCIA)

are required for care recipients who first entered permanent residential
care after 1 March 1998 and prior to 1 July 2014 (including pre-entry
leave), and have not had a break in care of greater than 28 days since 1
July 2014

determine the amount of income tested fee (ITF) a care recipient is
liable to pay

-   note that annual and lifetime capping does not apply to pre 1 July
    2014 assessment schemes

could not be finalised until after the care recipient entered care

See Aged care means assessment for when an application is required for
an aged care income assessment.

A separate process applies if a care recipient is updating an existing
income assessment, see Actioning an income reassessment where a current
income assessment exists table in the Process page.

Income assessments and private trusts and companies

When an income assessment is lodged, and the care recipient states they
have income from a private trust or private company:

-   an interim income assessment is completed until the care recipient
    provides the completed Module PT - Private Trust and/or Module PC -
    Private Company
-   historically, the care recipient was given up to 56 days to return
    the module/s. Currently, the timeframes detailed in the Request
    Further Information letters apply instead

Failure to complete the requested modules will result in the aged care
(RCA) status being cancelled (CAN-MND).

Currently:

-   a new income assessment will be required if the requested
    information is not returned within the requested timeframe

Historically:

-   if the required modules were returned within 12 months of the date
    of cancellation the income assessment could be restored
-   if the required modules were returned more than 12 months from the
    date of cancellation a new income assessment would be completed from
    the date of lodgement

Income assessments and means not disclosed (MND)

A care recipient may decline to provide income details for an
assessment:

-   the RCA/NCL would then be finalised as rejected due to 'Means Not
    Disclosed' (REJ-MND) and the care recipient would be liable to pay
    the maximum income tested fee (ITF)
-   if a care recipient subsequently chooses to provide this
    information, they are required to submit a new request for an
    assessment

Date of event of a new income assessment where MND previously applied

The date of event for an aged care income assessment depends on the
circumstances surrounding the customer's rejection due to 'MND'.

The care recipient will need to provide a sound explanation as to why
there was no response to the request to supply a completed assessment
form or fee advice letters dating back to the date of entry. This may
include medical reasons (for example, dementia) or that the aged care
costs were being direct debited and the care recipient was not aware of
the cost until the account was depleted.

If a decision is then made to backdate to the original entry date, the
customer/nominee will need to provide income details that were current
at the time of entry.

Change of service provider

A care recipient will remain assessed under pre 1 July 2014 rules (that
is, grandfathered) when they have:

-   departed from one provider, and
-   been admitted into another provider within 28 days, and
-   not opted in to the post 1 July 2014 assessment scheme

See Aged care means assessment for information about opting in.

The RCIRC screen will display their assessment as one of the following:

-   PRE2008
-   POST2008, or
-   blank

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Health and Aged
Care - Schedules of Fees and Charges, links to forms, user guides and
letter template for further information.

Related links

Aged Care - fees and charges

Aged care fees and charges - accommodation payments

Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview

Aged care - initial contact

Aged care letters - creating manual letters

Aged care means assessment

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Exempt lump sums

National Redress Scheme overview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
