
Requesting external users’ access to the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) 065-22081002

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about requesting and managing
external users’ access to the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

External users’ access to the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)

The Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) is the consolidated portal for staff
processing aged care claims and payments.

External users from the Department of Health and Aged Care can request
access to the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

To do this, they must:

-   request access to ACSP
-   send a completed Services Australia access request form - Aged Care
    Systems form to the Department of Health and Aged Care’s Aged Care
    Payments Team via their positional mailbox
-   send their line manager’s approval to the Department of Health and
    Aged Care’s Aged Care Payments Team via their positional mailbox and
-   have their access request approved by the Aged Care Programmes
    Branch’s Operations Change and Correspondence Team

The Department of Health and Aged Care’s Aged Care Payments Team will
email all forms and line managers’ approvals to the Aged Care Programmes
Branch’s Operational (Change and Correspondence) team. All emails are
sent via positional mailboxes. See the Resources page for a copy of this
request form.

External users from the Department of Health and Aged Care with the
appropriate business role can also request access to ACSP on behalf of
someone else from their department. See the Resource page for the user
business roles available to external users.

External users from the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission (ACQSC)
must contact the Department of Health and Aged Care Policy Operations
Team for all information requests in ACSP. All requests must be received
via emails to the positional mailbox. This arrangement is in place until
ACQSC’s external access to ACSP becomes available.

Note: business role owners within the Aged Care Programmes Branch can
run reports within ACSP to monitor access details and expiry dates at
any time.

Related links

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
