-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about viewing and managing aged care
service details.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 11 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Historical ACMPS process

The Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) was the previous system
used for managing Service Approved places for transition care and short
term restorative care. Service Approved places create, update and delete
functionality was switched to view only from 16 June 2023.

To view the previous ACMPS process, see the historical version.

Service converts to an MPS

The Multi-Purpose Service (MPS) program provides health and aged care
services in rural and regional areas that cannot support both a hospital
and a separate residential aged care service. This allows people to stay
in their own communities as they get older and be close to their
families and community ties.

If a government-subsidised residential aged care service converts to an
MPS, the service will cease to be eligible for residential aged care
subsidy. The Department of Health and Aged Care notifies Services
Australia about these service conversions as part of the service closure
process.

Variation to Aged Care approved places

The Department of Health and Aged Care notifies Services Australia when
an aged care service receives approval for a variation to its allocation
of approved places. For residential care services, this information is
automatically received via the National Approved Provider System (NAPS)
to Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) interface.

The Department of Health and Aged Care can update the Aged Care Staff
Portal with the variation to approved places for residential care in the
event that the interface is experiencing outages and manual intervention
is required.

The Aged Care Programs Branch update the Aged Care Staff Portal with the
variation to approved places for transition care and short term
restorative care through notification received manually (for example,
email) from the Department of Health and Aged Care.

Any adjustment to payment of government subsidies may need to be
applied.

From 27 February 2017, Increasing Choice in Home Care commenced. The
allocation of approved places within the Aged Care Approvals Round
(ACAR) process ceased for home care. Approved places for a home care
service applied up to and inclusive of the February 2017 claim month.

Service under administration

Aged care providers may become bankrupt or insolvent if they are unable
to repay debts. These include aged care providers that are in voluntary
administration, liquidation or receivership.

The Department of Health and Aged Care notifies Services Australia about
aged care providers that are under administration. Services Australia
will undertake the necessary process to ensure the government aged care
subsidies are paid correctly.

Notification of changes

Aged care services must notify the Aged Care Quality and Safety
Commission of changes to authorised contact and organisation details.
This ensures aged care services receive important notifications and
correspondence. This must be completed within 28 days of the change
occurring.

Closing a service

The Department of Health and Aged Care notifies Services Australia of
aged care services that are closing. Services Australia will undertake
the necessary process to ensure the government aged care subsidies are
paid correctly. See New, combine, sales, closure and transfer processes
for aged care services for more information.

Transferring a service

See New, combine, sales, closure and transfer processes for aged care
services for more information on transferring a service in aged care.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Aged Care and
external websites.

Related links

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Debt recovery in Aged Care program for service providers

National Approved Provider System (NAPS)

New, combine, sales, closure and transfer processes for aged care
services

Residential Care monthly claim form

Return or redirect forms for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
