
Aged care reviews - manual adjustments for post 1 July 2014 residential care 065-20010653

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the calculation and refund process for manual
adjustments for post 1 July 2014 residential aged care fees.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Aged Care reviews

For information on pre 1 July residential care manual adjustments, see
Aged Care Reviews - Manual adjustments for home care recipients

For information on home care manual adjustments, see Manual adjustments
for home care recipients.

Manual adjustments and future reviews

A manual adjustment calculation compares the fees a care recipient was
charged with the fees they should have paid and may result in an
adjustment of payments to service providers.

Manual adjustments are always made to aged care providers. A manual
adjustment can be coded at both the care recipient and service level in
the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP), however any monies paid or collected
will be at the service level. Any manual adjustments completed may
require future manual intervention.

-   Future reviews in Customer First can be set to trigger manual
    interventions. These reviews allow: a future QR refund to be stopped
-   aged care systems to be reviewed following a future QR to reassess
    refund eligibility
-   a manual review to be set to investigate a possible annual or
    lifetime cap when the aged care systems cannot calculate this
    automatically

The Resources page contains links to:

-   Aged Care Fee Calculator
-   Aged Care Payments team contact details
-   external websites

Related links

Aged Care

Aged care fees and charges - care subsidy reduction to zero

Aged care letters

Aged care means assessment

Aged care means assessment - Manual means assessment

Aged care program for service providers

Aged care reviews - manual adjustments for Care Recipients - overview

Aged care reviews - manual adjustments for home care recipients

Aged care reviews - manual follow-ups

Aged care reviews - quarterly reviews

Aged care reviews - reassessments and discharge reviews

Aged care reviews - Residential Care Pre 1 July 2014 - processing
reviews and reassessments

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Attaching electronic documents to a Centrelink customer's record using
Document Tools in Customer First

Process manual adjustments for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
