
Retirement villages 065-11010000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information about the types of retirement
villages available and the services they provide. It also provides
information on how assets are assessed and whether a customer may be
considered a homeowner.

On this Page:

Accommodation provided

Retirement villages accommodate people aged 55 years or over. They
generally provide either:

-   Self-care units - where the resident looks after their own needs.
    The units are fully self-contained including a kitchen to prepare
    meals
-   Serviced units - which usually do not have full kitchen facilities.
    Meals are provided in a communal dining room. Other services such as
    cleaning and laundering may be provided

In some cases, facilities may provide accommodation which allows
residents to 'age in place' and are comprised of a Retirement Village
and low and high level care facilities all in the one complex.

Entry contribution amount

When a customer takes up residence in a retirement village, home
ownership is determined by the entry contribution amount, if any, and
affects assessment under the assets test. The entry contribution amount
is not subject to the deeming provisions.

The entry contribution amount does not include ongoing costs such as
general service or maintenance fees which are payable on a regular
basis. If the customer is assessed as a non-homeowner, fees and charges
are assessed as rent and rent assistance may be payable depending on the
amount paid by way of fees and charges. If the customer owned their
principal home prior to moving in to the retirement village, the former
home is an assessable asset, from the date of entry to the village. Any
rental income received is assessed as income.

A customer may not pay an entry contribution. When this occurs the
customer may be asked to pay rent in addition to the maintenance fees.
Rent Assistance (RA) is payable on the combined amount.

Care situation

Customers who need and receive a substantial level of care that is
provided by the retirement village for at least 14 consecutive days may
be considered to be in a care situation for the social security assets
test provisions.

If the customer owns their own home and vacates it to permanently enter
a care situation in a retirement village, the former home will be exempt
from the assets test for 2 years from the date the customer first
entered care in accordance with sections 11A(9) of the Social Security
Act. See the References page.

If the customer needs and is likely to receive a substantial level of
care for at least 14 consecutive days compare the lump sum payment to
the extra allowable amount (EAA). If the lump sum is greater than the
EAA the customer is considered to be a home owner and will not be
entitled to receive Rent Assistance (RA). The lump sum will not be
assessed as an asset. If the customer has retained ownership of the
former principal home, it will be an exempt asset for 2 years from the
date the customer entered care.

In the instance that the lump sum is less than the EAA, the customer is
a non-homeowner and may be eligible for RA. The lump sum payment is
assessed as an asset but not a financial asset and therefore deeming
provisions do not apply. If the customer has retained ownership of the
former principal home, it will be an exempt asset for 2 years from the
date the customer entered the retirement village.

Lifestyle Villages, Park Homes, Over 55 villages

Note: a caravan or mobile home (transportable home) park may call itself
a retirement park or village, and restrict occupancy to residents over a
specified age. Although these may appear to satisfy the basic criteria
for determining that they are a retirement village, they should not be
classified as such. In all cases, rent assistance may be payable in
respect of the site fees paid (depending on the amount paid). Refer to
Assessing caravans, boats and park homes.

Factors to consider are:

-   It is essential to clarify what state legislation covers the
    facility and only those facilities covered by state retirement
    village legislation are retirement villages. A copy of the contract
    will be required to see if the home is covered by the relevant state
    retirement village legislation. If not sure, contact the RA Service
    Desk via the On-Line Enquiry Form
-   Names that these facilities tend to refer to themselves as are
    lifestyle villages, park homes, mobile park homes, Over 55 villages,
    etc
-   That even if the dwelling is not moveable it is still assessed as a
    park home
-   The customer may own the dwelling but has a lease for the use of the
    land (that is, pays site fees)
-   If the customer moves to other accommodation, what happens with the
    dwelling (in most cases these are sold to the next resident)

If there is doubt about whether the accommodation facility meets the
definition of a retirement village obtain a copy of the contract and
relevant details and refer to Level 2 Policy Help Desk via the Online
Query Form on the Resources page for assistance with the decision.

Customers in Retirement Villages come under the special residents
provisions. The Accommodation (AC) screen is to be recorded to reflect
this.

Supported Residential Services (SRS)

Supported Residential Services operate privately in New South Wales,
Victoria, Queensland and South Australia. They offer supported
accommodation to older people and people with a disability. SRS differ
from Residential Aged Care as an Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT)
assessment is not required to enter a SRS and a SRS does not receive
funding from the Australian Government. They also differ from Retirement
Villages as they are not regulated under state Retirements Village
legislation. See, Supported Residential Services (SRS).

The Resources page contains links to the Real Estate form (MOD R) and
the Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online Query Form.

Contents

Assessment of entry contribution

Related links

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
