
Aged care means assessment - residential care post 1 July 2014 - pre-entry 065-18082318

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about residential care means
assessments before the care recipient has entered permanent residential
care.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Pre-entry residential care means assessment

Where a care recipient has not entered permanent residential care, they
may request a pre-entry means assessment, which will:

-   be a combined income and assets assessment
-   estimate costs payable if they enter residential care

Where Services Australia is responsible, means assessments are
undertaken via:

-   a verbal means assessment, or
-   the care recipient completing an Aged Care Calculation of your cost
    of care

See Aged care means assessment to decide if a form is needed for a
residential care means assessment.

When a residential care pre-entry means assessment is completed, a
letter is sent to the care recipient (and nominee if applicable)
advising:

-   the costs (including the type of accommodation payment) they are
    liable for should they enter care
-   a summary of the income and assets assessed to determine these costs

Care recipient with a current means assessment requests a pre-entry means assessment

Where a care recipient has a current pre-entry residential care means
assessment, they may request to correct or update their income and
assets used in the assessment.

Any updates made are used for the means assessment if the care recipient
enters care.

If income and asset data is corrected from the date of the original
assessment, a new pre-entry letter is not issued automatically unless
the care recipient's resident status has also changed because of the
update. When a resident status:

has changed, a new pre-entry letter is automatically sent

has not changed, the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) will not send a new
letter as it is within 120 days of the original pre-entry letter being
issued

-   an updated pre -entry letter can be manually sent with the current
    income and asset information, if asked for

The pre-entry letter is a record of income and assets used in a means
assessment. It is not used by a service provider to set aged care costs
and charges. Once a care recipient enters care, a fees letter is sent
from ACSP to the care recipient, aged care nominee (if applicable) and
the service provider.

A care recipient may ask for a pre-entry means assessment for
residential care if they are currently in:

-   home care (RCA-CUR/DSS or RCA-CUR/SFR), or
-   residential care (RCA-CUR/DSS or RCA-CUR/SFR) and they are
    considering changing providers

As the care recipient is still in care, the current means assessment is
not cancelled. Instead, a reassessment is needed and a manual letter is
issued.

Resident status and date of entry to permanent residential care

The care recipient’s resident status determines the liability for
accommodation costs.

A pre-entry means assessment will provide the expected resident status
of low means or not low means and is based on:

-   the care recipient’s means assessment as at their date of
    assessment. This will be the date of effect if there are no changes
    in circumstances

See Aged care means assessment for more information including
concessional assisted or supported resident status.

Income support payment (ISP) customers

Receiving an ISP means the care recipient or their partner receives:

-   a social security benefit
-   a social security pension, or
-   service pension, income support supplement or veteran payment from
    the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

This does not include:

Age Pension (Blind) and Disability Support Pension (Blind) as they are
paid free of an income and assets test

-   unless Rent Assistance (RA) is claimed or the care recipient’s
    partner is on or applying for a means tested income support payment

War Widow(er)'s Pension from DVA

ISP waiting periods including an income maintenance period (SUS-IMM)

from 1 July 2019, periods where the pension status is current zero rate
(CZR) for reason PLS (see Home Equity Access Scheme for further details)

Care recipients receiving Centrelink ISP

Information provided for the means assessment may affect the care
recipient's Centrelink ISP rate. Any changes to circumstances coded as
part of a means assessment also needs to consider the relevant dates for
updates to the ISP.

For ISP purposes:

-   changes to the value of assets only need to be notified if they
    exceed the small change to asset value thresholds
-   supporting documentation for any update is not needed unless there
    is a new income stream, private trust, private company or there is
    doubt about the accuracy of the information given

Favourable decisions

Increases in payment rate are effective from the date of the change or
the date of notification, whichever is later.

Changes for ISP purposes notified before a means assessment is completed
are coded separately from the means assessment using the earliest date
of notification.

Any increase in the rate of ISP calculated as part of a means
assessment:

is adjusted as a favourable decision, and

takes effect from the date of notification. This may be later than the
means assessment date. For example:

-   Care recipient enters care on 1 February
-   Auto activity is created in Customer First on 5 February
-   Verbal means assessment is completed on 20 February
-   Changes to income and assets that occurred before pre-entry means
    assessment have been advised as part of the verbal means assessment
    and result in an increase to ISP
-   An increase to ISP will be applied from 20 February, as this is the
    date of notification . Any calculated arrears may need to be
    manually adjusted to ensure the arrears are issued from the correct
    date. See Payment of arrears after reassessment

Unfavourable decisions

A reduction in ISP rate is applied from the date of change in
circumstances, if a change in income or asset information provided for a
means assessment:

-   decreases the ISP rate, and
-   the change was not advised within the allowable notification period
    for ISP

For example:

-   Care recipient enters care on 15 March
-   Auto activity is created in Customer First on 20 March
-   Verbal means assessment is completed on 30 March
-   Changes to income and assets that occurred before entry have been
    advised as part of the verbal means assessment and result in a
    decrease to ISP
-   The decrease to ISP will be applied from the date of change and may
    result in an overpayment

See also Notification Handler and Date of receipt for help if needed,
including about favourable and unfavourable decisions.

The Resources page contains links to forms, letter templates and
Services Australia and Department of Health and Aged Care websites.

Related links

Accepting information from and disclosing information to a Power of
Attorney

Aged care - consent and disclosure

Aged care letters - creating manual letters

Aged care means assessment

Aged care means assessment - home ownership and real estate estimates

Aged care means assessment - preliminary checks

Aged care means assessment - protected person

Aged care means assessment - Rental income from principal home

Aged care request for a nominee

Aged care reviews - reassessments and updates

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Appointing nominees

Assessing and coding the Real estate details Mod R

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Assessing the Partner details (MOD P)

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Exempt lump sums

General 14 day notification provisions

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Income from boarders and lodgers

Indexing a customer’s claim on the system

National Redress Scheme overview

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Updating address details

Verifying income and assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
