
Claiming the Pension Bonus 065-07010000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for customers to claim a Pension
Bonus Payment (PBP).

On this Page:

Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

The PBS is a tax free lump sum payment for registered members of the
Pension Bonus Scheme who have deferred claiming Age Pension and stayed
in paid work.

The scheme is voluntary and allows registered members to keep working
and accrue periods of work that count toward a lump sum bonus when they
stop working and claim Age Pension.

Customer need to claim their Pension Bonus at the same time they claim
Age Pension. If they cannot get Age Pension, they cannot get a bonus.

Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

To be eligible for a PBP a person must have registered for the PBS
before 1 July 2014.

Customers must not have received Age Pension or any other income support
payment other than Carer Payment since qualifying for Age Pension and
meet the work test rules for at least 12 months from the date their
membership in the scheme started.

Customers must also satisfy residence requirements and be:

-   an Australian resident on the day they lodge their claim, and
-   physically present in Australia on the day they lodge their claim

Customers who have lived worked in a country with which Australia has an
international social security agreement, may meet agreement provisions
to meet residence requirements when they registered in the scheme.
Customers can, however, not be paid if they use those provisions when
they wish to claim the bonus.

Pension Bonus Top-up Payment (PBTP)

A customer who has received a Pension Bonus payment may be entitled to a
PBTP if their Age Pension entitlement increases within the 13 weeks
after grant of Age Pension and the increase is due to a reduction in the
assessment of their income or assets.

The PBTP was implemented for all Age Pension customers granted with a
commencement date on or after 1 January 2008. PBTP is a tax free
payment. The PBTP is not a second bonus payment, it is a recalculation
of the original bonus amount. Note: The PBTP does not apply to Pension
Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP).

Contents

Claiming Age Pension

Registration for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Completing the Claim for Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (SA388)

Completing the Claim for Age Pension and Pension Bonus (SA002)

Issue of Evidentiary Certificate for the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Return and processing of Pension Bonus letters

Pension Bonus Top-up Payment (PBTP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
