
Process manual adjustments for aged care services 065-13100020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on processing manual adjustments for
aged care services.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Manual adjustments in ACMPS and ACSP

A manual adjustment is a payment or recovery amount that is applied to a
service. The adjustment may be a one-off payment/recovery or applied
over a number of claim months. Manual adjustments are required due to a
non-payment or incorrect payment of subsidies and supplements to care
recipients.All manual adjustments payments or recoveries are only made
after being verified and approved by authorised users. Only Subject
Matter Experts and above in the Aged Care and Allied Health Branch can
do this.

Manual adjustments are processed in 2 different aged care systems
depending on the care type:

-   Flexible care and home care manual adjustments are processed in the
    Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)
-   Residential care manual adjustments are processed in the Aged Care
    Staff Portal (ACSP)

Aged care services have a limit of 2 years after the end of a payment
period to change an event through the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP).
For changes beyond the 2 year period, aged care services can email their
request to the Aged Care and Allied Health Branch (see Resources for a
link to email details). All requests must include relevant  supporting
evidence. See Maintain claims for aged care services in Aged Care
Management Payment System (ACMPS) for the process in approving or
rejecting requests beyond the 2 year period.

Service Officers must create a manual adjustment for all events when:

-   ACMPS cannot automatically generate the adjustment for periods
    before 1 January 2020
-   ACSP cannot automatically generate the adjustment for periods before
    1 July 2015

Note: all requests for these manual adjustments must be directed to the
Subject Matter Experts in the Aged Care and Allied Health Branch for
consultation prior to creating the manual adjustment.

Calculation of manual adjustments

For all manual calculations of aged care subsidies and supplements:

-   check the aged care systems to avoid duplicate payments, for example
    check payment statements and care recipient notes to see if the
    payments have been previously paid or adjusted
-   refer to the Department of Health and Aged Care’s Schedule of
    Subsidies and Supplements for the applicable rates (see Resources
    for a link to the website)
-   include 366 days for leap years’ impacts
-   take into consideration the leave impacts (for example the impacts
    of leave type and leave duration)

See the Resources page for links to Aged Care contact details and the
Department of Health and Aged Care’s websites.

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)

Maintain claims for aged care services in Aged Care Management Payment
System (ACMPS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
