
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect of commencing or returning to work
when the customer or their partner is receiving Age Pension.

Details of employment

If an Age Pension customer or their partner commences or returns to work
they must advise Centrelink within 14 days of being paid. The customer
must supply the following:

-   date they were paid
-   employer's name, address and phone number
-   gross employment income paid per week/fortnight (including salary
    sacrifice into superannuation or assessable fringe benefits)
-   if employment is casual or part time
-   if partnered, any payment that the partner is receiving

Self-service

[]Age Pension customers who have commenced or returned to work or have
ceased employment are able to update their employment status through
their Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.
This service will automatically update their reporting requirement.

Eligible customers can also update their partner's employment status
when the partner:

-   does not receive an income support payment
-   receives an income support payment other than Disability Support
    Pension and has given the customer permission to enquire
-   receives Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension (Blind)
    with Rent Assistance

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
Exception applies.

Online estimator

[] The Online estimator options can be used by customers and Service
Officers to show how the customer's payments will be affected by a
change in income.

Work Bonus, working credits and nil rate

When a customer has employment income (including salary sacrifice into
superannuation or assessable fringe benefits) and:

-   they are over Age Pension age and in receipt of a pension, they may
    be entitled to the Work Bonus. Work Bonus only applies to the
    customer’s own employment income – however, partners may still
    benefit by the reduction in total income. Note: customers paid under
    the transitional rules for pension customers are not eligible for
    the Work Bonus and therefore their partner’s rate is not affected
-   their partner is under Age Pension age and receives a payment with
    access to Working Credit, the partner may use their working credits
    to offset their employment income. The Age Pension customer is not
    eligible for Working Credit as they are over Age Pension age
-   receives Age Pension, the customer may be able to have their payment
    suspended for up to 2 years if their Australian employment income
    still precludes them from payment at the end of the employment
    income nil rate period

Choice between cancellation or employment income nil rate

If an Age Pension customer is in, or is entering, an employment income
nil rate period and they ask about eligibility for other payments, they
are to be offered the choice of cancellation or an employment income nil
rate period. The customer should be advised of the benefits and
disadvantages of each:

-   Cancellation - Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) is cancelled but the
    customer may access the Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card
    (CSHC). The customer needs to reclaim when payable
-   Nil rate period - PCC remains current but the customer may miss out
    on bonuses targeted to pensioners being paid and CSHC holders only.
    The customer will not need to reclaim Age Pension if it becomes
    payable before the end of 6 fortnights and 13 days. If the customer
    is eligible to enter an extended employment suspension period, their
    payment will be suspended automatically and can remain suspended for
    up to 2 years. The customer can request a restoration of their
    payment within this time without needing to reclaim. The customer
    can also keep their Pensioner Concession Card while suspended. If
    the customer chooses to access this option, the customer must
    continue reporting as usual. Do not manually code a suspension. For
    more information about the extended employment suspension period,
    see Extended suspension periods for pension payments

Income assessed fortnightly

From 7 December 2020, Age Pension customers have employment income
assessed in the fortnight it is taken to be paid. For more information,
see Recording and correcting employment income details.

Age Pension customers are generally to be placed on 2 weekly reporting
for both continuous and varying ongoing employment income. Some
exceptions apply.

Effect of income on Age Pension

Employment income is assessed under the Pensions Income Test.

For partnered customers, the system automatically applies half the
combined total ordinary income of the couple to each, regardless of
whether their partner receives a Centrelink payment. This means that if
combined income is above the allowable amount for a couple under the
pension Income Test, the customer's pension will be reduced by 25 cents
for each dollar above that amount (instead of 50 cents per dollar for a
single pensioner).

Transitional rules for pension customers

If the customer is receiving payment under the transitional rules for
pension customers, the reduction of 20c for a partnered pensioners or
40c per dollar for a single pensioner will stay in place until the
customer is no worse off under the current pension Income Test.

Extended employment suspension period

If an Age Pension customer loses payability because they have employment
income which precludes them from payment, the customer will initially
enter an employment income nil rate period. From 1 January 2023, if the
customer’s Australian employment income still precludes them from
payment at the end of the employment income nil rate period, their
payment will be suspended automatically and can remain suspended for 2
years from the first day their rate of payment reduced to zero. This
includes where the customer’s employment income nil rate period
commenced before 1 January 2023. This suspension will apply
automatically and must not be coded manually. If they have a partner who
receives Age Pension, Disability Support Pension or Carer Payment, their
partner’s payment will also be automatically suspended for 2 years.
These records will have a benefit status of SUS-ESP or SUS-EPP. An Age
Pension customer may also become suspended with reason EPP if their
partner receives DSP or an eligible DVA payment, and their partner
enters an extended employment suspension period.

Eligible DVA payments are DVA Age Pension, Invalidity Service Pension,
Income Support Supplement and Veteran Payment.

If the customer and their partner (if applicable) becomes payable again
within the 2 year suspension period, they can request to have their
payment restored instead of completing a new claim. If the customer
requests a restoration but is still not payable for any reason (for
example, income or assets over the limit) they are still eligible to
remain suspended for the remainder of the 2 year period. Both the
customer and the partner (if applicable) must individually request a
restoration, unless one member of the couple has the appropriate
authority to request a restoration on behalf of the other member of the
couple.

If a customer (and their partner if applicable) have not had their
payment restored before the end of the 2 year suspension period, their
payment will automatically cancel with reason ESP or EPP. If they want
to receive payment again, a new claim is required.

Effect of partner income

If the customer's partner receives:

-   a Centrelink pension, half the couple's combined total ordinary
    income will be applied to each customer's payment separately
-   a Centrelink allowance such as JobSeeker Payment or Parenting
    Payment, half the combined total ordinary income will be assessed
    for the partner under the Allowance Income and Asset Tests
-   Special Benefit (SpB), half the combined income will reduce the
    partner's SpB as a direct deduction

Special Employment Advance

Customers receiving Age Pension are not entitled to a Special Employment
Advance.

Related links

Recording and correcting employment income details

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Online estimator options

Pension income and assets tests

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Reporting screens

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Access Management for Self Service (AMSS) - Staff-assisted access for
phone self service and nominees online

Reporting employment income online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
