
Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) 065-07030040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS).
This is a tax-free lump sum bonus for customers who choose to work past
Age Pension age and defer claiming Age Pension.

PBS closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014

The PBS is closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014. Applications to
register in the PBS that were lodged or deemed lodged before 1 July 2014
can be processed as usual.

As part of the Government's Secure and Sustainable Pension Reforms, the
PBS closed to new entrants who did not qualify for Age Pension before 20
September 2009. Service Officers must not register customers in the PBS
unless the customer reached Age Pension qualification before 20
September 2009.

All existing members may remain in the scheme and claim their pensions
in due course, in line with existing arrangements, including customers
who took advantage of early registration provisions and registered
before 29 June 2009, when Royal Assent was given.

Qualification

To qualify for a Pension Bonus, a customer must satisfy all of the
following:

be a registered member of the scheme

have accrued at least 1 full 12 month bonus period

have not already received a pension bonus under either the Social
Security or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) schemes

have not received Age Pension

since qualifying for Age Pension have not received

-   an income support payment from Social Security (other than Carer
    Payment)
-   a DVA Service Pension (other than a Carer Service Pension), or
-   a DVA Veteran Payment, or DVA Income Support Supplement (ISS) (other
    than a Carer ISS)

be qualified to receive Age Pension without the aid of an international
agreement

claim the Pension Bonus within the required time limit

at time of claim a person must also lodge a claim for Age Pension (the
Pension Bonus claim is in the Age Pension claim form, if Age Pension is
rejected, the claim for Pension Bonus is taken to have been withdrawn)

PPB period

A member must have at least one full year bonus period for a Pension
Bonus to be payable. Only the final bonus period can be a part year.
Bonus periods must be consecutive, or separated by periods if the
customer is a non-accruing member. The normal 12 month bonus period is
extended by the length of a non-accruing period.

Discretionary non-accruing periods can extend the normal 12 month bonus
period by all or part of the non-accrual period, depending on the length
of non-accrual period coded on the Pension Bonus Non-Accrual (PBNA)
screen.

During the bonus period, the customer must satisfy the work test. Note:
if a person who is registered for the PBS has their ability to meet the
work test affected by a major disaster for example, Cyclone Larry,
special rules apply.

Calculating the PBP amount

The amount of PBP is based on:

-   the customer's rate of basic Age Pension at the start day (date of
    grant)
-   how long the person has been an accruing member of the scheme, and
-   the member's relationship status during the deferment period

For customers with reporting requirements for the first entitlement
period this cannot be done until the end of the first entitlement
period. An activity will be produced when the reporting requirement has
been fulfilled prompting consideration of the Pension Bonus claim.

At least 1 full year bonus period must be accrued. Up to 5 full year
bonus periods can be paid.

Customers who are not entitled to basic Age Pension cannot be paid a
PBP. Note: if no Pension Bonus is payable due to the customer or partner
being paid employment income for longer than one entitlement period
(LOP), check whether the Age Pension start date can be changed to pay
Age Pension and Pension Bonus from a later date.

If the Age Pension start date cannot be changed and/or the LOP payment
is assessed for 13 weeks or more after the start date, refer the case to
the retirements helpdesk.

Superannuation investment exemptions

If the customer has applied for their superannuation investment to be
exempted from the income and assets tests, it will still be included in
the calculations for Age Pension and PBP at grant. If the application is
successful, a Pension Bonus top-up may be payable. A top-up will only be
payable if the date of effect of the superannuation exemption is no
later than the end date of the Pension Bonus top-up period.

If no Pension Bonus was payable due to the initial assessment of a
superannuation investment that is later exempted from the Age Pension
start day, reconsider the original decision based on the revised income
and asset assessment.

DVA scheme

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) has a similar scheme for
ex-service people. A customer may be registered with DVA and Services
Australia at the same time. However, only one PBP is ever payable. For
more information, customers should contact DVA on the correct number for
their State.

Review of decision

If a customer disagrees with the granting or value of the pension bonus,
the decision may be reviewed.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and relevant forms,
and examples of Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) work test and bonus period.

Related links

Registration for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Calculating a Pension Bonus

Accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Non-accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Issue of evidentiary certificate for the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Claiming Age Pension

Exemptions from income and assets tests for superannuation investments

Cancellation of membership for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Reviews and appeals

Pension Bonus Top-up Payment (PBTP)

Types of Centrelink records

Assessing Age Pension claims and transfers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
