
Age Pension combined partner online claim 065-19012550

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer and their partner can lodge an Age
Pension combined partner claim online, or with help from a Service
Officer using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Eligibility

+ Read more ...

Some customers can lodge a combined Age Pension claim for their partner
when starting their own online claim for Age Pension.

The option to submit as a combined claim will only appear where specific
criteria are met.

Once registered, to start an online claim for Age Pension (and Pension
Bonus) the customer must:

-   Sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account
-   Select My Details from the menu, then My profile, update and save
    any changes to their personal details (such as address and
    relationship details)
-   Select Payments and Claims > Claims > Make a claim from the menu
-   From the Make a claim page select Get Started under the Seniors
    category
-   Answer the streaming questions to Check their Eligibility for an Age
    Pension combined partner claim, including details of circumstances
    to help the customer determine if they are in a crisis situation
    Note: if the customer answers yes to being in crisis then the option
    for a combined claim will not be available and the customer will be
    directed to other available claiming options
-   Commence the combined claim if eligibility criteria have been met

The partner must be registered with an active Centrelink online account
and subscribed to electronic messaging. They will then be required,
within 3 days, to respond to the notification sent to their phone and
myGov Inbox to complete a 'Task for Age Pension combined partner claim'
by:

-   Signing into myGov and accessing their own linked Centrelink online
    account
-   Selecting the outstanding 'Task for Age Pension combined partner
    claim'
-   Giving permission for their partner to claim on their behalf
-   Answering questions about their payment destination and tax
    deduction preferences
-   Reviewing the answers supplied by their partner in the claim
-   Accepting and declaring that the information provided is correct
-   Lodging supporting documents if applicable using the upload document
    service

Once both the customer and partner have completed all steps, the
customer will be required to:

-   Sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account
-   Select the open claim
-   Ensure all required tasks are completed and required documents have
    been uploaded
-   Submit claim

Note: if the partner does not complete the task within 3 days of being
notified, the partner task will disappear and the claim will revert back
to an individual Age Pension claim for the customer only.

Lodging documents

Either customer or partner can lodge the required documents for the
claim in their own online account and submit the claim for processing.

Nominees submitting online claims

Nominees acting on behalf of their principals cannot submit an Age
Pension combined online claim. However, nominees:

-   Are able to submit an Age Pension claim for their principal as a
    single claim, or
-   Where they are appointed correspondence nominee for both members of
    a couple, submit individual claims separately, or
-   Where they are appointed correspondence nominee for both members of
    a couple and the couple is eligible to lodge a combined partner
    claim and subscribed to electronic messaging, staff can run an ACC
    for an Age Pension combined claim. However, the nominee cannot
    finalise it online

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Service Officers are able to view and run an ACC for an Age Pension
combined partner claim. Service Officers are able to run an ACC for both
the customer and their partner. For more information, see Viewing and
processing online and assisted customer claims.

Service officers can only run an ACC with a nominee for an Age Pension
combined partner claim where eligibility criteria are met, including the
nominee is appointed for both members of the couple.

Customer declaration and claim submission

Once ACC has been completed by the Service Officer, the claimant must
either:

Access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account or
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to upload their documents and submit
the claim, or

Accept a verbal declaration and provide all required documents before
submitting their claim. Once the verbal declaration is accepted and ACC
submitted, a DOC containing this information will be displayed in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   the Customer Claim Summary

If a customer is unable or declines to make a verbal declaration, the
Service Officer must:

-   Invite the customer to log on to their online services, accept the
    declaration and submit their claim, or
-   Provide the customer with a Customer Declaration Form (CDF). The
    claim must not be submitted without the CDF being completed and
    signed

The claim will expire after 13 weeks if not submitted.

Notifications

When an Age Pension combined partner claim is started, the customer will
receive notifications to advise the claim has been submitted. However,
there are also additional notifications that will be sent to the
customer and partner to advise of the claim's progress. These
notifications are sent before the claim is submitted to assist with the
completion of the required combined claim tasks. For a full list of the
notifications that the customer and partner will receive during the Age
Pension combined partner online claim process see, Circumstance Change
Monitor (CCM).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website for
information about payments and services for older Australians, and a
link to the Customer Declaration Form.

Related links

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
