
My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO) 065-21081637

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the roles and responsibilities of Services
Australia when providing the face-to-face My Aged Care General Service
Offer (MACGSO) across service centres and telephony channels.

My Aged Care face-to-face services delivered by Services Australia

As part of the 2021-22 Budget, the Australian Government announced a new
aged care reform package. The Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality
and Safety identified a need for a face-to-face presence to further
support customers to access the aged care services they need and
navigate the system. The reform package builds an aged care system that
provides high quality and safe care for older Australians.

The Connecting Senior Australians to Aged Care Services budget measure
was introduced to further help older Australians understand, access, and
navigate aged care services. Services Australia introduced an aged care
face-to-face general service offer in October 2021. This complements the
existing aged care means assessment service offer.

The key deliverables of the budget measure include:

-   My Aged Care General Service Offer: all staff in face-to-face and
    aged care telephony roles provide this service. Older Australians,
    their carers or nominees who need support can access digital
    assistance and basic aged care information
-   Aged Care Specialist Officers: customers who need more specialised
    support, or who prefer face-to-face services, have access to an Aged
    Care Specialist Officer (ACSO) in some service centres. By December
    2022, ACSOs will be available in 70 service centres across
    Australia, along with 10 additional outreach officers for customers
    in rural or remote areas. Staff can book an appointment with an ACSO
    or where there is no ACSO available in the customer’s location, warm
    transfer them to the My Aged Care contact centre
-   Warm transfers: Services Australia and My Aged Care contact centres
    are linked so customers can be warm transfer customers between the
    two services. My Aged Care Contact Centre staff do not have access
    to the Centrelink booking system therefore are unable to book
    customers into an appointment with an ACSO

My Aged Care General Service Offer

A My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO) is available in all
Services Australia service centres and some Smart Centres telephony
queues).

Service Officers trained in the MACGSO provide general information and
support to customers and/or their representatives on aged care services
including:

-   the types of aged care services
-   accessing aged care
-   basic fee information
-   assist potential representatives register with My Aged Care
    digitally
-   referral to My Aged Care contact centre or an Aged Care Specialist
    Officer (ACSO) for additional support and assistance

The MACGSO provides digital support for customers and/or their
representatives on the My Aged Care website including assistance with:

-   online registration for My Aged Care
-   how to set up and update their My Aged Care online account
-   document lodgement through their My Aged Care online account
-   the find a provider tool

Customers wanting to access My Aged Care support through a channel other
than telephony or online, can have an appointment booked with an ACSO.
If there is no ACSO available in the customer’s location, warm transfer
the customer to the My Aged Care contact centre.

ACSOs are the only Services Australia staff with access to My Aged Care
customer records.

My Aged Care

The My Aged Care website makes it easier for older people, their
families, and carers to find information on ageing and aged care in
Australia. The Resources page contains a link.

My Aged Care is the key entry point and source of information for all
government-subsidised aged care services and support.

The My Aged Care Contact Centre is managed by the Department of Health
and Aged Care.

My Aged Care Contact Centre staff:

-   conduct over the phone registration for prospective clients
-   screen customers' eligibility for an aged care assessment
-   refer for a home support assessment or comprehensive assessment to
    work out their support needs
-   refer customers for an assessment and provide information regarding
    the assessment process
-   provide information on what to expect, the assessment process, home
    care services, care in an aged care home and any fees they may be
    required to pay

Customers must register with My Aged Care and be given an Aged Care user
ID before accessing Australian government-funded aged care services.

My Aged Care keeps a central client record that includes the customer’s
assessed needs, referrals for services and the government-subsidised
care services being provided.

Customers identified as having entry level aged care needs may be
referred to a Regional Assessment Service (RAS). Customers with more
complex aged care needs may be referred to an Aged Care Assessment Team
(ACAT).

Eligibility for services is based on:

-   how much assistance the customer needs with everyday tasks
-   the customer being 65 years or older (50 years or older for
    Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander people)

Customers are eligible for home support services if they are:

-   homeless
-   at risk of homelessness as a result of experiencing housing stress
    or not having secure accommodation
-   aged 50 years and over (or 45 years and over for Aboriginal and
    Torres Strait Islander people)

My Aged Care supports customers through the following channels:

Digital - through the My Aged Care website and online account

Telephony

-   through the My Aged Care contact centre (managed by the Department
    of Health and Aged Care)
-   through the Services Australia Aged Care line and other queues that
    help older Australians (providing general My Aged Care support)

Face-to-face – through general My Aged care support in all Services
Australia Service Centres and specialist support in some locations

Services Australia nominee/My Aged Care representative

A customer may have a ‘nominee’ recorded at Services Australia. This
does not mean they are also a representative for that same person at My
Aged Care. My Aged Care use the term ‘representatives’ and ‘agents’ to
support customers who:

-   May need some support to interact with MAC, and
-   Do not have close family or friends who could represent them

A customer can register someone as their representative or agent to
speak and/or act on their behalf to My Aged Care about their aged care
services and needs.

A Representative can:

-   be a person
-   be an approved organisation (future state)
-   act for a customer

An Agent:

-   can be a person
-   can be an organisation (future state)
-   can support the customer to make decisions, but not make decisions
    for the customer
-   will have limited use to view and update details for or with the
    customer
-   could be the customer’s advocate, friend, or neighbour

Note: this ‘Agent’ option is not the same as Services Australia’s Agents
and Access Points.

Service Officers can help potential representatives use the self-service
options on the My Age Care website.

For more information see the My Aged Care representatives link on the
Resources page.

ACSOs have the authority to set up potential representatives for My Aged
Care. An appointment may be booked with an ACSO to have a representative
role created if one is available in the customer’s area. Alternatively,
the customer can be warm transferred to My Aged Care.

Regional Assessment Service (RAS)

The Regional Assessment Service (RAS) assess older people for entry
level home support services available under the Commonwealth Home
Support Programme (CHSP).

RAS will visit a client in their home or main residence and do a home
support assessment to identify a client’s:

-   eligibility to receive services through CHSP
-   ability to undertake tasks in their usual living environment and
    community

A face-to-face assessment in the client's main place of residence is
preferred as this best reveals the client’s full requirements to enable
them to live in their home.

To arrange a referral to a RAS, customers need to register for My Aged
Care. MACGSO staff and ACSOs can assist customers to register for My
Aged Care online.

Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT)

Aged Care Assessment Teams (ACATs) assessors are funded by the
Department of Health and Aged Care and administered by My Aged Care.

ACAT assessors conduct comprehensive assessments of customers’ care
needs and help them access the most suitable types of care and services,
including approval for government-funded aged care. Customers are
assessed for eligibility for care under the Aged Care Act 1997. Approval
is subject to a decision by an ACAT delegate.

An ACAT assessment can be requested through either:

My Aged Care

-   Online
-   Telephone

an Aged Care Specialist Officer

The assessment can be requested by a family member, friend or carer of
the customer. For more information see Aged Care Assessment Teams
(ACAT).

To arrange a referral for an ACAT assessment customers need to register
for My Aged Care. MACGSO staff can assist customers to register for My
Aged Care online, book an appointment with an ACSO if one is available
in the customer’s location or warm transfer to My Aged Care.

Commonwealth Home Support Programme (CHSP)

The Commonwealth Home Support Programme (CHSP) helps senior Australians
access entry-level support services to live independently and safely at
home. It also provides respite services to give carers a break.

The program aims to:

-   help people live as independently as possible
-   focus on working with them, rather than doing things for them
-   give a small amount of help to a large number of people.

Most people want to stay at home for as long as possible. To support
this, the government subsidises a range of in-home aged care services,
including:

-   help around the house
-   transport
-   meals
-   personal Care
-   home modifications
-   social support
-   nursing and allied health
-   planned respite care

To arrange a referral for assistance under CHSP, customers need to
register for My Aged Care. MACGSO staff can assist customers to register
for My Aged Care online.

Home care packages

A home care package (HCP) enables older Australians access to affordable
care at home. HCPs are designed for those with more complex care needs
that go beyond what the Commonwealth Home Support Programme can provide.

There are no minimum age requirements for eligibility purposes. However
persons under age 65, will need to provide evidence that there are no
other options available for their support.

There are no citizenship, visa or residency restrictions on accessing
the HCP Program. However, the packages are not intended for visitors to
Australia or people requiring temporary or short-term care.

Eligibility for home care packages is determined through a comprehensive
assessment using the National screening and Assessment form. The Aged
Care Assessment Team (ACAT) undertakes comprehensive assessments.

If approved, the customer will receive a letter telling them the outcome
of their assessment and that they are part of the National
Prioritisation System. Allocation to the system does not automatically
assign a customer to a home care package.

To arrange a referral for a CHSP customers need to register for My Aged
Care. MACGSO staff can assist customers:

-   to register customers for My Aged Care online
-   book an appointment with an ACSO if one is available in the
    customer’s location
-   warm transfer customers to My Aged Care

Aged care homes

Residential aged care is provided in aged care homes on a permanent or
respite (short-term) basis. It is for people who need more care than can
be provided in their own homes. Services include personal care,
accommodation, laundry and meals, nursing, and some allied health
services.

Both the Australian Government and contributions from residents fund
residential aged care. The Australian Government pays subsidies and
supplements to approved providers for each resident.

All residents can be asked to pay a basic daily fee set at 85 per cent
of the single basic age pension. Some residents also pay a means-tested
care fee based on an assessment of their income and assets. Some
residents will have their accommodation costs paid in full or in part by
the Australian Government, but those with greater means are required to
pay the accommodation price (formerly known as a bond) agreed with the
aged care home.

For more in depth information on Aged Care homes, an appointment should
be booked with an ACSO or warm transfer to My Aged Care.

Short term care

Flexible care caters for senior Australians who need a different type of
care than that offered by mainstream home and residential services. This
includes:

-   Short-Term Restorative Care (STRC) designed to help reverse or slow
    the difficulties of everyday tasks. The program is delivered by a
    team of health professionals to help manage and adapt to changing
    needs
-   transition care helps an individual recover after a hospital stay.
    It provides short-term special care to help regain functional
    independence
-   respite care supports senior Australians and their carers by giving
    them a break for a short period. Depending on needs, it could be a
    few hours, a few days, or longer.

Indigenous Australians can also receive flexible care. The National
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care Program makes
grants to services that provide culturally appropriate residential and
home care for Indigenous Australians, mainly in rural and remote areas.

Warm transfers

A warm transfer process has been introduced between Services Australia
and the My Aged Care contact centre.

Warms transfers include:

-   transfer of customers from Service Australia Service Centre and
    Smart Centres to the My Aged Care Contact Centre
-   transfer of customers from the My Aged Care Contact Centre to
    Services Australia Smart Centres
-   transfer between the My Aged Care Industry phone line and Services
    Australia Provider line (Aged Care and Allied Health)

Warm transfers from My Aged Care can be accepted from a third party to
book an ACSO appointment. See Implied consent regarding third parties
for more information

For the warm transfer number to My Aged Care see ‘Contact details’ on
the Resources page.

Aged Care Specialist Officer (ACSO)

The Aged Care Specialist Officer (ACSO) provides face-to-face end-to-end
access and navigation services for aged care customers, including the My
Aged Care General Service Officer (MACGSO).

ACSOs also provide in-depth information on the different types of aged
care services including:

-   help at home (Commonwealth Home Support Programme, Home Care
    Packages)
-   short term care (Respite and transition care)
-   aged care homes (permanent residential aged care)

ACSOs may also provide the following services:

-   screen customers to determine eligibility for a My Aged Care
    assessment
-   refer customers for a My Aged Care assessment
-   assist customers to appoint a representative for My Aged Care and/or
    authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on their
    behalf for Services Australia
-   help determine how complex financial arrangements or products impact
    customer’s entitlement under the Social Security and Aged Care Acts
-   assist customers to understand how their financial situation impacts
    the amount they contribute towards the cost of their aged care
    services
-   assist customers or their representatives in crisis by problem
    solving and supporting them to ensure they are connected to services
    they need
-   make updates to customers My Aged Care and Services Australia
    electronic records, including personal information such as address
    and phone number
-   complete reviews of customer circumstances and referrals for
    reassessments where their needs have changed
-   build relationships with local community and external providers and
    connect customers where appropriate
-   support with facilitating responses to local MP electoral office
    enquiries
-   manage complaints in line with My Aged Care complaints process

Outreach Service Offer

The Outreach Service Offer provides services to customers living in
regional and remote locations. Aged Care Specialist Service Officers
(ACSOs) deliver outreach services, either face-to-face or virtually.

The ACSO outreach officers:

-   support Mobile Service Centres to service customers in rural and
    regional locations
-   support the agency’s remote servicing model, to deliver services
    directly to people living in remote areas and Aboriginal and Torres
    Strait Islander communities
-   service customers in their local area and if required assist ACSOs
    to service customers during emergency situations
-   work in collaboration with the community outreach specialist
    programme (COSP). COSP is a collaboration between the Community
    Engagement Officer (CEO), Indigenous Service Officer (ISO) and
    Multicultural Service Officer (MSO) programs, to deliver
    out-servicing programs to people experiencing a vulnerability or
    complex needs in local communities

The Resources page contains aged care contact details, a glossary of
terms and external website links.

Related links

Aged Care

Aged care - initial contact

Aged care means assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
