
Aged Care means assessment – Rental income from principal home 065-09030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Where a care recipient receives rental income for their former principal
home, the date that they first entered permanent residential care will
affect the assessment of this income.

On this Page:

Care assessment scheme codes

Once the Admission date and Pre-entry date are entered on the RCA
Circumstances (RCIRC) screen, the system will determine the Assessment
Scheme that the care recipient is affected by.

-   POST2016 - care recipient entered aged care after 1 January 2016,
    net rental income from their former principal home is included in
    their Aged Care means assessment
-   POST2014 - care recipient entered aged care, or commenced pre-entry
    leave, on or after 1 July 2014, net rental income from their former
    principal home is not included in their means assessment
-   POST2008 - care recipient entered aged care, or pre-entry leave, on
    or after 20 March 2008, net rental income from their former
    principal home is not included in their means assessment
-   PRE2008 - care recipient entered aged care, or commenced pre-entry
    leave, before 20 March 2008, net rental income from their former
    principal home is not included in their means assessment

Care recipient entered aged care prior to 1 January 2016

Care recipient(s) who entered permanent residential care prior to 1
January 2016 and meet the following conditions:

-   are renting their former principal home, and
-   paying their accommodation costs by either periodic payment or a
    combination of periodic and lump sum payment

will have all of the rental income from their former principal home
excluded from the Aged Care means assessment. This includes if they:

-   take social or hospital leave before 1 January 2016 and re-enter
    care after 1 January 2016, or
-   start pre-entry leave before 1 January 2016 and enter care after 1
    January 2016

They will still be considered to be a homeowner for social security
purposes depending on the date of vacation of the former principal home.
See also: Vacation of principal home due to illness.

The former principal home may be rented out at any time and the care
recipient is still eligible to have their rental income exempt from the
Aged Care means assessment, providing the above criteria are met.

Care recipient entered aged care on or after 1 January 2016

From 1 January 2016, new entrants into permanent residential care will
have all of the rental income from their former principal home included
in their Aged Care means assessment.

A new assessment scheme code of POST2016 Assessment Scheme will apply
for residential care recipient(s) only.

POST2016 will be automatically determined and set by the means
assessment where a recipient’s date of admission is on or after 1
January 2016, unless a saving provision applies.

The POST2016 Assessment scheme will display in the Assessment Scheme:
field.

Aged Care means assessment - Income component - Processing

From 1 January 2016, care recipient(s) with a POST2016 Assessment Scheme
will commence having net rental income from their/their partner’s former
principal home included in their assessable income. Rental income for
these care recipient(s) will be assessed for Aged Care means assessment
regardless of whether the real estate item is recorded as EXA, EXP, EX5
or EXE exempt on the Real Estate/Business Identifying (REBI) screen.

No changes will be made to the process or procedures for recording a
property as exempt, since these exemption codes and associated
assessments must remain correctly recorded for Income Support Payment
(ISP) purposes.

EXE asset exemptions will remain unchanged for both ISP and Aged Care
means assessment.

Care recipient entered aged care prior to 1 January 2016, but was formally discharged for more than 28 days after 1 January 2016

After 1 January 2016 if a care recipient is formally discharged from
Aged Care means assessment for more than 28 days, rental income from
their former principal home will be included in their means assessment
if they re-enter care.

Home care

Care recipient(s) receiving a Home Care package are not subject to the
new post 1 January 2016 business rules. Since these care recipient(s)
receive care in their own homes they do not have a ‘former principal
home’ that can have rental income exempt from the income assessment.

All care recipient(s) receiving home care are currently assessed under a
POST2014 Assessment Scheme and will remain so after 1 January 2016.

Change of care type

Situations may arise where a care recipient(s) transitions between care
types.

Where a care recipient departs residential care to commence home care
from 1 January 2016, they will be assessed as POST2014.

Where a care recipient departs home care and enters permanent
residential care from 1 January 2016, they will be assessed as POST2016
from their permanent residential care date of admission.

Savings provisions

Residential care recipient(s) will be subject to a saving provision that
will allow them to remain assessed under a PRE2008, POST2008 or POST2014
Assessment Scheme in some circumstances.

28 Day saving provision

Where a care recipient departs from permanent residential care, and
within 28 days (inclusive) re-enters permanent residential care, they
will retain their existing assessment scheme under grandfathering
provisions. That is, they will not be automatically set to a POST2016
Assessment Scheme.

The Resources page contains information about Working Credits and the
assessment of income, savings provisions, change of care type and codes
used for exempting care recipient(s) from the income and/or assets
assessment.

Related links

Aged care fees and charges - accommodation payments

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Exempt income

Exempt Assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
