
Assessing Age Pension claims and transfers 065-03030000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the assessment of new claims
for Age Pension and transfers to Age Pension from another income support
payment.

Age Pension claims

For information about how to help customers or their correspondence
nominees claim Age Pension and what to do upon receipt of a paper claim
or documentation, see Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension. If the
customer or their partner is registered in the Pension Bonus Scheme,
they will need to claim Pension Bonus at the same time.

When an online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is submitted whether it
is lodged as a single person claim or as a combined partner claim, an
Age Pension claim Work Item is created in Process Direct that contains
the claim information. The claim is reviewed and processed in Process
Direct.

When a paper claim is scanned to the customer's record, a SOA shell Work
Item is created in Process Direct. Claim information is entered manually
in Process Direct before the claim is processed.

Early claims

Age Pension claims can be lodged up to 13 weeks prior to qualification,
where customers are yet to reach Age Pension age. The start date for
payment will be the date the person qualifies for payment.

If early claim provisions do not apply (the customer qualifies for Age
Pension but not payable on the date they lodged their claim), start day
rules may apply a later start if a change of circumstances applies
within 13 weeks of claim lodgement. See Calculating the start day
general rule.

Transfers to Age Pension

Most income support customers are invited to transfer to Age Pension
before they reach Age Pension age. Identified Indigenous customers may
be eligible for an automatic transfer.

If the customer does not submit an online transfer or lodge a Transfer
to Age Pension (SA383), their payment (and their partner’s) will be
suspended or cancelled on the day they turn Age Pension age. Payment
(including their partner’s) should only be restored if the online
transfer is submitted or an SA383 has been lodged (including required
documentation). Superannuation investments are assessable at Age Pension
age whether the customer transfers to Age Pension or not.

Check the customer will not be disadvantaged by transferring to Age
Pension. If they continue to qualify for their current payment, they may
choose not to transfer. Superannuation investments and any changes to
their (and their partner's) income and assets must be provided and
recorded and the reassessment activity finalised.

If a customer has submitted the Transfer to Age Pension online, process
the transfer or reassessment activity in Customer First.

If a customer has lodged the SA383, run the Transfer to Age Pension
script in Customer Record to record details and to finalise or reject
the transfer.

Customers who receive their income support payment entirely as a loan
payment under the Home Equity Access Scheme can only be transferred to
Age Pension as a PLS-only customer. They are not eligible to receive a
payable rate of Age Pension without undergoing a full assessment of
their income and assets (for example, via the SA369 or SA220). Before
transferring a PLS-only customer to Age Pension, contact the Home Equity
Access Scheme National team to determine that the transfer is an
appropriate course of action. Contact via Fast Note. Select Auto text,
use > Complex Assessment > Request for CAO action > CAO Home Equity
Access Scheme.

Qualification for Age Pension and other assistance

To qualify for Age Pension a person must have reached Age Pension age
and satisfy residence requirements. Age Pension is also subject to an
income and assets test.

The qualifying age for Age Pension increased from 65 and a half years to
66 years from 1 July 2019. The qualifying age will rise by 6 months
every 2 years, reaching 67 by 1 July 2023.

If a claim is rejected for a residence related reason this may be based
on information the customer has provided or visa, citizenship and
movement information provided directly from the Department of Home
Affairs datalink. Information provided by this datalink will take
precedence over any conflicting information provided by the customer.

Eligible Age Pension customers may be entitled to Pension Supplement and
additional products and services.

Once an income support customer reaches Age Pension age, they are no
longer covered by the Working Credit initiatives but may be entitled to
the Work Bonus if they have employment income.

Proving age

For all claims proof of age must be supplied. When a customer lodges a
claim and provides a document that verifies their age and is an approved
Identity document, the information must be checked against the
customer's record.

Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

A customer's entitlement to a Pension Bonus must be considered before
the Age Pension claim is finalised. This is because if no basic rate of
Age Pension or Pension Supplement basic amount is payable, the
customer's Pension Bonus will be nil.

The customer may elect to withdraw both the Age Pension claim and the
Pension Bonus claim before the Age Pension claim is determined and
re-claim when an amount of basic pension or basic Pension Supplement is
payable, and a Pension Bonus may be payable.

Discuss options with the customer or refer them to a Financial
Information Service (FIS) Officer if they have not seen one previously.

All Pension Bonus claims are processing in Customer Record.

Contents

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Processing transfers to Age Pension

Related links

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension'

Transfer to Age Pension

Process Direct

Qualification for Age Pension

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Identity Confirmation

Request to reassess a rejected claim

Australian residence requirements for payment

Residence requirements

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Updating residence screens (CLK)

Former resident provisions

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Early claims

Calculating the start day general rule

Pension income and assets tests

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
