
Initial contact by customers registering for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) 065-01010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for initial contact by customers
registering for the PBS.

Tax free lump sum bonus

The PBS provides a tax free lump sum bonus for people who choose to work
past Age Pension age and defer claiming an Age Pension.

New registrations now closed

The PBS is closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014.

Service Officers must not register customers in the PBS unless:

-   the customer qualified for Age Pension before 20 September 2009, and
-   lodged or can be deemed to have lodged an application to register
    before 1 July 2014

The Registration for the Pension Bonus Scheme (SA319) cannot be accepted
from 1 July 2014. However, if the customer has a completed application
form to lodge, it should be taken and the customer advised of the
outcome in writing.

All registered members may remain in the scheme and claim Age Pension in
due course, in line with existing arrangements.

Background to scheme

The start date of the scheme was 1 July 1998. Customers must be a
registered member of the PBS to qualify for a pension bonus. Membership
of the scheme is voluntary.

Applications to register in the PBS could be lodged with the Department
of Human Services, or for ex-service people, the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA).

As part of the Government's Secure and Sustainable Pension Reforms, the
PBS was closed to new entrants who do not qualify for Age Pension before
20 September 2009.

Enquiries after 1 July 2014

If a customer who is not registered for the PBS enquires about the
scheme from 1 July 2014, they should be advised that the scheme is
closed to new registrations.

Run the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow to screen the
customer for other service offers.

Customers may wish to claim:

-   Age Pension
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

The Resources page links to the Payment and Service Finder which the
customer may be referred to.

Registrations before 1 July 2014

Customers could lodge a registration form (SA319) up to 13 weeks before
and up to 13 weeks after Age Pension age to have their registration
start from the date they qualified for Age Pension.

If a customer lodged their registration form more than 13 weeks after
their Age Pension qualification date, they must have been either
accruing and meeting the work test (or non-accruing) for the whole
pre-application period, to have their registration accepted.

The registration date was the date of receipt of the form or the date of
customer contact if received within 14 days of contact. However, if the
customer had an acceptable reason for not registering on time,
registration could be backdated to the date the customer qualified for
Age Pension (or 1 July 1998 if qualified for Age Pension pre 1 July
1998).

Most reasons were acceptable, for example not understanding the need to
register, not knowing about the scheme. Customers had an acceptable
reason for not registering within 13 weeks of their Age Pension
qualification date if they did not expect to be paid Age Pension due to
their assets but have benefited from legislative changes such as
extended curtilage from 1 January 2007 and the reduced assets taper from
20 September 2007.

For a customer registering in the PBS it was mandatory that the Service
Officer recommend an appointment with a Financial Information Service
(FIS) Officer. They explained the scheme in detail and discussed all
options available to the customer.

Complex enquiries

Enquiries from a customer, financial planner or organisation involving
complex issues of entitlement comparisons or 'what if' scenarios, should
be referred to the local Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer.

The Resources page contains links to the Claim for a Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (SA296) and the Payment and Service Finder.

Related links

Registration for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Confirming a customer's identity

Residence requirements

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
