
Other financial assistance and services for Older Australians 065-12000000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines other financial assistance and services for older
Australians.

Government intent

The Australian Government is committed to providing services to help
older Australians maintain their quality of life. As people age, it is
important they remain healthy and independent for as long as possible.
Services Australia aims to meet the needs of customers seeking help in
retirement by ensuring the customer receives the right payment from the
earliest possible date of eligibility.

A range of organisations provide support services and useful
information:

-   the MoneySmart website has information to help people make the most
    of their money
-   the myagedcare website provides information on a wide range of
    community, aged care and support services
-   the Hearing Australia website is dedicated to helping hearing
    impaired people have a better quality of life

Other payments and supplementary benefits

Customers not eligible for Age Pension due to residence or age
requirements may be eligible for other income support payments. Advise
customers of the payments they may qualify for and then help them select
the most appropriate for their needs. Note: Widow Allowance and Partner
Allowance can no longer be claimed.

Quarterly Supplement

Quarterly supplement will be paid on or soon after the test days 20
March, 20 June, 20 September, 20 December to Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC) holders who have given payment destination details and not
asked to suppress the quarterly supplement.

If the customer ceases being a CSHC holder before the next payment date,
any accrued quarterly supplement will pay on cancellation.

Utilities Allowance (UA)

Utilities Allowance (UA) payments started from March 2005. They are paid
to certain customers to help meet the cost of regular bills such as gas,
electricity and water.

My Aged Care General Service Offer

As a result of the aged care reform package announced in the 2021-2022
budget, a My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO) is being made
available in all Services Australia service centres and aged care
contact centres). See My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO) for
more information.

Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSO)

ACSOs provide free, independent and confidential end-to-end access and
navigation services for aged care including:

the My Aged Care General Service Officer (GSO)

access and navigation of My Aged Care services

in-depth information on the different types of aged care services

-   Help at Home (Commonwealth Home Support Programme, Home Care
    Packages)
-   Short term care (Respite and transition care)
-   Aged Care homes (permanent residential aged care)

FIS

The Financial Information Service (FIS) is a free education and expert
information service provided by the government.

FIS helps people to make informed decisions about investment and
financial issues by helping them understand their own financial affairs
and the options available to them.

One-off payments

The 2006, 2007 and 2008 Budgets included a one-off bonus payment for
Senior Australians who are Centrelink customers and who met the
qualifications on Budget night of that year.

The Resources page contains links to MoneySmart, myagedcare and the
Hearing Australia websites.

Contents

Other payments and supplementary benefits that may be claimed by Older
Australians

Quarterly Supplement

Utilities Allowance (UA)

Financial Information Service (FIS)

State Seniors Cards

Related links

Widow Allowance (WA)

Partner Allowance (PA) qualification and savings provisions

Hearing Services Program

Helping customers to build their financial capability

My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO)

Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSOs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
