
Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) 065-19112638

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Aged Care Provider Portal
(ACPP).

Aged Care Provider Portal

The Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) makes it easier and quicker for
aged care services to perform secure online transactions with Services
Australia. The ACPP is the single point of entry for online services
used by aged care services. A PRODA account is required to access the
Aged Care Provider Portal. When registered, only authorised users (‘A
users’) can access the ACPP.

Note: the term “Commonwealth” is often referred to as “CW” in this
document and system menus.

Options available in the ACPP

Aged care services can use the ACPP to:

access online claiming. This allows ‘A users’ to:

-   submit a monthly claim for an aged care service
-   submit an invoice amount for home care purposes only
-   submit and correct care recipients’ circumstances events
-   register Viability events and register, delete and/or return
    Commonwealth (CW) unspent amounts (for home care purposes only)
-   register care recipients’ Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI)
    assessment details (for residential care purposes only)
-   register Oxygen Supplement and the Enteral Feeding Supplement events
    and upload the Application for the Oxygen or Enteral Feeding
    Supplement (AC011) form and supporting evidence (for residential
    care purposes only)
-   view a care recipient’s leave balance including respite care (for
    residential care purposes only)
-   register care setting days and bulk events (for flexible care
    purposes only)

access, view and download care recipients’ personal details and payment
information history

access and view a care recipient’s home care account (for home care
purposes only)

access, view and download their services’ payment statement details

switch between services (if authorised)

manage and request registration of service user details (if authorised)

manage and register service contact details (if authorised)

Accessing the ACPP

To access the ACPP, ‘A users’ must have:

-   a PRODA account, and
-   their service linked through PRODA

Their organisation can be:

-   a residential care service
-   a home care service
-   a flexible care service

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions and answers about
the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP), links to contact details and the
Service Australia website.

Related links

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACCP) self service

Aged Care Staff-Assist Portal (ACSAP)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)

Helping users create a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Managing a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Online claiming registration process for aged care providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
