
Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme 065-19041642

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for the Home Equity
Access Scheme (the Scheme).

Eligibility criteria

To be eligible for the Scheme a customer must meet all of the following
criteria:

be Age Pension age or partnered to someone who is Age Pension age

be receiving or be qualified for a one of the following payments:

-   Age Pension, or
-   Carer Payment, or
-   Disability Support Payment

own real estate in Australia of sufficient value to secure the loan

have adequate and appropriate insurance for the Australian real estate
offered as security for the loan, and

not be bankrupt or subject to a personal insolvency agreement

The customer must also be in Australia on the date they lodge their loan
application, meet identity confirmation requirements and agree to the
terms and conditions of the Scheme to be eligible to participate.

The Scheme (Loan Only) is payable to customers that do not get the Age
Pension because they fail the income and/or assets test. That is, only
if they are current or qualify for the Farm Household Assistance (FHA).

Age requirements

-   A customer meets the age criteria for the Scheme if they are Age
    Pension age or over. Customers who are under Age Pension age meet
    the age criteria if they are partnered to someone that is Age
    Pension age or over
-   A customer who is under Age Pension age and qualifies because their
    partner is Age Pension age, will lose qualification if they become
    separated from their partner
-   There are no early claims for the Scheme. If a person lodges a loan
    application before becoming eligible, (that is, before they and/or
    their partner reach Age Pension age) the application will be
    rejected.

Qualifying payments

-   Customers only need to qualify for 1 of the qualifying payments for
    the Scheme to be eligible, and do not need to have a payable rate.
    There is no requirement to meet the income and assets tests for the
    Scheme purposes
-   If the customer does receive a qualifying pension, the actual rate
    payable affects the amount of loan payable per fortnight. See Home
    Equity Access Scheme for more details

Customers do not necessarily have to lodge a claim for the qualifying
payment, however in some cases it is mandatory, for example if the
person is under Age Pension age and not already current on a qualifying
payment. See Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications for more
details

Real estate as security for the loan

Customers (or their partner) must own real estate in Australia, and be
willing to offer their real estate as security for the loan to
participate in the Scheme.

See Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme for more details about
real estate and loan security.

Adequate and appropriate insurance

-   The customer must have adequate and appropriate insurance for the
    Australian real estate they use as security for the loan
-   If the insurance value of the secured real estate falls below the
    market value of all buildings on the property (or properties), the
    person may not be eligible to participate in the Scheme
-   Customers must provide documentation of their insurance policy for
    each property offered as security with their loan application

See Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme for more details.

Bankruptcy or Personal Insolvency

-   If a customer is bankrupt or subject to a personal insolvency
    agreement, they are not eligible to receive the loan payments
-   Before granting a loan application, the customer's bankruptcy status
    is verified by checking the bankruptcy register through the online
    tool, Equifax
-   If the customer becomes listed as bankrupt or subject to personal
    insolvency after being granted a loan, they cease to be qualified to
    get further loan payments

Terms and conditions

-   To be eligible for the Scheme, the customer and their partner must
    accept and agree to the Scheme terms and conditions
-   Consent to the terms and conditions is obtained through the loan
    application. Customers (and their partners, if the customer is a
    member of a couple) must read the terms and conditions and make sure
    they have a full understanding of the loan arrangements they are
    entering into before lodging an application

Identity confirmation requirements

-   Customers applying for the Scheme (and their partners, if the
    customer is a member of a couple) are required to satisfy identity
    requirements before their application can be accepted
-   If a customer or their partner do not have a confirmed identity
    status (see Identity Confirmation), they are required to provide
    documents that establish commencement of identity and use of
    identity in the community. The link between the identity and the
    individual will then be established via an approved photographic
    identity document
-   If the loan applicant is a member of a couple, their partner must
    also complete linkage
-   If a customer has a confirmed identity status, they should not be
    asked to provide further identity documents
-   Identity Confirmation must not be confused with Proof of Record
    Ownership (PoRO). Customers will still need to answer PoRO questions
    that confirm they are the person identified in the record

See Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan for details about checking
identity status before accepting a loan application.

Notification obligations

The Scheme customers must notify the agency within 14 days of any
changes to their circumstances that may affect their eligibility for the
Scheme.

For details on the notification obligations, and reviewing changes to a
customer's circumstances, see Home Equity Access Scheme reviews.

Lodgement requirements

For a Scheme application to be valid, the customer must be physically
present in Australia, and qualified for a qualifying payment, on the day
they lodge their Scheme application. The application must be signed by
the applicant. If the customer is partnered, their partner must also
sign the application.

Applications signed by another person on behalf of an applicant are not
accepted unless the person is a legal representative for the applicant,
for example they hold Power of Attorney. The legal representative must
have a correspondence nominee arrangement in place and provide a copy of
the legal documentation with the application. See Assessing Home Equity
Access Scheme applications for more details.

Portability

Loan payments under the Scheme continue to be paid while the customer is
outside Australia as long as they remain qualified for the Scheme,
including retaining:

-   qualification for their associated pension payment, and
-   equity in the Australian real estate they used to secure the loan

Any qualifying payment the person receives is subject to normal
portability provisions. If the customer ceases to be qualified while
they are outside Australia (for example, a Carer Payment recipient is no
longer providing care as a result of an overseas absence), their loan
payments will stop

Residents of non-agreement countries

Generally, requests to be paid under the Scheme will not be successful
from residents of non-agreement countries who are not already current on
a qualifying payment.

The claim for the relevant social security payment will be rejected if
the person is either not an Australian resident and/or not in Australia
on the day on which the claim is lodged (unless lodged under an
international social security agreement). Consequently, any Scheme
application will also be rejected.

Hardship

-   Financial hardship provisions do not apply to the Scheme
-   The assets hardship provisions applicable to income support payments
    are mutually exclusive with the Scheme
-   If a person is receiving income support under hardship provisions,
    this does not prevent them from being able to lodge a request for
    payment under the Scheme. However, payment can only be made under
    one or the other provision
-   If an applicant is at risk of financial hardship, see Request for
    urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
    hardship
-   It may be appropriate to investigate whether a customer has
    entitlement to income support under the assets hardship provisions
    before proceeding with a request for a loan payment under the
    Scheme.

Customers registered in the Pension Bonus Scheme

Customers who are registered in the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) can apply
for the Scheme loan however need to be aware their eligibility for the
PBS will be impacted if they claim a qualifying pension as well.

Customers registered for the PBS should attend an appointment with a
Financial Information Services Officer to consider these impacts.

If the customer is applying for a loan only arrangement under the Home
Equity Access Scheme, receipt of the loan does not constitute receipt of
income support and eligibility for PBS won't be affected.

Customer legal or financial advice

Customers should be advised to seek independent legal or financial
advice before applying for a loan under the Scheme.

The Resources page contains a link to details about the Scheme on the
Services Australia website.

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme claims

Identity Confirmation

Coding identity documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
