
Viability Supplement for aged care services 065-13040070

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Viability Supplement paid to residential and
home care services as well as the additional support for services
providing care to care recipients under the Indigenous/Homelessness
Australians measure.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version

Viability Supplement

The Viability Supplement is a payment under the Aged Care Act 1997 to
improve the capacity of rural and remote aged care services to offer
quality care to care recipients.

The remoteness of a service has historically been determined based on
Rural, Remote and Metropolitan Areas (RRMA) (1997 Scheme only) and the
Accessibility/ Remoteness Index of Australia (ARIA). Both these
methodologies were based on 1990s Census data but no longer accurately
reflect Australia's population distribution.

The 2016-17 Budget measure improved the targeting of funding for aged
care services in rural and remote areas by using the most recent Census
data to determine if residential care services and home care recipients
are in regional, rural and remote areas.

As of 1 January 2017 the Modified Monash Model (MMM), the classification
model applies.

MMM takes into account the size and isolation of a town based on latest
Census data. Any change to the MMM classification table requires
legislative changes.

The changes applied to all residential care services and home care
services, for which Services Australia administers payments.

For home care recipients, eligibility is based on the location where
they are receiving care. For residential care services, eligibility is
based on the service’s location and the number of care recipients in the
service’s care.

The Viability Supplement is paid to eligible residential and home care
services on a monthly basis. Current and historical rates of the
Viability Supplement are published on the Department of Health’s
website. The Resources page has a link to the schedule of subsidies and
supplements.

The Viability Supplement changes that apply to flexible care places
funded under the Multi-Purpose Services Programme (MPS) and the National
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care Programme
(NATSIFACP) are grant-based and are administered by the Department of
Health.

Note: the Viability Supplement will continue to be paid if a care
recipient receives care in the same location when transferring to
another service. If a care recipient moves, their eligibility will be
recalculated automatically based on their new location.

Grandfathering for care recipients

To ensure no services were disadvantaged as a result of the shift to
Modified Monash Model (MMM), grandfathering provisions have:

-   continued for the old 1997, 2001 and 2005 residential care Viability
    Supplement schemes, and
-   commenced for the home care Viability Supplement arrangements for
    eligible care recipients in care prior to 1 January 2017

Grandfathering arrangements apply in certain circumstances. For example,
a care recipient who was in receipt of a home care package prior to 1
January 2017, are assessed against both the Accessibility/ Remoteness
Index of Australia (ARIA) and MMM classifications. If the MMM payment
rate was equal to or higher than the old ARIA classification, the MMM
rate applies. If the ARIA rate was more than the MMM classification, the
care recipient remains on the ARIA rate under the grandfathering
arrangements.

If the care recipient subsequently moves to a new location or a new
service provider in a different suburb or postcode, the grandfathering
arrangements ceases and they are assessed for eligibility under the MMM
rate at their new location.

The Resources page contains a MMM vs ARIA Home Care Location Scores for
Grandfathering comparison table.

Viability Supplement - expansion

As part of the 2011-2012 Budget, measures were introduced to expand
funding under the Viability Supplement to provide additional support to
eligible aged care services that provide specialist aged care services
to:

-   Indigenous Australians, and
-   people with a history of (or severe risk of) homelessness

For a service to be eligible for additional funding under the Viability
Supplement expansion component, more than 50 per cent of the residents
at an aged care home must be:

-   homeless or Indigenous Australians with complex behavioural needs,
    or
-   care recipients with lower care needs

The service must be registered with the Department of Health to be able
to receive the Viability Supplement expansion component.

Eligibility for a care recipient is assessed using appraisal tool A and
B in the Aged Care Subsidy Principles. Where a person is both Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander and homeless both appraisal A and B must be
completed.

Services should use the Viability expansion component and homeless
supplement assessment and homelessness form (AC024) to complete this
appraisal. See Homeless supplement for aged care services for
information on how to process the AC024 form. For new care recipients in
an already approved service, the date of eligibility commences on the
date they enter into care, provided the form is submitted during the
notification period.

For services that are newly registered with the Department of Health,
the Department of Health will contact Services Australia and advise that
the AC024 forms for eligible care recipients can now be processed with
the date of effect that the Department of Health delegate approves the
registration.

The Resources page contains a MMM vs ARIA Home Care Location Scores for
Grandfathering comparison table, the ARIA scores and the corresponding
MMM classifications for all geographical locations in Australia
attachment. There is also a link to the Aria (Scores rounded for
demonstration purposes) website and a link to the Department of Health
and Services Australia websites.

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Homeless supplement for aged care services

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
