
Unspent home care amounts 065-13010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about unspent home care amounts and
processing the Commonwealth (CW) portion of unspent home care amounts
(CW unspent amount).

Unspent home care amounts

From 27 February 2017, a home care package follows the care recipient.
Care recipients are able to choose a provider who best meets their goals
and needs, and to change their provider if they wish.

The unspent home care amount is the total amount of home care subsidy
and home care fees paid to the provider that have not been spent on a
care recipient’s care. The unspent home care amount may consist of a
care recipient portion and a Commonwealth (CW) portion. Up until 31
August 2021, both the care recipient and the CW portion accrued with the
provider. From 1 September 2021, the CW unspent accrues with Services
Australia.

Note: the term ‘Commonwealth’ is often referred to as ‘CW’ in this
procedure and system menus.

Unspent home care amounts can occur at any time. Providers should be
working with the care recipient to ensure they are getting the full
benefit of their home care package. This can occur as part of providers’
ongoing discussions with the care recipient and reflected in their
individualised budget statements.

If the care recipient departs from the service, the provider may deduct
an exit fee from the unspent home care amount. The exit fee is deducted
from the care recipient portion of unspent amount if available. This is
subject to the exit fee being fully disclosed to the care recipient in
the home care agreement and through publication on My Aged Care.

Note: an exit fee helps cover the cost of administration when a care
recipient departs a provider. The care recipient and the provider work
out this amount.

Improved payment arrangements for home care September 2021 changes

The way unspent home care amounts are managed changed from 1 September
2021. The changes were:

-   All home care recipients have a home care account. See Home care
    account for further information
-   The Government collects and holds the Commonwealth (CW) unspent
    amount in each care recipient’s home care account
-   The unspent funds continue to be available to pay for a care
    recipient’s care and services when needed
-   Providers must report the CW unspent amount for each care recipient
    calculated as at the end of the month preceding the claim month.
    Note: while reporting was initially optional, providers had to
    report at least once in either the September 2021, October 2021 or
    the November 2021 claim. From the December 2021 claim month onwards,
    reporting the CV unspent amount was mandatory
-   Providers had the choice to return the CW unspent fund amounts as
    part of the home care monthly claim process from 1 September 2021
    for a 6 months period
-   For care recipients currently in care, providers continue to have a
    limit of 2 years after the end of a payment period to make changes
    to a home care event
-   For care recipients who departed home care, providers can only make
    changes within 70 days after the care recipient’s departure date
-   If providers believe a significant error on the part of Services
    Australia has impacted their payments requiring a change beyond the
    70 days, they can submit supporting evidence to the Aged Care
    Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied Health Branch) for escalation to
    Aged Care Programmes Branch
-   All requests for changes greater than 70 days or 2 years period must
    include relevant supporting evidence. See Maintain claims in Aged
    Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) for further information
-   Transfers of unspent funds between providers no longer occurs from 1
    September 2021

There are no changes to how and when providers inform Services Australia
of the CW unspent amounts. Providers can continue to inform Services
Australia of the CW unspent amount within 70 days after the departure
date via the home care monthly claims reconciliation process. The claim
can be submitted via either the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) or the
paper format channel.

There are no changes to the calculation and administration of the Care
Recipient portion of the unspent amount. Services Australia has no
visibility of the Care Recipient portion of the unspent amount upon the
care recipient’s departure. See Care Recipient portion of unspent home
care amount for further information.

Prior to 1 September 2021, an unspent home care amount was broken down
into 3 categories:

-   The CW portion
-   The Care Recipient portion
-   The Transfer portion

Commonwealth (CW) portion of unspent home care amount

The Commonwealth (CW) portion is the unspent amount attributed to the
home care subsidy paid to a provider for a care recipient.

The provider is responsible for the identification and management,
including the calculation, of any CW unspent amount in respect of the
care recipient.

If the service opts to return the CW unspent amount, or if the care
recipient departs from the service (for any reason including transfer to
another service of the same provider) the provider must calculate the
unspent amount(s) to determine the portion to be returned to the
Commonwealth.

The provider must inform Services Australia of the CW unspent amount
within 70 days after the departure date via the home care monthly claims
reconciliation process.

On 1 September 2021, the time providers have to make changes to a home
care event changed. Providers have a limit of 70 days after the
departure date. This applies to care recipients who have departed from
home care and all home care event types.

For changes to an event prior to 1 September 2021, providers have a
limit of 2 years after the end of a payment period. This applies to all
care recipients, regardless of the care recipient’s care status.

For changes beyond the 70 day or 2 year periods, providers can email
their request to the Aged Care Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied
Health Branch). All requests must include relevant supporting evidence.

Service Officers must be satisfied the request to change an event beyond
the 70 days or 2 years period is a result of:

-   an administrative error made by the Commonwealth or an agent of the
    Commonwealth, or
-   determining the circumstances of a care recipient are different from
    those on the basis the subsidy was claimed

See Maintain claims in Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) for
further information.

Care Recipient portion of unspent home care amount

The Care Recipient portion is the unspent amount attributed to home care
fees paid to the provider by the care recipient, less any unpaid home
care fees owed by the care recipient.

Unpaid home care fees can only be offset from the Care Recipient
portion. They cannot be offset from the Commonwealth (CW) portion.

If the care recipient has left home care:

-   the provider must pay the Care Recipient portion (if any) of the
    unspent home care amount to the care recipient within 70 days after
    the departure date

If the care recipient passes away:

-   the provider must pay the Care Recipient portion (if any) of the
    unspent home care amount to the care recipient’s estate within 14
    days after seeing the probate of the will, or administration letters
    from the care recipient’s estate

There were no changes to the calculation and administration of the Care
Recipient portion of the unspent amount from 1 September 2021.

Transfer portion of unspent home care amount

Transfers of Commonwealth (CW) portion of unspent funds between
providers no longer occur from 1 September 2021. This includes transfers
between services under the same provider.

Prior to 1 September 2021, the Transfer portion was the sum of the CW
portion and Care Recipient portion. The existing provider transferred
the Transfer portion to the new provider in specified circumstances. The
aged care legislation did not regulate how this transfer occurred. The
Transfer portion was a matter for both providers, with no direct
involvement of the Commonwealth. The Transfer portion amount was not
reportable and/or viewable to Services Australia.

Where an existing provider was notified within 56 days that the care
recipient had entered into a new home care agreement with another
provider:

the ceasing provider had paid the Transfer portion of the unspent home
care amount and issued a copy of the written notice to the new provider
within 70 days after the departure date, and

on receipt of the Transfer portion, the new provider had identified the
transferred funds in the care recipient’s next monthly statement

-   This allowed transparency for care recipients that is, the care
    recipient being advised that their new provider had received the
    Transfer portion

Note: in the event that the care recipient moved again to a different
provider prior to 1 September 2021, the accumulated unspent amount was
transferred to the new provider.

After 1 September 2021, any remaining CW portion of unspent funds must
be returned to Services Australia when a care recipient departs for any
reason (including transfers between services under the same provider).
Providers will continue to transfer the Care Recipient portion of
unspent amount if the care recipient moves to another home care service.

Provider responsibilities

Providers are responsible for calculating the unspent home care amount,
including the Commonwealth (CW) unspent amount

Providers are required to:

-   give care recipients written notice of their unspent home care
    amount
-   report the CW unspent amount to Services Australia when the care
    recipient permanently exits home care, or when the care recipient
    fails to re-enter care within 56 days
-   notify Services Australia within 31 days after a care recipient has
    departed care. This occurs through the home care monthly claim form
    (the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) or paper claim form)

Providers must report the CW unspent amount for each care recipient
calculated as at the end of the month preceding the claim month Note:
while reporting was initially optional, providers had to report at least
once in either the September 2021, October 2021 or the November 2021
claim. From the December 2021 claim month onwards, reporting the CW
unspent amount was mandatory

Providers had the choice to return the CW unspent fund amounts as part
of the home care monthly claim process from 1 September 2021 for a 6
months period

If the care recipient has moved to a new provider, the new provider is
required to notify Services Australia within 28 days of the care
recipient starting care. This notification is received via submitting an
Aged Care Entry Record (ACER) form (AC021) or an entry event in the ACPP

Providers have 56 days to reconcile and 70 days to transfer a care
recipient’s unspent home care amount. The exception to this is when the
care recipient dies. The provider must pay the care recipient’s estate
the care recipient portion within 14 days after the provider is shown
the probate of the care recipient’s will or the administration letters
of the care recipient’s estate. The CW unspent amount is due and payable
to the Commonwealth within 70 days

Services Australia responsibilities

Services Australia’s responsibility for the Commonwealth (CW) unspent
amount is limited to receiving and processing only on behalf of the
Commonwealth.

Services Australia:

records the CW unspent amount declared by the provider via the home care
monthly claim

recovers the CW unspent amount through a deduction of future subsidies
payable to the provider

-   For closed providers, Services Australia follows current debt
    recovery procedures and recovers the CW unspent amount through a
    debt notice. See the Aged Care debt recovery process for the process

issues a monthly payment statement which shows any CW unspent amount
declared by the provider at the individual care recipient level

-   The statement will also identify the adjusted CW unspent amount to
    be recovered from the provider

Quality and compliance

Services Australia is not responsible for quality or compliance
surrounding unspent home care amounts.

The Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission is responsible for
administering compliance activities and issuing sanction notices. This
includes a sanction notice to address circumstances where a provider is
non-compliant with its responsibilities in managing unspent home care
amounts.

The Department of Health and Aged Care has information on its website
about unspent home care amounts and examples in calculating unspent home
care amounts.

The Resources page contains contact details, forms and links to Services
Australia and external websites.

Related links

Aged Care

Home care account

Home Care packages program

Home Care monthly claim form

Sanctions for aged care service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
