
Aged care means assessment - residential care pre 1 July 2014 - assets assessment 065-19042305

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for completing an Aged Care assets
assessment for care recipients assessed under pre 1 July 2014 assessment
schemes.

Aged care assets assessments

An assets assessment for aged care purposes is:

-   the net value of a person's assets either on or before the date the
    customer enters permanent residential aged care

Changes in the value of the customer's assets after they enter care are
not relevant to an assessment made for that admission to care.

Since 1 July 2005, Services Australia and the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) have been undertaking asset assessments. Prior to that
date, service providers were responsible for assessing the assets of
their care recipients.

Applying for an assets assessment is voluntary. However it is compulsory
where the care recipient wishes to claim either concessional, assisted,
or supported resident status. Assessment of care can be completed either
prior to or after entry into care.

Only the care recipient (and nominee where applicable) are notified of
the result of an assets assessment. As the service provider does not
receive notification, the care recipient may elect to show the
notification letter to the service providers.

A care recipient’s resident status is determined by the assets
assessment in conjunction with:

-   care needs, plus
-   additional criteria for pre 2008 reform care recipients

If on the day they enter residential care, a care recipient:

has assets above the minimum assets amount, or

does not complete a Calculation of your cost of care (SA457, SA486 )
they would pay an:

-   Accommodation Charge (for High Level Care), or
-   Accommodation Bond (for Low Level Care or Extra Service Facility)

Care recipients with net assessed assets:

-   equal to, or
-   less than the relevant minimum permissible asset amount are not
    required to pay either an accommodation bond or an accommodation
    charge

An accommodation supplement is paid at the maximum rate for care
recipients who are not required to pay an accommodation bond or
accommodation charge. Where the care recipient is liable for an
accommodation charge the amount of supplement is reduced. Accommodation
Supplements are for care recipients that have low care classifications
and are liable to pay an accommodation bond. The provider has a monthly
retention amount from the bond.

The following applies to an assets assessment:

-   The assessment is based on the value of assessable assets on or
    before the date of entry to care. Unlike post 1 July 2014 assessment
    schemes, the accommodation charge does not change. This irrespective
    of any change in asset value after entry date
-   The value of the principal home is included in the assets assessment
    (unless a protected person exemption exists). However the value is
    not capped
-   The assessable asset amount is reduced by allowable asset
    reductions. This includes mortgages (even when home was exempt),
    credit cards, utility bills, outstanding loans and any other
    outstanding liabilities

The results of an assets assessment are displayed on the Customer First
RCAA Assessment Determination (RCAD) screen.

Information about when a form is required for an assets assessment is on
the Background page of Aged Care means assessment.

Assets assessment for deceased or discharged care recipients

An assets assessment may be requested for a deceased or discharged care
recipient when a care recipient:

was originally assessed as low care and the service provider did not
negotiate an accommodation bond (as assets were below the threshold)

-   the provider was not paid accommodation supplements as there was no
    assets assessment
-   completing an assets assessment will result in the payment of any
    accommodation supplements that may be due to the provider

was originally assessed as high care and no accommodation costs were
charged (as assets were below the threshold). It is then found that they
have been paying an accommodation charge at the maximum rate as there
was no assets assessment completed

-   completing an assets assessment will adjust supplements paid to the
    provider if it determined that assets were below the threshold. If
    applicable the service provider will then refund any overpaid
    accommodation charge to the care recipient

has a completed assessments effective from date of entry that require
correction to adjust accommodation charged paid by them

See the Department of Health and Aged Care - Schedule of Fees and
Charges for Residential and Home Care for historical asset thresholds.

Who can apply for an asset assessment?

This can be a care recipient, or where a care recipient is not deceased,
an authorised third party can apply on their behalf if:

-   they are their payment or correspondence nominee (as per the Nominee
    Link Summary (NOLS) screen). Or they have a power of attorney or
    other guardianship type authority in relation to the care recipient
-   the care recipient is unable to sign the application form. In this
    case a letter from a doctor, hospital or social worker stating that
    the care recipient is unable to sign is sufficient authority
-   they are the Director of Nursing for the service provider and they
    provide a letter from a doctor stating that the care recipient is
    unable to sign the application form

Where a care recipient is deceased, only the administrator or executor
of the estate can apply for an assets assessment. Confirmation that the
applicant is the administrator or executor of the deceased person's
estate is required.

Assets assessment where entry to care was before 20 March 2008

A care recipient is referred to as ‘pre 2008’ when they:

-   first entered Permanent Residential Care on or after 1 July 2005 but
    before 20 March 2008 (including pre-entry leave), and
-   have not subsequently been discharged from care for a continuous
    period of 28 days or more

A pre 2008 reform care recipient’s resident status is:

-   concessional
-   assisted, or
-   neither concessional nor assisted

The care recipient’s status determined by:

-   the net value of their assets
-   their income support payment status, and
-   their home ownership status as defined under the Aged Care
    (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997

Concessional resident status

A concessional resident is a pre-2008 reform resident who:

at the relevant time was in receipt of an Australian income support
payment, and

-   was considered not to have owned a home in the past 2 years under
    the Aged Care (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997, and

had net assessable assets equal to or less than the minimum permissible
asset amount

Concessional residents do not pay accommodation bonds or accommodation
charges.

Since 20 March 2008, concessional residents have been able to transfer
their concessional resident status from 1 service provider to another
without a new assets assessment if:

-   they enter the second service within 28 days of being discharged
    from the first service, and
-   their concessional status in the first aged care service had been
    determined by Services Australia or Department of Veterans' Affairs
    (DVA)

If their concessional resident status in the first service had been
determined by the service provider:

-   they will need to lodge a new application for an assets assessment
    if they want to claim concessional resident status in the second
    service

Assisted resident status

An assisted resident is a pre-2008 reform resident who:

at the relevant time was in receipt of an Australian income support
payment, and

-   was considered not to have owned a home in the past 2 years under
    the Aged Care (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997, and

from 20 September 2009 had net assessable assets over the minimum
permissible asset amount,

-   but less than 3.61 times the single annual rate of basic Age Pension
    rounded to the nearest $500
-   prior to 20 September 2009 the assisted resident upper asset limit
    was calculated as 4 times the single annual rate of basic Age
    Pension

Since 20 March 2008, assisted residents are able to transfer their
assisted resident status to a new service provider without a new assets
assessment if:

-   they enter the second service within 28 days of discharge from the
    first service, and
-   their assisted status in the first aged care service had been
    determined by Services Australia or Department of Veterans' Affairs
    (DVA)

If their assisted resident status in the first service had been
determined by the service provider (for example, pre 1 July 2005):

-   they need to lodge a new application for an assets assessment to
    claim assisted resident status in the second service

Neither concessional nor assisted resident status

A pre 2008 reform resident is determined to be neither concessional nor
assisted where their assets have been assessed as above the asset cut
off limit.

The care recipient is liable to pay the full cost of accommodation in
residential care.

Assets assessment where entry to care was on or after 20 March 2008

A care recipient is referred to as ‘post 2008’ when they first entered
Permanent Residential Care on or after 20 March 2008, but prior to 1
July 2014 (including pre-entry leave).

An assets assessment will determine the resident status for a post 2008
reform care recipient. The resident status will be 1 of the following:

-   fully supported
-   partially supported
-   not supported

Post 2008 reform care recipients do not need to have been in receipt of
income support payment or to have been considered a non-homeowner under
the Aged Care (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997 in order to be a
supported resident.

Fully supported resident status

A fully supported resident is a post 2008 reform resident who at the
relevant time had net assessable assets equal to or less than the
minimum permissible asset amount which from 20 September 2009 is
calculated as 2.25 times the single annual rate of basic Age Pension
rounded to the nearest $500.

Partially supported resident status

A partially supported resident is a post 2008 reform resident who had
net assessable assets between the minimum permissible asset amount and
the supported resident cut-off amount that applied on the date they
entered care.

Not supported resident status

A not supported resident is a post 2008 reform resident who at the
relevant time had net assessable assets equal to or more than the
partially supported resident cut off amount.

Care recipients transferring from one aged care service to another

Care recipients transferring from low level care to high level care with
a new service provider

When a care recipient transfers from low level care to high level care,
they may do 1 of the following with regards to their accommodation bond:

-   transfer the balance of their accommodation bond from 1 service
    provider to another service provider (also known as ‘rolling over’)
-   have their accommodation bond refunded and request a new assets
    assessment from their new date of entry (to determine their new
    accommodation charge)

Care recipients who have paid a lump sum accommodation bond:

for low level care in 1 service, and

who are subsequently admitted for high level care in a second service
within 28 days of leaving the first service can:

-   if the service provider agrees, transfer the balance of their
    accommodation bond from the first service to the second

Care recipients transferring from low level care to low level care with
a new service provider

Care recipients who leave a provider will have their bond balance
refunded. The new provider can only charge the amount of the bond that
has been refunded.

An assets assessment is not able to be completed where the balance of an
accommodation bond is being transferred to a new service.

Related links

Aged care consent and disclosure

Aged care - Initial contact

Aged care means assessment

Aged care means assessment - home ownership and real estate estimates

Aged care means assessment - protected person

Aged care request for a nominee

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Exempt lump sums

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

National Redress Scheme enquiries and document lodgement in service
centres

National Redress Scheme Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity
process in service centres

National Redress Scheme overview

Nominees for the National Redress Scheme

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning call or leaving
messages on answering machines

Requests for information after someone has died

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
