
Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSOs) 065-21081646

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the ACSO role and explains how to refer customers
to an ACSO.

My Aged Care face-to-face services delivered by Services Australia

As part of the 2021-22 Budget, the Australian Government announced a new
aged care reform package. The Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality
and Safety identified a need for a face-to-face presence to further
support customers to access the aged care services they need and
navigate the system. The reform package builds an aged care system that
provides high quality and safe care for older Australians.

The Connecting Senior Australians to Aged Care Services budget measure
was introduced to further help older Australians understand, access and
navigate aged care services.

Services Australia introduced an aged care face-to-face general service
offer in October 2021. This complements the existing aged care means
assessment service offer.

The key deliverables of the budget measure include:

-   My Aged Care General Service Offer: all staff in face-to-face and
    aged care telephony roles provide this service. Older Australians,
    their carers or nominees who need support can access digital
    assistance and basic aged care information. For more information see
    My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO)
-   Aged Care Specialist Officers: customers who need more specialised
    support, or who prefer face-to-face services, have access to an Aged
    Care Specialist Officer (ACSO) in some service centres. ACSOs will
    be available in 70 service centres across Australia, along with 10
    additional outreach officers for customers in rural or remote areas.
    Staff can book an appointment with an ACSO or where there is no ACSO
    available in the customer’s location, warm transfer them to the My
    Aged Care contact centre.
-   Warm transfers: Services Australia and My Aged Care contact centres
    are able to warm transfer customers between the two services. My
    Aged Care Contact Centre staff do not have access to the Centrelink
    booking system therefore are unable to book customers into an
    appointment with an ACSO. For more information see My Aged Care
    General Service Offer (MACGSO)

ACSO role

ACSOs provide face-to-face end-to-end services including:

-   the My Aged Care General Service Officer (MACGSO)
-   access and navigation of My Aged Care services
-   in-depth information on the different types of aged care services
-   Help at Home (Commonwealth Home Support Programme, Home Care
    Packages)
-   short term care (Respite and transition care)
-   aged care homes (permanent residential aged care)

ACSOs are available to help older Australians find information on ageing
and aged care in Australia for:

-   older Australians 65 years or older, their families and carers
-   Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders 50 years or older
-   people from a culturally and linguistically diverse background
    (CALD), including migrants and refugees
-   people living in a rural or remote area

Note: if there is no ACSO available in the customers local area they can
access My Aged Care by:

-   the My Aged Care website (The Resources page contains a link)
-   a warm transfer to My Aged Care from Services Australia
-   calling My Aged Care contact centre
-   attending any Services Australia service centre

ACSO locations

The Resources page contains a link to a list of current ACSO locations
on the Services Australia website. There is also information about
ACSOs’ appointment availability in Office Locator for these sites.

Services an ACSO provides

ACSOs help customers understand their current and future aged care
needs.

They can also help people find and access the services they need,
including:

-   My Aged Care, and the options available to fund aged care
-   educating about the different types of aged care services, assess
    eligibility and refer individuals for a My Aged Care assessment
-   screening customers to determine eligibility for a My Aged Care
    assessment
-   referring customers for a My Aged Care assessment
-   assisting to appoint a representative for My Aged Care and/or
    authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on their
    behalf for Services Australia
-   building and maintaining relationships with local community and
    external service providers
-   connecting customers to community and external services where
    appropriate
-   completing a review of customer circumstances and referrals for
    reassessments where their needs have changed
-   assisting customers or their nominee/representatives in crisis by
    problem solving
-   updating My Aged Care and Services Australia records
-   managing complaints in line with the My Aged Care Complaints process
-   explaining how their financial situation impacts on the cost of
    their aged care services and how different financial products
    interact with the payments and services offered by the agency
-   providing information on income and means assessments
-   explaining financial concepts such as social security, tax,
    superannuation, budgeting, debt, investment and insurance
-   providing information on options to use a lump sum payment such as
    compensation, redundancy payments or an inheritance
-   understanding the different options for generating an income when
    they retire. This includes superannuation, income streams,
    annuities, allocated pensions and other investments

ACSOs do not provide:

-   advice or recommendations on which aged care provider the customer
    should choose
-   financial advice, planning or counselling

Note: if an ACSO and FIS Officer are both located at a customer’s local
service centre, offer an ACSO appointment in the first instance.

FIS Officers are required to refer customers to an ACSO or My Aged Care
to help customers with information on their aged care needs. For
example, booking a Residential Assessment Service (RAS)/Aged Care
Assessment Team ACAT.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the Services
Australia and My Aged Care websites.

ACSO Outreach

The ACSO Outreach Service Offer provides services to customers living in
regional and remote locations.

Outreach ACSOs deliver services face-to-face by booked appointments in
their home location, or via mobile servicing in surrounding locations.

The Outreach ACSOs:

support the Mobile Service Centres to service customers in rural and
regional locations (subject to COVID restrictions where virtual support
is available)

support the agency’s Remote servicing model, to deliver services
directly to people living in remote areas and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities

service customers in their local area and sometimes in locations were an
ACSO is available, for example during emergencies

work with the community outreach specialist programme (COSP). COSP is a
collaboration between the:

-   Community Engagement Officer (CEO)
-   Indigenous Service Officer (ISO), and
-   Multicultural Service Officer (MSO) programs to deliver
    out-servicing programs to people experiencing a vulnerability or
    complex needs in local communities

Community and external service providers

ACSOs have established relationships with community and external service
providers and organisations which include:

-   Social workers
-   Dementia Australia
-   Charity organisations
-   Carer Gateway
-   Advocacy Groups
-   Local community and non-commonwealth funded service providers

ACSOs may also support Service Centre Managers to respond to local MP
electoral office enquiries.

The Resources page contains contact details and links to the Services
Australia and My Aged Care websites.

Related links

My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
