
Online Carer and/or Close Relative Assessment 065-21050527

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Some older Australians may be at risk of abuse. For information on how
to identify abuse of older Australians and the referral options
available, go to Abuse of older Australians. If the customer is with
another person or on speaker phone, continue the current business
conversation as usual.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how a carer or close relative can complete online
claims for customers and how to confirm details.

Online aged care calculation of cost of care

Customers who complete an online claim and own their home are asked if a
carer and/or close relative lives with them. This does not include their
partner. They need to provide the carer’s and/or close relative’s:

-   name
-   date of birth
-   Customer Reference Number (CRN) if known
-   contact number
-   nature of their relationship

At the end of their online claim, instructions present for the
customer’s carer or close relative to complete an online task.

This is a ‘Supplementary Task’ the customer can still submit their claim
without providing this information within their online claim.

Note: the online aged care calculation of your cost of care pilot has
now ended.

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

When assisting customers to claim using ACC:

By phone, the Service Officer can:

-   advise the customer of the claim number and temporary access code
    (TAC) to give to their carer and/or close relative
-   print and mail the carer and/or close relative assessment
    information page to the customer. Note: this will delay the claim
    finalisation process

Assessing a carer and/or close relative as a protected person

A carer and/or close relative nominated as a protected person in an
online claim needs to provide more information. This is so Services
Australia (the agency) can assess them as a protected person.

The agency asks if they give consent to using their information to
determine assets for calculating ‘your cost of care’. If they choose not
to give their consent the agency cannot determine their protected person
status. They go straight to review and submit the assessment.

If they state that they are receiving an Income Support Payment (ISP),
they need to provide their Customer Reference Number (CRN). If the
agency confirms this information, they go straight to review and submit.

If they are not receiving ISP, questions include:

-   financial details to determine a notional entitlement to an ISP, and
-   how long they have been living in the home to determine their
    eligibility as a protected person

They are also asked for verification.

For more information see Aged care means assessment – protected person.

Locating carer or close relative assessment in Customer First

Once complete, an online Carer or Close Relative Assessment uploads as a
PDF file. This is accessible in Document Tools on the customer’s record.
The carer and/or close relative may also upload documents with their
assessment. The customer will not be able to view these on their online
account.

Alternative options for completing the Carer or Close Relative Assessment

If the carer and/or close relative is unable (or chooses not) to use
online services, they can confirm their details:

-   by completing an Aged Care Carer and/or close relative assessment
    (SA483) form. The customer must then upload the complete form using
    Upload documents, or
-   verbally, if they are present at the time of contact. They can give
    verbal permission to access their Centrelink record but if more
    information is required they need to complete the SA483

Once this assessment is complete, update the task status in the online
claims to Provided.

See Resources for links to the Services Australia privacy policy and
online forms.

Related links

Aged care means assessment

Aged care means assessment - protected persons

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Inadvertent access and authorised access

Searching for a customer on the system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
