
Aged care means assessment 065-09000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Some older Australians may be at risk of abuse. For information on how
to identify abuse of older Australians and the referral options
available, go to Abuse of older Australians. If the customer is with
another person or on speaker phone, continue the current business
conversation as usual.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the role of Services Australia and the Department
of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) in processing aged care means assessments.
The assessments determine the fees payable for home care and permanent
residential care.

Means assessments overview

A means assessment is the assessment of a care recipient’s income and/or
assets. It determines the type and level of contribution a care
recipient must make towards their aged care costs.

For home care:

-   a means assessment is an income assessment
-   determines the care recipient’s contributions to their care costs
-   applies to care recipients commencing home care on or after 1 July
    2014, or
-   a pre 1 July 2014 care recipient opting in to the post 1 July 2014
    assessment rules

For residential care:

-   for care recipients assessed under post 1 July 2014 schemes, a means
    assessment is a combined assets and income assessment
-   for care recipients assessed under pre 1 July 2014 schemes, a means
    assessment is done via separate assessments for income and assets
-   the means assessment determines the care recipient’s contributions
    to their accommodation and care costs

Initial contact

Assessments are completed in the Customer First system. If a care
recipient or their nominee contacts to request a calculation of their
cost of care, they can do this in one of the following ways:

Automatically

-   Customer First can complete a means assessment automatically where
    the care recipient has commenced care and the required information
    is available in the system

As a verbal assessment

-   Can be undertaken where the information is available in the system
    and any outstanding information can be obtained verbally

Via lodgement of a form. Depending on care type the form will be one of
the following:

-   Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care (SA486)
-   Home Care Package Calculation of your cost of care (SA456)
-   Residential Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care (SA457), or
-   Residential Aged Care Property details for Centrelink and DVA
    customers (SA485)

The Resources page contains links to forms.

Means assessment validity periods

See Aged care means assessment - preliminary checks for information
regarding means assessment validity periods.

Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care forms

The Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care forms are located on the
Services Australia website. They are available as a dynamic digital form
or paper form. The Resources page has a link to the forms and an
explanation of which forms are required.

Explain the benefits of accessing the forms online to the care recipient
or nominee. For example, the dynamic digital form (SA486) is intuitive
and adjusts the questions according to the care recipient’s
circumstances and the answers they give. It also provides early warnings
if they may not be eligible and a document checklist that adjusts based
on the applicant’s responses.

Encourage applicants to access the forms from the website themselves,
where possible. If the applicant is unable to complete the digital form,
they can print and complete a paper form (SA456, SA457 or SA485). If an
applicant is unable to access the form online, issue the form using the
Customer First Mail Forms Guided Procedure.

Note: to print the SA486 all questions must be answered.

SA486 (digital) form:

-   collects income and asset details for permanent residential aged
    care purposes or an income assessment for home care
-   is a dynamic digital form that only asks questions relevant to the
    individual’s circumstances. This will shorten the time taken to
    complete the form
-   care recipients should be encouraged to use this form where possible

SA456 (home care) and SA457 (residential aged care) forms:

-   are required when a care recipient does not receive a means tested
    payment from Centrelink or Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
-   request all income and asset information required for the completion
    of a means assessment
-   The SA456 form was previously titled  Aged Care Fees Income
    Assessment and the SA457 was previously titled Permanent Residential
    Aged Care - Request for a Combined Assets and Income Assessment

SA485 (residential aged care property details) form:

-   may be used when a care recipient receives a means tested payment
    from Centrelink or DVA and owns or part owns their home, including
    retirement villages, if a verbal assessment is not able to be
    completed
-   is shorter than the SA457 form, and only collects information
    related to the principal home

Downloading the Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care (SA486)
digital form

The best way to download the Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care
(SA486) digital form:

-   Go to the Services Australia website and search Aged Care
    Calculation of your cost of care (SA486)
-   From the form page, right click on the link Aged Care Calculation of
    your cost of care form and select ‘save link as’. Save the document
    to a PC or tablet
-   To open the saved document from a PC or tablet right click on the
    saved document. Select ‘Open with’ and choose ‘Adobe Acrobat Reader’

Note: when opening the saved document, there may be a message saying
‘Please wait’. If this occurs, users should select the ‘Enable All
Features’ yellow button on the top right hand side of the screen. The
form will open.

There is a change to the request for information (RFI) process for
carers and close relatives when assessing Aged Care Calculation of your
cost of care forms (SA457, SA485 and SA486). The Aged Care Carer or
close relative assessment (SA483) form replaces the decommissioned
questionnaire. Links to forms are available on the Resources page.

Home care means assessments

Home care providers are responsible for aged care means assessments for
home care recipients assessed under pre 1 July 2014 schemes. Care
recipients who commenced a package prior to 1 July 2014 are not required
to complete a new income assessment, unless there is a break in care of
greater than 28 days.

The agency (or the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)) undertake home
care means assessments for care recipients assessed under post 1 July
2014 schemes and who commenced:

-   a new package, or are considering commencing a new package, on or
    after 1 July 2014
-   a package prior to 1 July 2014 and after a break in care of greater
    than 28 days have commenced a new package, or are considering
    commencing a new package, on or after 1 July 2014
-   a package prior to 1 July 2014 and are seeking an estimate of fees
    as they are considering opting in to the post 1 July 2014 assessment
    rules (no break in care)

Determining when an application for a calculation of cost of care or form is required for home care

When is an online application, Aged Care calculation of your cost of
care (SA486) or Home Care Package – Calculation of your cost of care
(SA456) form required?

An online application SA486 or SA456 is required for care recipients
who:

are self-funded retirees (includes care recipients who receive a foreign
pension)

receive a Centrelink non-means tested income support payment

-   examples include: Age Pension (Blind), Disability Support Pension
    (Blind), Carer Allowance and Mobility Allowance
-   however if they have a partner who receives a Centrelink means
    tested income support payment and/or rent assistance they may not
    need to lodge a form

receive a Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) non-means tested payment

-   for example, a War Widow(er)’s Pension (without an Income Support
    Supplement)

When is an online application (SA486 or SA456) not required?

An online application (SA486 or SA456) is not required for care
recipients who:

receive a Centrelink means tested income support payment

-   examples include Age Pension and Disability Support Pension

receive a DVA means tested income support payment

-   examples include Age Service Pension, Invalidity Service and Income
    Support Supplement

receive Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension (Blind) from
Centrelink and have a partner who receives a Centrelink means tested
income support payment/rent assistance

If an online application (SA486 or SA456) is not required:

the means assessment will complete automatically when the care recipient
enters care

where the care recipient has not yet entered care, it is not possible
for the means assessment to complete automatically:

-   where a means assessment is requested prior to entry to care it will
    need to be undertaken online, verbally or via an SA456 or SA486

Residential care means assessment - post 1 July 2014 schemes

A residential care means assessment is required for care recipients who:

-   enter or are considering entering permanent residential care for the
    first time after 1 July 2014
-   re-entered permanent residential care after a break in care of more
    than 28 days on or after 1 July 2014, or
-   enter permanent residential care prior to 1 July 2014 and are
    considering opting in to a post 1 July 2014 assessment scheme

The Residential care means assessment determines:

-   the daily means tested care fee, and
-   liability for accommodation costs

Liability for accommodation costs

The care recipient’s status, set at the date of permanent entry to care,
determines liability for accommodation costs. The status will be either
low means or not low means.

A low means care recipient is eligible for assistance with their
accommodation costs. They can be asked to pay either:

-   an Accommodation Contribution. This is a partial contribution
    towards the accommodation cost (the government will pay the
    remainder)
-   no accommodation costs. The government will pay the full
    accommodation cost

A not low means care recipient is not eligible for government assistance
with their accommodation costs. They must pay an Accommodation Payment
(that is, the accommodation price they agree to with the service
provider). The accommodation price must be agreed to before entry to
care.

The care recipient’s status will not change following entry to care,
even if there are changes to their circumstances.

For low means care recipients, a change in circumstances after entry to
care:

-   may affect the amount of accommodation contribution and/or means
    tested fee payable
-   will not make them liable for an accommodation payment while they
    remain in the same facility

For not low means care recipients, a change in circumstances after entry
to care:

-   may affect the amount of means tested fee payable
-   will not affect the accommodation price that was agreed to prior to
    entering care

A previously low means care recipient may be reassessed and found to be
not low means at date of entry to care. Any accommodation supplement
paid to the provider is recovered and the care recipient asked to pay an
accommodation payment.

Note: if the means assessment was incorrect at the date of entry, any
review of the means assessment may be backdated.

The Resources page contains:

-   calculation examples of Residential Aged Care means assessments
-   fee calculation worksheets for manual calculation of residential
    care fees, and
-   links to Department of Health and Aged Care’s Schedule of Fees and
    Charges for home care and residential care - Pre and Post 1 July
    2014 assessment schemes

Determining when an application for a calculation of your cost of care is required for residential care - post 1 July 2014

When is an online application, Aged Care Calculation of your cost of
care (SA486) or Residential Aged Care – Calculation of your cost of care
(SA457) form required?

An online application, SA486 or SA457 must be lodged for care recipients
who:

are self-funded retirees (includes care recipients who receive a foreign
pension)

receive a Centrelink non-means tested income support payment

-   examples include: Aged Pension (Blind), Disability Support Pension
    (Blind), Carer Allowance and Mobility Allowance
-   home owners who have a partner who receives a Centrelink means
    tested income support payment will need to provide principal home
    details verbally
-   non home owners who receive rent assistance or who have a partner
    who receives a Centrelink means tested income support payment will
    need to provide principal home details verbally

receive a Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) non-means tested
payment, for example a War Widow(er)’s Pension (without an Income
Support Supplement)

When is an online application, Aged Care Calculation of cost of care
(SA486) or Residential Aged Care Property details for Centrelink and DVA
customers (SA485) form required?

For care recipients who receive a Centrelink or DVA means tested income
support payment:

where the care recipient has entered care:

-   for non-home owners, the means assessment will complete
    automatically
-   for home owners, principal home details will need to be provided
    verbally or via an SA486 or SA485
-   DVA care recipients should contact DVA to discuss if they are
    required to complete an SA485 or SA486 form or can lodge a verbal
    assessment

where the care recipient has not yet entered care and has requested a
pre-entry assessment:

-   an automatic means assessment cannot be triggered and needs to be
    undertaken verbally or by completing the online application, digital
    SA486 or a SA485 form

When is an online application, SA486, SA457 or SA485 not required?

An online application, SA486, SA457 or SA485 is not required for care
recipients who receive:

a Centrelink means tested income support payment (examples include Age
Pension and Disability Support Pension); and are non home owners

a Centrelink non means tested income support payment (for examples
include Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension (Blind)); and
receive Rent Assistance or have a partner who receives a Centrelink
means tested income support payment:

-   have already provided income and asset details to Centrelink
-   will be required to provide principal home details if they are a
    home owner
-   these assessments will need to be completed manually as they are not
    eligible for auto completion

a Centrelink means tested income support payment, has not yet entered
care and has requested a pre-entry assessment:

-   an automatic means assessment cannot be triggered and needs to be
    undertaken verbally or by completing the online application or
    digital SA486

DVA care recipients should contact DVA to discuss if they are required
to complete an SA485 or SA486 form or can lodge a verbal assessment

Residential care means assessment - pre 1 July 2014 schemes

Prior to 1 July 2014, a means assessment was known as a Residential Care
Assessment (RCA). The RCA covered 2 different types of assessment:

-   Residential Care Income Assessment (RCIA), and
-   Residential Care Assets Assessment (RCAA)

Income Assessments

Aged Care Income Assessments (previously known as RCIA) are applicable
for care recipients who:

-   first entered permanent residential care after 1 March 1998 and
    prior to 1 July 2014, and
-   have not had a break in care of greater than 28 days since 1 July
    2014

The income assessment determines the daily income tested fee amount. If
no means assessment is completed, care recipients are liable for the
full cost of their care. An income assessment could be completed at the
time of entry or a care recipient could subsequently choose to complete
an income assessment at a later date.

Assets Assessments

Aged Care asset assessments (previously known as RCAA) are required for
care recipients who first entered permanent residential care after 1
July 2005 and prior to 1 July 2014, and have not had a break in care of
greater than 28 days since 1 July 2014.

Applying for an assets assessment is voluntary. It is compulsory where
the care recipient wishes to claim either concessional, assisted, or
supported resident status. Assets assessments can be completed either
prior to, or after entry into care.

Prior to July 1 2005 the service provider completed these.

The assets assessment determines the amount payable for accommodation
costs. The care recipient will be liable for one of the following:

Accommodation Bond:

-   For those in low level care and extra service places
-   Amount payable is dependent on the assets assessment
-   Can be paid as a daily amount or as a lump sum

Accommodation Charge

-   For those in high level care
-   Can only be paid as a daily amount
-   Depending on the date that the care recipient first entered care,
    different rules regarding this charge apply. Further information
    regarding these rules is available on the Resources page linking to
    the Department of Health and Aged Care – Residential Care Fees and
    Charges for residents that entered care before 1 July 2014
-   Can only be paid as a daily amount

Forms required for a pre 1 July 2014 residential care means assessment

Form options for pre 1 July 2014 residential care recipients are:

SA486 or SA456 for an income assessment

-   Where the care recipient uses the SA486, advise them to select the
    home care assessment option
-   Advise the care recipient to disregard the instructions on the form
    that state they are not to be used for residential care. This only
    applies to care recipients who first entered care on or after 1 July
    2014

SA486 or SA485 for an assets only assessment where the care recipient is
in receipt of a Centrelink means tested income support payment

-   See below note regarding information about debts

SA486 or SA457 for an assets only assessment where the care recipient is
a self-funded retiree or is not in receipt of a Centrelink means tested
income support payment

-   see below note regarding information about debts

SA486 or SA457 to obtain an estimate of fees if they are considering
opting in to the post 1 July 2014 assessment rules

The Resources page has links to forms.

Note: pre 1 July 2014 residential care recipients cannot complete an
online Aged Care calculation of cost of care.

Care recipients assessed under pre 1 July 2014 schemes can deduct the
value of debts from their assessable assets. Further information
regarding any outstanding debts, other than a mortgage on their
principal home, need to be provided in addition to the information
requested on the SA486, SA457 and SA485.

Debts include:

-   Credit card debts
-   Personal loans
-   Utility bills
-   Medical bills

Specific details required include:

-   The amount owing
-   The name of the creditor
-   The care recipient’s percentage of share in the debt
-   Their partner’s percentage of share in the debt

It may be possible to obtain this information verbally but in most cases
a Request for information letter will need to be sent.

Means not disclosed (MND)

A care recipient who chooses not to have their means assessed is not
eligible for government assistance with their fees except in the
circumstances of annual and lifetime caps. They are deemed to be means
not disclosed (MND) and are liable for the maximum care fee based on the
cost of their care. Residential care recipients who are MND are also
liable for an Accommodation Payment.

MND Letters

Where a care recipient has:

commenced care and does not have a valid means assessment:

-   An MND initial letter is sent requesting they lodge an Aged Care
    Calculation of your cost of care form
-   If no response is received following the MND initial letter, an MND
    reminder letter is sent (unless the care recipient advises that they
    do not wish to disclose their means)
-   If no response is received following the MND reminder letter (or if
    the care recipient has advised that they do not wish to disclose
    their means), the MND final letter is sent. The letter advises that
    they are now deemed to be MND and are liable to pay the maximum fees
    for their level of care

not commenced care and has advised they do not wish to disclose their
means:

-   MND letters are not sent before the care recipient has commenced
    care
-   When care has commenced, the MND final letter is sent. This advises
    that they are deemed to be MND and are liable to pay the maximum
    fees for their level of care

Details of MND letter types are available in the Aged care letter codes
and descriptions.

Where a calculation of your cost of care application has commenced, but
documentation required to complete the assessment is not received, a
written request for information will be issued. The care recipient is
deemed to be MND if they fail to provide the requested information.

MND and responsible department/agency

For care recipients who entered care prior to 1 July 2019, the agency
managed the MND process for all care recipients.

For care recipients entering care from 1 July 2019, the
department/agency responsible for completing the means assessment, for
example, Services Australia or Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
manages the MND process.

Care recipients may commence home or residential care with the DVA as
the responsible department, and during their care period, the
responsibility may change to Services Australia. Where change of
responsibility occurs Customer First will receive an entry event to
create an RCA/HOM or RCA/NCL. The date of entry on RCIRC will display
the date the responsible department changed not the actual date of entry
into care. The change in responsibility date is the date of event for
coding a means assessment.

Opting in

A care recipient may elect to opt into post 1 July 2014 assessment rules
if moving to a new service provider and currently assessed under a pre 1
July 2014 scheme. To opt in, the care recipient:

must be moving into the same service type (home care to home care or
residential care to residential care)

-   if the move is from home to residential care (or vice versa), the
    care recipient will automatically be assessed under post 1 July 2014
    rules

must be moving into a new service

-   they cannot opt in if they remain with the same service (as
    determined by the Service/RACS ID)

must lodge an AC022 (Continuing Care Recipient opting into the New Aged
Care Arrangements from 1 July 2014 form):

-   the ACO22 must be lodged with the new service provider before moving
    to the new service
-   the service provider will then send the form to the Aged Care
    Payments team (Aged Care and Allied Health Branch) who process this
    form
-   see the Resources page for a link to this form

Care recipients who are outside of care (other than on approved leave)
for more than 28 days after leaving their former home or residential
care service are automatically subject to post 1 July 2014 assessment
rules if they later re-enter care.

Once the care recipient has opted in, they cannot choose to return to
their former fee arrangements. For more information see Opting into the
post 1 July 2014 aged care means assessment arrangements.

The Resources page contains:

-   additional information on means assessments
-   calculation examples of residential aged care means assessments
-   calculators
-   worksheets
-   links to external websites
-   forms, and
-   link to letter code descriptions

Contents

Aged care means assessment - home care pre-entry

Aged care means assessment - home care post-entry

Aged care means assessment - residential care post 1 July 2014 -
pre-entry

Aged care means assessment - residential care post 1 July 2014 -
post-entry

Aged care means assessment - home ownership and real estate estimates

Aged care means assessment - manual means assessment

Aged care means assessment - preliminary checks

Aged care means assessment - protected persons

Aged Care means assessment - Rental income from principal home

Aged Care means assessment - Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 – assets
assessment

Aged care means assessment - residential care pre 1 July 2014 - income
assessment

ACAH escalation process for aged care calculation cost of care (means
assessment) related issues

Opting into the post 1 July 2014 aged care means assessment arrangements

Related links

Aged Care

Aged care letters - creating manual letters

Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview

Aged Care means assessment - Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 - assets
assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
