
Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) 065-07000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) which provides a
tax free lump sum bonus for customers who choose to work past Age
Pension age and defer claiming an Age Pension. The Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) has a similar scheme for ex-service people.

On this Page:

Government intent

As part of the Government's Secure and Sustainable Pension Reforms, the
PBS was closed to new entrants who did not qualify for Age Pension
before 20 September 2009. The PBS is closed to new registrations from 1
July 2014.

All existing members may remain in the scheme and claim their pensions
in due course, in line with existing arrangements, including customers
who took advantage of early registration provisions and registered
before 29 June 2009, when Royal Assent was given.

From 20 September 2009 customers cannot remain as non-accruing members
of the scheme for the reason 'NWF - not a member of the workforce'.
Unless these customers are non-accruing members for another reason or
they recommence meeting the work test, they will generally need to claim
their Pension Bonus within 13 weeks of 20 September 2009.

Components of the PBS

There are 3 payment components to the PBS:

-   The Pension Bonus payment - is a payment made when a registered PBS
    customer claims Age Pension and Pension Bonus and is granted Age
    Pension.
-   A Pension Bonus Top-up payment (PBTP) - is a payment made to
    customers who have already received a Pension Bonus payment and
    receive a higher rate of pension within 13 weeks of the start day
    (date of grant) of their Age Pension, where the increase is due to a
    reduction in their assessed income or assets. The system
    automatically determines if the customer is entitled to a top-up of
    the pension bonus amount previously paid. Note: a customer does not
    qualify for a top-up payment if the increase in Age Pension rate was
    solely due to a change in the income or assets limits or maximum
    pension rate due to Consumer Price Index (CPI) changes.
-   Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP) - is a payment for the
    surviving partner of a deceased member of the scheme who died on or
    after 1/1/08 and had not lodged a claim for Age Pension and the
    Pension Bonus payment before they passed away. Note: this is not
    paid to the estate of single registered members of the scheme who
    died before claiming Age Pension and the Pension Bonus payment.

Bonus period information

The PBS commenced 1 July 1998. The Pension Bonus Top-up payment (PBTP)
and Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP) were implemented from 1
January 2008.

The customer needs to be registered in the PBS and accumulate at least 1
full year bonus period for a pension bonus payment to be payable. A
maximum of 5 full year bonus periods can contribute to the bonus. Only
the final bonus period can be a part year. Work after age 75 (or age 70
under the DVA scheme) cannot contribute to the bonus. Periods of
deferment prior to 1 July 1998 do not count.

Bonus periods must be consecutive, or separated only by periods in which
a customer is a non-accruing member. Non-accruing periods extend the
normal 12 month bonus period by the length of the non-accruing period.
During the accruing periods the customer must satisfy the work test.
Note: if a registered member of the scheme is affected by a major
disaster such as Cyclone Larry, special rules apply.

Amount of PBS payable

The amount of Bonus payable depends on:

-   Pension Bonus - rate of basic Age Pension at the start day (date of
    grant) of Age Pension, the length of time a person was an accruing
    member in the PBS and the member's relationship status during the
    time they deferred claiming Age Pension.
-   Pension Bonus Top-up payment (PBTP) - a reduction in the assessed
    value of the person's income and/or assets within the 13 weeks since
    the PBS start day, that caused an increase in pension rate that was
    not due to CPI changes.
-   Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP) - notional rate entitlement
    to Age Pension immediately before the death of the PBS customer.
    Note: PBBP employment income, regular compensation payments or lump
    sum compensation payments of the deceased or their surviving partner
    are not taken into consideration when working out the notional rate
    of Age Pension.

A customer may be concurrently registered with both DVA and Centrelink.
However, only 1 bonus is ever payable. For more information, customers
should contact DVA, see Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) for
contact details.

The Resources page contains contact details for DVA.

Contents

Claiming the Pension Bonus

Assessing Pension Bonus claims

Qualification for Pension Bonus payments

Pension Bonus Scheme rejections and cancellations

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment
(PBBP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
