
Restoration of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06060030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the restoration of a Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (CSHC). Additional information on cancellation codes
can be found on the Process page.

On this Page:

Cancelled due to whereabouts unknown

Service Officers can restore the CSHC if the customer contacts within 13
weeks and either provide their new address or provides evidence of their
current address if their address has not changed.

Cancelled due to income

Service Officers are not able to restore a customer's CSHC if it was
cancelled due to income. The customer must lodge a new claim for
assessment of entitlement if their circumstances have changed, or if
they believe that the decision was incorrect they can ask for the
decision to be reviewed.

Cancelled due to absence from Australia

Customers leaving Australia temporarily will retain entitlement to a
CSHC for the maximum portability period of 19 weeks from departure after
which their CSHC will automatically cancel.

For all CSHC customers that 'return to Australia' make sure the
processes at Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart
Centre staff for non-pension payments and cards have been followed and
completed before any CSHC restoration action.

[] If the customer returns to Australia within 26 weeks of the
cancellation, they can re-claim online or use the Re-claim for a
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (SA296a).

Certain customers may complete a verbal re-claim for a CSHC on their
return. The criteria to determine if a customer can complete a verbal
re-claim claim for a CSHC is set out in the procedure Re-claiming a
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal re-claims)
after a portability cancellation.

When a customer has been outside Australia for less than the maximum
portability period, but their CSHC has cancelled incorrectly due to an
absence of the return to Australia information from the Department of
Home Affairs, their CSHC may be restored without the need to reclaim as
long as the customer has contacted within 13 weeks of CSHC portability
cancellation. Ensure that the restoration date is the same as the date
of cancellation to ensure correct payment of quarterly supplement.

Cancelled due to not returning review form within 28 days

If the review form is returned within 13 weeks of the cancellation it is
to be processed and if the customer is still entitled CSHC is to be
restored, ensuring any quarterly supplement arrears are paid (if
applicable).

If the form is returned between 13 and 26 weeks of cancellation the
customer must re-claim CSHC.

If the form is returned more than 26 weeks after cancellation the
customer must lodge a new claim for CSHC.

Cancelled for not replying to correspondence

If the customer replies to the correspondence, and provides any
requested information, within 13 weeks CSHC can be restored.

If the reply is received between 13 and 26 weeks after cancellation the
customer must re-claim CSHC.

If the reply is received more than 26 weeks after cancellation the
customer must lodge a new claim for CSHC.

Cancelled for failing to provide TFN

All CSHC claimants and their partners are required to provide a Tax File
Number (TFN), or be granted a TFN exemption. Where a customer’s CSHC is
being reviewed and/or their partners TFN has not be previously provided,
the TFN must be provided for the CSHC to remain current.

If a Tax File Number (TFN) is provided within 13 weeks of the
cancellation CSHC can be restored.

If the TFN is provided between 13 and 26 weeks after cancellation the
customer must re-claim CSHC.

If TFN is advised more than 26 weeks after cancellation the customer
must lodge a new claim for CSHC.

The Resources page contains links to the Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (SA296) and the Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(SA296a). Note: the SA296a form is only to be used for customers whose
CSHC was cancelled in the last 26 weeks.

Related links

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for non-pension payments and cards

Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal
re-claims) after a portability cancellation

Portability of concession cards

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Cancellation and rejection codes for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC)

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
