
Aged Care Reviews – Residential Care Pre 1 July 2014 - processing reviews and reassessments 065-09010040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process a customer initiated request for a
review of an Aged Care Means Test Assessment Team (MTA) Staff need to
determine if a reassessment of the original decision can be processed.

On this Page:

Assessment process

Aged Care Means Test Assessment (MTA) are provided by Services Australia
under the provisions of the Aged Care Act 1997. They are a snapshot of
the customer's circumstances and the value of their assets for aged care
purposes at the assessment's date of effect. MTA’s are not the same as
social security assets assessments and different date of effect rules
apply to MTA’s.

Because the assessment is a snapshot at a particular date of effect,
changes in the customer's circumstances or the value of their assets
that apply from a date after the date of effect of the original MTA
decision are not relevant to that assessment.

Review process

Customer initiated requests for MTA reviews must be made within 13 weeks
of the MTA decision being finalised, allowing a few extra days for
delivery of the notice of the assessment. A reassessment is only
processed as a consequence of the review if the change of circumstances
or value of assets applies at the original MTA date of effect.

If the original MTA decision is before the date the customer entered
care, the customer can lodge an application for a new MTA based on what
their circumstances and the value of their assets were at the date they
entered care. This is not a reassessment of the original MTA; it is
instead a new decision with a new date of effect, for example, the date
entered care.

Customers can lodge an application for a new MTA for their current
admission (based on what their circumstances and the value of their
assets were at the date of admission) even if the date that they entered
permanent residential aged care is more than 13 weeks ago.

MTA decisions that are incorrect can be manually revoked even if they
are not reassessed.

Related links

Aged Care means assessment

Aged Care means assessment – Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 – assets
assessment

Aged Care means assessment - home care post-entry

Aged Care means assessment - home care pre-entry

Aged care means assessment - residential care post 1 July 2014 -
pre-admission

Aged care means assessment - residential care post 1 July 2014 -
post-entry

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
