
Rate of Age Pension (Blind) 065-04040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the different components of Age
Pension (Blind) payments. It also lists other add-on payments that a
customer may receive.

On this Page:

Components of Age Pension (Blind)

Age Pension (Blind) is a taxable payment made to a customer's account on
a fortnightly basis. It is not subject to an income or an assets test.

The payment is made up of the basic rate of pension plus the Pension
Supplement. The basic rate depends on the customer's relationship
status. Customers receiving this payment and their partners (if
applicable) do not have to disclose their income and assets unless their
partner wishes to claim an income tested payment in their own right (for
example, Carer Payment) or if they wish to claim supplementary benefits
for example, Rent Assistance.

Age Pension customers may also be eligible for:

-   Rent Assistance, depending on their accommodation circumstances
-   Energy Supplement
-   A Pensioner Concession Card
-   A lump sum advance, an interest-free advance payment
-   Remote Area Allowance, if the customer is living in a remote area

Effect of receiving other payments on Age Pension (Blind) rate

If a customer is granted Age Pension (Blind) under a provision of an
International Social Security Agreement then the direct deduction rules
will apply. For any customer granted a New Zealand Government payment
the direct deduction rules will also apply.

Although foreign income would not usually affect the customer's rate of
payment, an Age Pension (Blind) customer is still required to pursue
their comparative foreign payment entitlements.

The compensation provisions impact on Age Pension (Blind) in the same
way they affect Age Pension e.g. if the compensation is a direct
deduction or if preclusion periods apply, then Age Pension (Blind) is
affected.

Community Development Employment Project (CDEP) payments affect Age
Pension (Blind) in the same way they affect Age Pension. This option is
only available for CDEP wages participants. New CDEP wages participants,
in remote locations, commencing after 1 July 2009 will receive Age
Pension (Blind) or other relevant income support payment instead of CDEP
wages. CDEP wages are treated as a direct deduction. This is because
CDEP wages are considered an alternative form of income and do not
conform to the general definition of income.

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) payments affect Age Pension
(Blind) in the same way they affect Age Pension. NEIS payments are not
assessed as income, however they are a direct deduction.

Contents

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Related links

Payment rates and thresholds

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
