
Respite residential care 065-13020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the information and processes for respite
residential care.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Respite Care

Care recipients have 63 days of respite care days each financial year. A
care recipient must have a current National Screening and Assessment
Form (NSAF) approval for respite to access respite care.

Respite care days can be extended for another 21 days if the Aged Care
Assessment Team (ACAT) approves it. Once the ACAT has approved a 21 day
extension, the additional respite care days are automatically sent
through to Services Australia via the NSAF gateway.

Service Officers can view the following in the Aged Care Staff Portal
(ACSP):

-   the care recipient’s respite care days balance
-   the additional respite care days

Service Officers no longer manage additional respite care days and can
only view a care recipient’s additional respite care days via the ACSP.

If Service Officers receive an Application for a 21 day extension for
residential respite care (AC017) form, they must tell the aged care
service via phone or email:

-   the form has been decommissioned, and
-   Services Australia no longer process requests for additional respite
    care days

An Aged Care Specialist Officer (ACSO) can complete a referral to the
local ACAT for a care recipient requesting an assessment for additional
respite care days.

See the Resources page for information on where to locate the local ACAT
in the Aged Care Assessment Team finder.

Exceeding annual respite care allocation

Aged care services may request to extend the existing respite care
allocations on behalf of a care recipient. This often occurs towards the
end of the financial year when existing respite allocations may be
exhausted.

Subsidy or supplement will not be paid where the respite care days
utilised exceeds 63 days. The aged care service cannot claim the respite
subsidy or supplement for providing respite care if the aged care
service:

-   does not have an allocation of respite care days
-   has exceeded their respite care allocation

Aged care services are responsible for requesting additional respite
care days for care recipients in a timely manner. This can avoid delays
that can impact on the subsidy and supplement not being paid.

Aged care services or Services Australia staff can view the respite care
days balance for a care recipient by using the following systems:

-   the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) is used by aged care services
-   the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) is used by Services Australia
    staff

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details for Aged Care
-   the Department of Health and Aged Care websites relating to
    residential respite care
-   the local Aged Care Assessment Team finder

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Service in Context

Maintain claims in Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)

Manage aged care recipient details

Residential Care program

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
