
Re-claiming Age Pension 065-03010030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about re-claiming Age Pension after
payment has been cancelled or a claim has been rejected.

Age Pension cancelled

Review processes apply if a customer’s Age Pension is cancelled and they
believe the decision was incorrect based on their circumstances at the
time, and they:

-   have not been notified of the decision, or
-   were notified of the decision within the last 13 weeks

If a customer’s Age Pension has been correctly cancelled and the
customer’s circumstances have changed since cancellation, a re-claim is
required regardless of the length of time that has passed. See Claiming
Age Pension.

Age Pension rejected

A new claim is generally not required if the customer contacts within 13
weeks of being notified of the rejection decision, or if the customer
contacts and they have not been notified of the decision.

Exceptions to this are where the previous claim was rejected because the
customer was not in Australia (reason NIA) or not an Australian resident
(NAU) when they lodged their claim. They must lodge a new claim as their
previous claim is taken not to have been made.

The original claim can be used by the Service Officer to obtain details
of any changes and check that all other information provided for the
original claim is current.

If a favourable determination is subsequently made to grant Age Pension,
payment will start from the date the person was both qualified and
payable. Note: the date that qualification and payability are both
satisfied may be different to the date of effect of the original claim
determination.

A person who withdrew their previous claim must also lodge a new claim.

If contact is made more than 13 weeks after being notified of the
rejection, a new claim is required. Payment may only start from the date
the customer contacts.

Death of customer

To view an example of an Age Pension grant letter for a deceased
customer, see Rejecting a claim for Age Pension.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information about Age Pension and the additional form required when
re-claiming Age Pension (Blind).

Related links

Claiming Age Pension

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Qualification for Age Pension

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Identity Confirmation

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
