
Home Care Packages program 065-13010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Home Care Packages program.

On this page:

Home Care Packages program

The Home Care Packages program provides support to help care recipients
to stay independent and in their own home for as long as possible. Help
can be provided through access to a range of ongoing personal services,
support services and clinical care to help them with their day to day
activities.

Home care packages provides a co-ordinated package of services tailored
to meet the care recipient’s complex care needs.

To access government-funded home care services, My Aged Care conducts an
assessment. After the assessment, My Aged Care completes the National
Screening and Assessment Form (NSAF). The NSAF provides approval for a
care recipient’s eligibility to government-funded home care services and
the level of care the care recipient is eligible for.

There are 4 levels of home care packages with different funding amounts:

-   Home Care Level 1 - supports care recipients with basic care needs
-   Home Care Level 2 - supports care recipients with low level care
    needs
-   Home Care Level 3 - supports care recipients with intermediate care
    needs
-   Home Care Level 4 - supports care recipients with high care needs

The below supplements also apply to eligible home care recipients:

-   Dementia and Cognition Supplement - helps home care services with
    the costs of caring for care recipients who have moderate to severe
    cognitive impairment
-   Veterans’ Supplement - helps home care services with the costs of
    caring for veterans with a service-related mental health condition
-   Oxygen and Enteral Feeding Supplement - helps home care services
    with the costs of enteral feeding
-   Viability Supplement - helps home care services with the cost of
    providing services in rural and remote areas
-   Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview - aged care
    recipients can apply for this supplement if they are in financial
    hardship

Note: where a home care recipient is eligible for both the Veterans’
Supplement and the Dementia and Cognition Supplement, the aged care
service will only receive the Veterans’ Supplement for the care
recipient.

The costs for home care services will vary for each care recipient. Aged
care means assessments determine the care recipient’s ability to
contribute towards government-funded home care services. See Aged Care
means assessment for further information.

The below home care packages reforms have been implemented:

The 2021 Improved Payment Arrangements for home care - changes to how
home care subsidies and supplements are paid to providers

The 2019 Basic Daily Fee (BDF) Charges - the reduction of BDF and the
introduction of 4 BDF levels

The 2017 Increasing Choice in Home Care reforms - increased choice and
flexibility for home care recipients

The 2014 Care Fee changes - the introduction of income testing for home
care packages

The 2013 Home Care Packages program - replacing the Community Packaged
Care Programs which included:

-   Community Aged Care Packages (CACP)
-   Extended Aged Care at Home (EACH) packages, and
-   Extended Aged Care at Home Dementia (EACH-D) packages

These changes have helped to ensure home care packages continue to meet
care recipients’ needs.

The 1 February 2021 and 1 September 2021 Improved Payment Arrangements

Phase 1: 1 February 2021

Advance payments ceased, Services Australia now pays home care subsidies
and supplements monthly in arrears.

Services Australia no longer pays advances as the agency pays the full
subsidy and supplements when the monthly claims are submitted. This does
not affect care recipients' subsidy entitlements.

Services Australia pays the full amount of entitlement, regardless of
services provided in respect of the claim month. Providers hold unspent
amounts on behalf of their care recipients. There has been no change to
how they manage unspent amounts. For more information and the process,
see Unspent home care amounts.

Phase 2: 1 September 2021

Home care services must submit a dollar figure for each care recipient
as part of their claim at the end of the month.

Home care are paid actual expenses, up to the limit of the claim
entitlement for the month, plus any amount not claimed from previous
months.

Unclaimed Commonwealth unspent amounts will accrue in a home care
account and be available to the provider in future months.

From 1 September 2021, home care services have a 6-month window to
opt-in to return any Commonwealth portion of unspent amounts. These
amounts are recovered from the next claim/s. If the home care service
did not choose to opt-in, the amount must be returned when the care
recipient departs the service.

Home care services must report the Commonwealth portion of unspent
amounts that they currently hold for care recipients who were in care as
at the end of the month preceding the claim month. While it is optional
for services to report initially, services must report at least once in
either the September 2021, October 2021 or the November 2021 claim. It
is mandatory from the December 2021 claim month onwards. These amounts
must be reported for each care recipient up until the service opts to
return the unspent amounts, or until the care recipient departs.

1 July 2019 Basic Daily Fee changes

The Strengthening Aged Care - more places, lower fees, better access
measure resulted in a reduction of the Basic Daily Fee (BDF). From 1
July 2019, there are 4 levels of BDF aligning to the 4 levels of home
care packages. Prior to 1 July 2019, there was only 1 BDF equal to 17.5%
of the single Basic Aged Pension. This was regardless of the care
recipient’s home care package level.

The changes apply to all existing pre-1 July 2019 and new home care
recipients paying a BDF. For more information on the care fees (care
recipient contribution fees) see the Summary of Home Care Packages terms
table on the Resources page.

27 February 2017 Increasing Choice in Home Care

The Increasing Choice in Home Care reforms took effect from 27 February
2017.

This resulted in:

increased choice and flexibility for care recipients

-   home care packages became portable, that is, the care recipient has
    the right to choose and change services at any time

less paperwork for aged care services

one national priority system for assigning packages

-   home care packages are assigned directly to care recipients from a
    national ‘pool’ of available packages

the introduction of unspent home care amounts

-   unspent home care amounts can either move with the care recipient to
    the new aged care service, or
-   be paid to the care recipient (or their estate) and the Commonwealth
    (for example, Services Australia)

1 August 2013 to 27 February 2017 transitional arrangements changes to approved provider arrangements

On 1 August 2013 the arrangements for obtaining approved provider status
were simplified for home care. There is now a single approval to be a
provider of home care. This enables an approved provider to deliver
services at any of the 4 home care packages levels.

From 27 February 2017 under Increasing Choice in Home Care, home care
packages are allocated via the Department of Health and Aged Care’s
national priority system. The Aged Care Approvals Round (ACAR) ceased.
Previously, home care providers applied for government-subsided home
care places through the ACAR. See the Resources page for a link to the
Department of Health and Aged Care’s Home Care Packages Program reforms.

1 July 2015 Consumer Directed Care (CDC)

All care recipients' home care packages are delivered on a Consumer
Directed Care (CDC) basis from 1 July 2015.

For care recipients, CDC provides choice, flexibility and control over:

-   the types of services they receive
-   how the service is provided
-   who provides the service
-   when the service is provided

Aged care services work in partnership with aged care recipients to
achieve this. Care recipients can be as involved as they want in
managing their home care package.

Aged care services must:

-   work with care recipients to create their home care agreement, care
    plan and individualised budget
-   let care recipients decide how involved they want to be in managing
    their services
-   have ongoing care discussions to make sure services are meeting the
    care recipients’ needs
-   help care recipients to access information and make informed
    decisions
-   be transparent about how much funding they have and where it is
    going

For further information on CDC, see the Resources page.

1 July 2014 Care Fee changes

The care fees arrangements changed on 1 July 2014. The changes are:

-   Basic Daily Fee (BDF) - care recipients can be asked by their home
    care service to pay the BDF
-   Income-tested fee - care recipients who have the financial capacity
    to pay are asked to contribute towards the cost of their care. This
    extra amount is known as an ‘income-tested care fee’ and is in
    addition to the BDF

The amount a care recipient’s home care service may ask them to pay will
vary with the care recipients’ financial circumstances. There are annual
and lifetime caps that apply to the income-tested fee for care
recipients who commenced receiving a home care package after 1 July
2014.

Care recipients who entered care on or after 1 July 2014 may need to
complete and lodge an Aged Care – Calculation of your cost of care form.

For care recipients who were receiving a home care package before 1 July
2014, the 1 July 2014 care fee arrangements do not apply to them. These
home care recipients will keep paying the fees they are already paying
under the pre-1 July 2014 arrangement.

For further information on home care package costs and fees, see the
Resources page.

Pre-1 August 2013 care recipients

All existing conditions for care recipients that have been receiving a
Community Packaged Care Program will continue to apply. Care recipients
do not need to be reassessed by My Aged Care unless their circumstances
change.

The transitional provisions in the legislation means that previous
existing care recipients receiving:

-   a CACP will receive services under a Home Care Level 2 package
-   an EACH package will receive services under a Home Care Level 4
    package
-   an EACH-D package will receive services under a Home Care Level 4
    package

Care Recipient Agreements (known as Home Care Agreements from 1 August
2013) will continue to remain in force.

Existing EACH-D care recipients (receiving services under an EACH-D package on 31 July 2013)

The Dementia and Cognition Supplement and the Top-up Supplement are paid
to aged care services for existing EACH-D care recipients (those
receiving services under an EACH-D package on 31 July 2013). These
recipients receive the higher Level 4 basic subsidy and Dementia and
Cognition Supplement rate to ensure they are not disadvantaged by the
commencement of the Home Care Packages program. The higher rate is
calculated and includes the Level 4 basic subsidy, the Level 4 Dementia
and Cognition Supplement amount and the top-up supplement amount.

Where the existing EACH-D care recipient is eligible for the Veterans'
Supplement and the Dementia and Cognition Supplement, the aged care
service will only receive the Veterans' Supplement for the care
recipient. For further information on EACH-D packages, see the Resources
page.

The Resources page contains a summary of Aged Care home care packages
and what they are comprised of.

Contents

Unspent home care amounts

Income Tested Care Fee (ITCF) remediation for pre-delimiter and/or
deceased care recipients for aged care services

Related links

Oxygen and Enteral Feeding Supplement for aged care services

Dementia and Cognition Supplement for aged care services

Veterans' Supplement for aged care services

Viability Supplement for aged care services

Aged care financial hardship assistance – overview

Aged Care program for service providers

Unspent home care amounts

Manage aged care recipient details

Process advance payments for aged care services

Advances in the Aged Care Management Payments System (ACMPS)

Aged Care Assessment Teams (ACAT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
