-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the cancellation of Age Pension.

Cancellation events

Age Pension may be cancelled for various reasons. Most cancellations
will be due to a change in the customer’s circumstances or a failure to
comply with their Centrelink notification obligations.

Some of the cancellation reasons can be used to cancel Age Pension
manually, or the system will automatically cancel Age Pension when the
new information is updated on the customer's record. For example, when a
change of income or assets takes a customer over the income or assets
threshold. When the income or assets are updated, the system will:

-   calculate if the customer has lost eligibility, and
-   automatically cancel the Age Pension due to income or assets

There is a comprehensive list of cancellation codes that can be used for
Age Pension.

A customer can also ask to have their payment cancelled. In these cases,
the customer must be advised of their options and that their payment
cannot be restored. If they need financial help in the future, they must
submit a new claim.

Vulnerable and 'at risk' customers

If a vulnerable and at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.
Note: customers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative and any MFUs generated for customers in this situation should
be cancelled.

Customer may qualify for CSHC

Customers not eligible for Age Pension may qualify for a Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (CSHC). Customers whose Age Pension has been
cancelled for specific reasons (see Resources tab for a list), may
receive a Notification Task on their Centrelink online account homepage
inviting them to claim for CSHC.

To claim CSHC, the customer can [] claim online or complete a Claim for
a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (SA296).

Home Equity Access Scheme customers

Age Pension customers who also receive loan payments under the Home
Equity Access Scheme are eligible to continue receiving their loan
payments if Age Pension cancels for certain reasons. In these
circumstances, the Age Pension status is set to Current Zero Rate (CZR)
for reason PLS to enable the loan payments to continue being paid.
During periods of CZR-PLS, the customer is not eligible to receive any
other Age Pension rate components.

For further information, see Home Equity Access Scheme cancellation and
rejections.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Age Pension

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
