
Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus 065-03030050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process Age Pension claims, and combined
Age Pension and Pension Bonus claims. This includes online claims,
Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) and paper claims.

A system issue exists regarding coding DOR (Date of receipt) - The
workaround for this issue is available in Network News Update (NNU) -
Centrelink online and assisted customer claims - 'date of submission'
issue NNU 10999.

Submitting claims and documentation

Customers can make a claim for Age Pension and Pension Bonus payment by
submitting an [] online claim, with help from a Service Officer running
ACC, or by lodging a paper claim form.

A correspondence nominee (individual and organisation) can submit a
claim for Age Pension on behalf of their principal. Nominees cannot
submit an Age Pension combined online claim.

An online claim or ACC for Age Pension cannot be submitted until all
required tasks have been completed (exceptions apply in specific
circumstances).

If ACC is used to submit a verbal claim on behalf of a customer and a
verbal declaration is completed, 'Staff assisted verbal declaration
accepted - Yes' will display in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   Customer Claim Summary

Verifying partner details before finalising an online claim or ACC

If a customer advises they are partnered within an online claim or via
ACC, the relationship status must be verified by both parties before the
customer's and partner's records are linked.

Verification can be provided by the partner either:

-   through the 'Partner Confirmation Logon' service on the Services
    Australia website, using the Temporary Access Code (TAC) provided at
    the end of the customer's claim,
-   verbally if the partner is present, or
-   by completing a Partner details (Mod P) form

This is not required if the customer has lodged an Age Pension paper
claim (SA002 or SA412) which has been signed by the customer and their
partner.

See Confirming a partnered relationship.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed using criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process AGE claims automatically if they meet these
criteria:

Identity is confirmed

Residency requirements met

Tax file number recorded

No change in known relationship details

No change in known children details

Blind details are known to the agency

Claim is not a combined claim

Homeowners on less than 2 hectares, or paying government rent

Savings updates of less than:

-   $20,000 for single customers, and
-   $30,000 for partnered customers

Claim results in a grant outcome

If a claim meets the criteria for automated assessment, DOCs or Display
Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created these.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Age Pension claim work item

When an online or ACC is submitted, as a single person or Age Pension
combined partner online claim, an Age Pension claim work item is created
in Process Direct containing the claim information. The claim is
reviewed in Process Direct.

A SOA shell claim (with no claim information) is created automatically
when an Age Pension paper claim (SA002 or SA412) is scanned onto the
customer's record.

Holding an Age Pension claim to user

Hold to User is a function that holds a work item in a user’s worklist
until it can be completed.

Claims can be held to user for many reasons, for example if the customer
needs to provide more information, is vulnerable, in hardship or has
complex circumstances. For a full list of reasons a claim can be held to
user see Hold to User new claim criteria.

To hold the claim to user see Work Optimiser for staff.

Age Pension combined claims

To identify if the claim is an Age Pension combined partner online claim
(customer and partner), check the Claim ID numbers are the same.
Alternatively, check if keyword DUALCLM appears in the keywords options.

If the customer and partner have lodged a joint paper claim, the SOA
shell is created on the customer's record only.

Age Pension claim with a Pension Bonus claim

Age Pension with a Pension Bonus claims need to be processed outside
Process Direct. Where an Age Pension with a Pension Bonus claim has been
lodged:

-   before assessing the claim, contact the customer and recommend they
    contact a Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer if they have
    not yet done so. If not trained in Pension Bonus assessments,
    reallocate both claims as per the Reallocating Pension Bonus claims
    table on the Process page
-   after finalising the Age Pension claim process the Pension Bonus
    claim in Customer Record using the Pension Bonus Claim Assessment
    script. See Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment
    (PBP)

Age Pension claim with a Home Equity Access Scheme claim

If the customer has also submitted a separate claim for the Home Equity
Access Scheme (the Scheme), process the Age Pension and (if applicable)
Pension Bonus claim first. The Scheme claim is processed by the Home
Equity Access Scheme National team upon completion of the Age Pension
and Pension Bonus claim.

Reopening a rejected claim

If a rejected claim needs to be opened and reassessed, re-index the
original claim or create a SOA shell. See Indexing, re-indexing and
cancelling claim activities.

Employment income and start date

Claimants who are qualified and payable for Age Pension are generally
granted from the date they submit a claim with all relevant supporting
documentation. From 7 December 2020, employment income is assessed in
the entitlement period in which it is paid by the employer. Where the
income is too high for the customer to be payable from the Age Pension
qualification date, but the customer will become payable within 13 weeks
of the date they lodged the claim, the start date should be moved to the
earliest Entitlement Period Start Date from which the customer is
payable. Note: this may not apply to claims with Pension Bonus
entitlement. See Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment
(PBP).

Reporting requirements

Customer who have reporting requirements from their first entitlement
period will not receive a Pensioner Concession Card until they complete
their report. If the customer is also claiming the Pension Bonus, the
bonus will not be paid until they report and Age Pension is assessed as
payable. When they report, an activity will be produced to prompt
assessment of the Pension Bonus claim.

For more information on reporting, see Reporting overview.

The Resources page contains:

-   link to the Level 2 Policy Help Desks intranet page
-   link to mySupport
-   the Process Direct sub-site
-   example text for Age Pension grant letter (Q999) for a deceased
    customer
-   a new claim (submit and DOC) script workaround

Related links

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Early claims

Claims received that are incomplete or incorrect

Inappropriate claims

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Calculating start day - general rule

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Identity Confirmation

Identifying and making referrals to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Processing a claim after the death of a customer

Qualification for Age Pension

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Residence and Portability screens

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Reporting ICT issues in Process Direct

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Straight through processing

Translation of documents

Waiting periods for income support payments

Work Optimiser for staff

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
