
Aged care financial hardship assistance – review/cease/revoke 065-22010415

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to review, cease or revoke a claim
for aged care financial hardship (hardship) assistance.

Review of hardship assessment

When a hardship assessment is granted, it is valid for a set period of
time, for example 12 months or 3 years. During this period, a change to
a care recipient’s income and/or assets may affect the assessment and
lead to a review. Changes to essential expenses may also require a new
assessment to be completed.

A review of a hardship assessment may be initiated by:

-   a care recipient/nominee seeking a review of a decision
-   a care recipient/nominee responding to a notice of intention to
    revoke hardship, or
-   Services Australia when there has been a change of circumstances
    that affects a current hardship assessment

Hardship may be granted for up to 3 years, and a manual review set to
check the care recipient’s circumstances and if any changes have been
advised.

Ceasing and revoking hardship assistance

Hardship assistance may be ceased if a change in circumstances means a
care recipient is no longer eligible for hardship. This may occur when:

-   an asset is assessed as an asset that cannot be sold or borrowed
    against
-   financial circumstances change, such as receipt of an inheritance
-   any changes in circumstances causing income or assets to exceed the
    hardship threshold

Hardship assistance may also be revoked where it has been identified
that the care recipient was not eligible.

Care recipient changes provider during hardship period

When a care recipient changes providers during a hardship period, they
are required to advise Services Australia of the change. If a care
recipient has been granted hardship for permanent residential care, they
will be required to provide their new accommodation agreement. An aged
care agreement is required for non-low means care recipients. A review
of hardship will be required based on existing hardship calculations
updated with current fees and charges.

Related Links

Aged care financial hardship - overview

Aged Care means assessment

Aged Care means assessment – residential Care post 1 July 2014 –
pre-entry

Aged care means assessment - residential care post 1 July 2014 -
post-entry

Aged Care means assessment – home care pre-entry

Aged Care means assessment – home care post-entry

Aged Care fees – Care subsidy reduction to zero

Aged care financial hardship assistance - assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
