
Home care account 065-21081745

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the home care account.

The home care account

The home care account was introduced as part of the Improved Payment
Arrangements (IPA) for home care September 2021 changes. The Aged Care
Management Payment System (ACMPS) will maintain a home care account for
each care recipient. This will accrue any unclaimed amounts from
previous periods (credits), which can be deducted from subsequent
periods (debits) if the service provider claims an amount greater than
the claim entitlement in that month. The maximum amount the service
provider can claim is up to the limit of the credits available in the
home care account.

Unspent funds are the total amount of home care subsidy and fees a
service provider has received on behalf of a care recipient that have
not been spent. For information about unspent funds, see Unspent home
care amounts.

From 1 September 2021, all care recipients have a home care account.
Each home care account has an initial balance of zero dollars ($0). This
is regardless of when care recipients started to get a Home Care
Package. The home care account will hold any Commonwealth (CW) unspent
funds accrued from that date onwards. The unspent funds will continue to
be available to pay for a care recipient’s care and services when
needed.

For care recipients currently in care, service providers will continue
to have a limit of 2 years after the end of a payment period to make
changes to an event. This can be submitted via either the Aged Care
Provider Portal (ACPP) or the paper format channel. When a care
recipient departs from a home care service provider, the home care
account relevant to the episode of care remains viewable to the
departing service indefinitely. The home care account balance will only
be available to the departing home care service provider to make changes
for 70 days. After 70 days, the departing home care service provider is
unable to claim for the care recipient and/or make any changes to
events. They can email their request to the Aged Care Payments Team
(Aged Care and Allied Health Branch). All requests beyond the 70 days
and 2 years period must include relevant supporting evidence.

Requests beyond 70 days must be genuine cases of administration errors
on Services Australia’s part. These cases are directed to the Aged Care
Programmes Branch for review and action via email. See Maintain claims
in the Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) for information about
time limits for aged care providers to make changes to events.

For care recipients who move to a new home care service within 70 days
from the departure date, the home care balance is transferred to the new
service on day 71. If the care recipient does not move to a new home
care service by the end of the 70 days from the departure date, the
amount of the home care balance is set to zero ($0) and the balance is
returned to Services Australia.

A care recipient’s home care account can be found in the Aged Care Staff
Portal and Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS). See the Process
page for the steps.

Calculating the amount of home care subsidy

From 1 September 2021, the amount of home care subsidy payable to a
service provider for providing care in a payment period is calculated as
follows:

-   the Commonwealth (CW) contribution amount plus the home care account
    balance equals the maximum contribution amount
-   the invoice amount minus the CW unspent amount (if opted in) minus
    any care recipient’s contributions (Income Tested Care Fee (ITCF))
    equals the shortfall amount
-   the lesser of the maximum contribution amount and the shortfall
    amount equals the amount of home care subsidy payable to the service
    provider. This is shown as the ‘payment determination’ on the
    payment statement

The CW contribution amount is equal to:

-   the basic subsidy amount
-   plus any primary supplements
-   minus any reductions in subsidy
-   plus any other supplements

Prior to 1 September 2021, home care subsidies payable to a service
provider were calculated as follows:

the basic subsidy amount

plus any primary supplements

minus any reductions in subsidy

-   a compensation payment reduction where a care recipient is in
    receipt of a compensation entitlement that covers home care, or
-   a care subsidy reduction where a care recipient has income above a
    certain amount, and is required to pay an ITCF

plus any other supplements  such as a hardship supplement for care
recipients in financial hardship, or a viability supplement for care
recipients living in regional and remote areas

Service providers are paid for the services they have delivered up to
the limit of the maximum contribution amount for the month. If the
shortfall amount exceeds the maximum contribution amount, the service
provider is able to draw down on (that is, use) any care recipient
portion of unspent funds they may hold (if any).

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details for Aged Care, and
-   Services Australia and external websites

Related links

Home Care Packages program

Maintain Claims in Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)

Aged Care Staff Portal

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
