
Aged care - consent and disclosure 065-18022700

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes involved when recording a care
recipient's consent to release information.

Financial disclosure to service providers

A service provider may request the financial details of a care recipient
from Services Australia (the agency):

-   for new care recipients, this commenced on 1 December 2017
-   for care recipients already in care, this commenced in February 2018

The provision of financial details may assist the service provider to
resolve issues where the outcome of the means assessment does not align
with the service provider’s expectations.

Before requesting the financial details from the agency, the service
provider should seek this information directly from the care recipient
(or nominee/authorised representative) if possible. The care recipient
(or nominee/authorised representative) may elect to share this
information directly with the service provider without providing written
consent to the agency. There is no obligation for the care recipient (or
nominee/authorised representative) to provide consent for release of
their financial details to a service provider.

Type of financial information to be released

Where consent is given, the service provider will be provided with the
same type of information that is currently provided in the summary
statements attached to the initial fee letters sent to care
recipients/nominees. That is:

-   For home care - the Income Summary Statement
-   For residential care - both the Income and Assets Summary Statements

Note: The provider will be given the financial details that are/were
current for the dates requested. These may differ from the financial
details contained in the initial fee letter sent to the care
recipient/nominee.

The consent provided by the care recipient (or nominee/authorised
representative) allows the agency to release current, former and future
income and asset details, to the current service provider and any future
service providers.

Consent for the release of financial information to service providers

The agency will only release financial details to a service provider
when written consent for this to occur has been received:

From June 2019, consent can only be obtained via the Aged Care Financial
Disclosure Consent form (SA480):

-   This form may be used either before or after entry to care

From 1 December 2017 to end of May 2019, consent could have been
obtained in 1 of the following ways:

-   Prior to entry to care – via versions 1711 (only) of the Aged Care
    Fees Income Assessment form (SA456) or Permanent Residential Aged
    Care – Request for a Combined Assets and Income Assessment form
    (SA457)
-   After entry to care – via the Aged Care Financial Disclosure Consent
    form (SA480)

Prior to 1 December 2017:

-   A service provider was unable to request the financial details of a
    care recipient from the agency

A care recipient (or nominee/authorised representative) cannot provide
verbal consent for the care recipient’s financial details to be released
to the service provider.

The care recipient (or nominee/authorised representative) may withdraw
their consent at any time.

Provider requests for a care recipient's financial information

The service provider must request the financial information from the
agency via the advertised email channel only. Financial information will
not be released verbally.

Signature requirements for Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care forms

Signature requirements for Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care
differ from Social Security forms. Unlike Social Security forms, if an
Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care form is:

-   signed by a care recipient or authorised third party anywhere on the
    form, the form can be accepted.
-   unsigned, it can be accepted following verbal contact in some
    circumstances

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
aged care forms, the intranet Privacy and Secrecy homepage, aged care
letter templates and task cards.

Related links

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Storing documents

Aged care letters - creating manual letters

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
