
Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what documentation is acceptable proof of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) and how to update the
information.

Original documents not required

The customer does not have to supply original copies of the Notice of
Assessment (NOA) and other supporting documents, such as payment
summaries/Australian Taxation Office (ATO) income statements and income
tax returns, copies are acceptable.

The type of income the customer has will determine what type of
verification of income is required. Not all information recorded on the
tax return is on a NOA, so further information or verification may be
required.

Verification of income

The CSHC claim process requires verification of income for the Income
test qualification:

-   Customer (and partner) must provide a NOA for the most recent
    verifiable financial year (reference tax year), which must be within
    2 years of the current financial year
-   For couples, both the customer and partner must provide NOAs or
    other financial documents (if not required to lodge) for the same
    reference tax year
-   If the customer (and/or partner) is required to lodge yet cannot
    provide a NOA for the either of the two financial years before the
    current financial year as they have an extension to lodge, or
    suspension of enforcement action on outstanding income tax returns
    granted by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), must provide
    evidence from the ATO. This must also be supported with other
    relevant documents for verification of income for the reference tax
    year
-   If the customer (and/or partner) has declared their income will be
    lower in the current financial year, due to change to their personal
    circumstances or a one-off variation in income, they must still
    provide a NOA for the reference tax year. The estimate of income
    requires evidence to support the reason the income will be lower
    than their most recent ATI and verification of income for the
    current financial year
-   If the customer (and/or partner) is not required to lodge a tax
    return for the reference tax year, they need to provide other
    relevant documents for verification of income for the reference tax
    year
-   If the customer (and/or partner) meet all other CSHC qualification
    criteria, and they declare ZERO income for the reference tax year,
    then no documentation is required for verification of income

Deemed income from account-based income streams is included in the CSHC
income test. Customer or partner must provide a Details of income stream
product form (SA330) or similar schedule from their provider, before a
new account-based income stream can be added or updates to an existing
account-based income stream can be recorded. See Adding or updating an
account-based income stream. If the customer is unable to meet the
verification of income requirements, the CSHC claim must be rejected.

To determine if the declaration of income supports the correct claim
outcome, the decision to accept the verification provided rests with the
delegate.

When a customer advises that they have little or nil income, then they
should consider applying for Age Pension. The customer may not be
eligible for Age Pension if they are excluded due to the assets test or
residential qualifications. For more information, see Qualification of
Age Pension.

CSHC income reviews

Services Australia and the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) match
records twice a year. Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) data received from
the ATO when matched with CSHC customers may result in an intervention
where income details exceed the applicable income threshold for the
reference tax year.

Existing account based income streams may be updated automatically as
part of the Automation of Income Stream Review (AISR) process.

Related links

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) Interventions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
