
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about bereavement entitlements and
assistance available to customers upon the death of a care receiver or
carer where the carer is receiving Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance
(CA). Qualification for bereavement assistance depends on whether the
carer receives CP or CA. Once the death is confirmed, Services Australia
will calculate the rate of bereavement assistance payable. This depends
on the circumstances of the carer/care receiver before the death.

Government intent

When a person contacts Services Australia after the death of a person or
child, the primary outcome for customers and the partner agencies is
that appropriate bereavement assistance and services are provided.

On this Page:

Bereavement assistance

From 1 July 2012, bereavement assistance for a Carer Allowance (CA)
(adult) recipient depends on whether or not the carer receives CA and an
income support payment (other than Carer Payment (CP)).

If they are receiving:

-   CA only, the carer is not entitled to a Bereavement Payment
-   both CA and CP (for the same or another care receiver), the carer is
    not entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment, but may be entitled to
    bereavement assistance in relation to CP
-   both CA and an income support payment (other than Carer Payment)
    that does not qualify them for a Bereavement Payment, they are
    entitled to CA up to the end of the bereavement rate continuation
    period and may be entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment
-   both CA and an income support payment, including Department of
    Veterans' Affairs (DVA), that qualifies for a Bereavement Payment,
    they are not entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment

The CA Bereavement Payment will be the equivalent of up to 7 instalments
of CA. The payment will be paid as a lump sum to the carer on
notification of the death of the care receiver.

If the care provided for CA is shared, each carer will receive a CA
Bereavement Payment based on the percentage of care they provided prior
to the care receiver's death. However, if the care provided for CA is
shared care and only one carer is receiving CA on the day of the care
receiver's death and that carer receives 100% of the rate of CA, then
that CA carer will be paid the full rate (100%) of the CA Bereavement
Payment.

The death is recorded by the agency to ensure the carer's payment is
correctly reassessed and that any bereavement payments associated with
other payments received by the care receiver are processed, for example
Disability Support Pension (DSP).

The notification period for the occurrence of a bereavement event is 28
days for carers receiving CP and/or CA.

Carer Payment (CP) customers

For CP customers, bereavement assistance after the death of a care
receiver may include a continuation of CP during the bereavement period
and a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment.

Under short term and episodic care provisions, after the death of a care
receiver, CP (child) customers may receive a Lump Sum Bereavement
Payment and continuation of CP (child) during the bereavement period,
even if this exceeds the date of the Medical Report, Medical Certificate
end date, or end of episodic care period.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

The 14 week bereavement continuation period only applies to CP (XWP)
customers where the last or only care receiver dies. CP (XWP) customers
may be eligible for a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment if their partner
dies, or they only get Carer Allowance (CA) for one care receiver. For
more details, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Carer Allowance (CA) customers

From 1 July 2012, carers receiving CA (adult) who also receive an income
support payment (other than CP) who are not entitled to a Lump Sum
Bereavement Payment following the death of the CA care receiver, will be
eligible for a CA Bereavement Payment.

Bereavement Payment for CA (adult) recipients depends on whether or not
the carer receives other payments and their payment type. If they are
receiving:

-   CA only, the carer is not entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment
-   both CA and Carer Payment (CP) (for the same or another care
    receiver), the carer is not entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment,
    but may be entitled to bereavement assistance in relation to CP
    depending on which care receiver passed away
-   both CA and an income support payment (other than Carer income
    support payment (other than CP) that does not qualify them for a
    Bereavement Payment, they may be entitled to a CA Bereavement
    Payment
-   both CA and an income support payment (including DVA)) that
    qualifies them for a Bereavement Payment, they are not entitled to a
    CA Bereavement Payment
-   The CA Bereavement Payment will be the equivalent of up to 7
    instalments of CA. The payment will be paid as a lump sum to the
    carer on notification of the death of the care receiver

If the care receiver is a child, a Bereavement Payment for the carer may
be payable. See Death of a child care receiver and the effect on Carer
Allowance (CA).

Member of a couple

If the care receiver or carer was a member of a couple, their partner
may be entitled to bereavement assistance.

Death of carer

If the carer has passed away, see Death of a carer (CLK).

Contents

Death of a carer (CLK)

Death of a care receiver (CLK)

Related links

Bereavement letters

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
