
Cancellation of Widow Allowance (WA) 099-09070030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the cancellation of a Widow
Allowance (WA) payment. WA can be cancelled either automatically or
manually. Changes in a customer's circumstances may result in the need
for a reassessment, so all variations to a customer's circumstances need
to be recorded on the customer's records.

Closure of Widow Allowance (WA)

Widow Allowance (WA) will cease on 1 January 2022. Customers will need
to transfer to Age Pension to continue receiving payment after this
date.

Widow Allowance is closed to new claims from 1 July 2018. Current WA
recipients will continue to receive payment unless their WA is
cancelled. Before cancelling WA, it must be established that the
customer has lost entitlement for payment and that cancellation is the
appropriate action, as the customer will not be able to reclaim WA.

See Restoration of Partner Allowance (PA) and Widow Allowance (WA) for
the only circumstances where WA can be restored.

Where a decision is made to cancel the payment, the customer may need to
test their eligibility for a different payment, for example consider
whether the customer is eligible for Age Pension.

Reassessments

During reassessments, cancellation should occur when a customer:

-   no longer meets the qualification and/or payability provisions for
    their current income support payment
-   fails to comply with the notification requirements and/or recipient
    obligations, or

Automatic cancellation will occur as a result of reassessments where no
continuing entitlement exists. For example, if a customer advises they
have returned to full-time employment, the employment income they are
paid is recorded and, if the customer is no longer entitled, payment
will be automatically cancelled due to income. If a customer advises of
casual work, the customer will automatically be placed on 2 weekly
reporting of their employment income. WA will cancel automatically
if/when the income limit is exceeded.

Vulnerable and at risk customers

If a vulnerable and at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.

Income reporting

A customer on 2 weekly employment income reporting, is required to
report their employment income on their Entitlement Period End Day
(EPED). If the customer does not report on their EPED, they will not be
paid until after they have reported. If they still have not reported 14
days after their EPED, payment will be automatically cancelled.

Manual cancellation

Manual cancellation is required in cases where a Service Officer makes a
decision to cancel a customer's payment based on the applicable Social
Security Law.

Before manually cancelling a customer's payment, extra care should be
taken to establish that the customer has lost qualification for that
payment, as they will be unable to claim WA again. Working credits may
enable the customer to keep some of their income support payment while
they are working. If the customer's income reduces their fortnightly
rate to nil, and some of that income is employment income, the
customer's payment may remain current at nil rate for up to 6
fortnights. They may also retain eligibility to certain benefits.

If the customer is not qualified for payment and the decision to cancel
payment is made, an advice is sent to the customer with the cancellation
reason and their rights of review and appeal.

When cancelling a payment, the reasons for the decision and the relevant
policy and legislation supporting that decision must be recorded on the
customer's record.

Related links

Widow Allowance (WA)

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Coding a cancellation

Working Credit

Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (job seeker)

Manual intervention for automatic suspension and cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
