
Requests for information after someone has died 099-01030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for staff about releasing information
about a deceased person under Public Interest guidelines for the
Centrelink program. Every request requires a response.

Calls received about a deceased person

When a person calls and enters the Customer Reference Number (CRN) for a
customer that is deceased, a message will display in Services Australia
Workspace. This alerts the Service Officer to the sensitivity of the
call and to handle the call appropriately. For more information, see
Telephone standards.

The caller may be:

-   Authorised to make enquiries about the deceased person’s
    information, such as the executor or administrator of the estate,
    with evidence and a request made in writing on the
    Executor/Administrator Request for information form (SS524)
-   Enquiring about what Bereavement Services are available to them,
    such as the surviving partner or carer. See About Bereavement
    services
-   Enquiring about the deceased person’s information but does not have
    authority, such as a family member or friend. Note: do not provide
    any information about the deceased person (including whether or not
    they were a customer), unless the caller has provided sufficient
    evidence of their authority

Requests for information

Information is frequently requested by executors/administrators after
someone has died so the estate can be finalised. These requests should
be in writing and preferably made using the Executor/Administrator
Request for information form (SS524).

Executors/administrators may ask for information about the deceased
person, such as:

-   bank account details
-   declared income and assets
-   if there is any uncontrolled pension or benefit entitlements
-   if Services Australia has a claim against the estate, or
-   if there are outstanding debts or money owing
-   a statement of pension or benefit for current/previous financial
    years

All requests must have proof that the person asking for the information
is the nominated executor/administrator. Executors are usually
identified in the will of the deceased person.

Note: it is generally accepted that a Public Trustee or a solicitor is
administering an estate when they officially write to the agency and
state this.

If a person dies without a will (intestate), the spouse, partner or next
of kin should apply to the Probate Office of the Supreme Court for
letters of administration. A personal representative (that is, an
administrator) will then be appointed by the court to finalise the
deceased person's affairs.

This does not apply to small estates (worth less than $10,000). Small
estates can be referred to the State or Territory Public Trustees, which
have additional powers in dealing with small estates. The Public Trustee
usually provides verification of their role at the time of their request
for information for:

-   small estates, and
-   court appointed administration of deceased estates

Information must only be disclosed to:

-   the executor as named in the will
-   the Public Trustee
-   a court
-   the administrator of the estate
-   state and territory government departments assessing burial/funeral
    assistance

Requests for returned payments

An executor of the estate or appropriate person can apply for any of the
deceased’s payments that have been returned from the financial
institution. See Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where
payment was returned from financial institution.

Delegations for disclosure of information

The Deceased Persons page on the Services Australia intranet provides
information about delegations for Centrelink, Child Support and
Medicare. See the Resources page for a link to the Deceased Persons page
on the intranet.

The Resources page also has links to:

-   Delegations and Authorisations Register
-   Centrelink Services, Delegations and Authorisations
-   Child Support Services, Delegations and Authorisations
-   Medicare Services, Delegations and Authorisations

For Centrelink, a Release of Information web form must be completed when
information is disclosed to a person or authority other than an executor
or administrator for this estate. The web form is available on the
Deceased Persons intranet page, see the Resources page for a link.

Recording executor details

Executor details must be recorded on the Death/Executor (DEA) screen.
The proof sighted must be recorded on a DOC before Services Australia
can issue arrears, complete debt recovery action or issue payment
summaries.

Sending a letter about a deceased person

Letters providing information about a deceased person can be prepared by
any Service Officer. These must be approved and issued by a staff member
with the appropriate delegation level before being issued. The
delegation is with a staff member at or above APS4 level.

Proof of executor or administrator status

Proof of executor or administrator status is always required before any
information is released or follow-up action is taken to contact or
advise the estate on matters such as debts or payments owed. A copy of
the deceased person's will should show if there is an executor and
identify them.

Information about the executor or administrator (including disputed
executor or administrator roles) should be recorded on a DOC on the
deceased person's record.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney (POA) cease at the time of
death. These should not be relied upon as an authority to receive
information about the deceased person. People who were nominee or POA do
not automatically become the executor or administrator. A statutory
declaration from a person who does not hold an appropriate authority
cannot be used as authorisation for access to a deceased person's
information. The person should be advised to seek advice from a lawyer,
Probate Office or Public Trustee.

Life insurance and superannuation companies can request information to:

-   confirm that a deceased person who held a policy or was a member of
    a fund was not a customer of Services Australia, or
-   request contact details for a beneficiary

State and territory government departments that provide burial/funeral
assistance may request information about assets held by the deceased
person. This information will determine eligibility for funeral
assistance.

It is extremely important that all requests are actioned urgently.

Note: do not provide a third party with any information (including
whether or not the deceased person was a customer) unless they have
provided sufficient evidence of their authority. See Disclosing
information to third parties.

Executor/Administrator Request for information form (SS524)

The SS524 form is the preferred method to request Centrelink information
from Services Australia about a deceased person. The form states what
Centrelink information can be provided, to whom and what proof of
executor or administrator status is required.

Note: when an executor or administrator makes a request by letter, the
request should be accepted, processed and the executor or administrator
encouraged in the future to use the SS524.

The Resources page includes a link to the SS524 form.

Requests for Medicare information

For requests for Medicare information about a deceased person, see
Release of information for Medicare.

Requests for Child Support information

For requests for Child Support information about a deceased payer, payee
or child, see Deceased Child Support Customer Management.

The Resources page includes links to:

-   Executor/Administrator Request for information form (SS524)
-   Release of information web form
-   Delegation instruments
-   Contacts
-   Intranet links including the Delegations and Authorisations
    Register, Deceased Persons page, Release of Information page,
    Bereavement Allowance and Bereavement Payment page, and
-   Office Locator

Related links

Disclosing information to third parties

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Deceased Child Support Customer management

Medicare claims for deceased persons

Issuing Payment Summaries

Quarterly Supplement

Locating information or screens using the Screen Search (SCREENS) screen

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Release of information for Medicare

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Undoing a death action

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
