
Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer 099-02040050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when the partner of a PPP
customer dies.

Assistance for surviving partner

Following the notification of the death of their partner:

-   the surviving customer's rate is adjusted to the single rate, and
-   the PPP customer transferred immediately to Parenting Payment Single
    (PPS)

A person receiving PPP when their partner dies may be entitled to
receive a lump sum bereavement payment if:

-   they are a long-term social security recipient, and
-   their partner is a long-term social security recipient or a
    pensioner. If the deceased partner was getting a payment from the
    Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA), DVA may be responsible for
    paying the lump sum bereavement payment

If the surviving Parenting Payment (PP) customer is subject to mutual
obligation requirements, they are entitled to a bereavement exemption
for 14 weeks from the date of death. The exemption period can be longer
if the customer is pregnant.

Confirmation of the death of a partner

Before the death action can be finalised on the record, the death must
be confirmed.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Customer is working or starts work

Working credits may enable them to keep some of their income support
payment while they are working.

If the customer's income reduces their rate to nil and it includes
employment income, they may remain current at nil rate for up to 6
fortnights and retain some benefits.

Note: if the customer's deceased partner had any working credits, these
credits cannot be transferred to the customer.

Assessment of assets following death of partner

If the surviving partner was a joint owner of any assets with their late
partner, full ownership of the assets legally transfers to the surviving
partner following the death of their partner. However, for social
security purposes, if assets are owned in joint names with the deceased
partner, the surviving partner is only assessed as owning 50%.

The system will only read that the surviving partner owns 50% of the
asset. This is not updated until the surviving partner advises of the
transfer of assets.

If the surviving partner is granted a reversionary income stream:

-   it is assessed from the date they are first entitled to receive it
-   if they receive a lump sum arrears payment, accrued between the
    death of the primary beneficiary and when the reversionary
    beneficiary starts to receive regular payments, it is assessed as
    income from the income stream. This means the income is assessed
    over the period to which it relates. This may result in a debt for
    that period if the customer has been in receipt of an income support
    payment

Effective from 9 May 2018, if the assessment of the lump sum arrears
results in a debt during the bereavement period for the surviving
customer, consider waiver provisions under Class of Debt, Section
1237AB(1) of the Social Security Act 1991. The legislative instrument
'Social Security (Waiver of Debts - Bereavement Period) Specification
2017' permits this action if all provisions are satisfied.

Note: any debt outside the 14 week bereavement period cannot be waived
under the legislative instrument. The legislative instrument is not
retrospective. This means any of these debts that occur before 9 May
2018 cannot be waived under class of debt waiver provisions.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
publications. contact details for the DVA Clearance Team (SCS), and the
Local Activities Database.

Related links

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Death of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Social work service referral

Working Credit

Transfer to Youth Allowance (YA) (Job seeker) from another payment

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Bereavement reviews

Suspension of payments

Restoration of payments

Non NSS systems coding for manual rate of payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
