
Bereavement reviews 099-11000000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains bereavement reviews. A bereavement review may be
conducted following the death of a member of a couple. It is carried out
on the surviving partner's circumstances to make sure they are receiving
their correct entitlement.

Government intent

If a bereavement review is needed from 16 September 2019, it will start
16 weeks after the death of the customer's partner. This is to allow
time for the deceased partner's estate to be finalised.

16 week bereavement review

For customers receiving an income support payment, a review may be
needed. The review will check if assets solely owned by the deceased or
income paid to the deceased will be transferred to the surviving
partner. Income sources may include:

-   superannuation,
-   compensation, or
-   other payments

In most cases, the system will automatically decide if a review is
needed and then automatically issue an SA220 Income and Asset Update
form 16 weeks after the date of death. See the Resources page for the
Bereavement review timeline. If a notice is received more than 16 weeks
after the date of death, the review starts immediately.

If the surviving partner wants to update their income and assets before
the 16 week review, an SA220 can be issued manually. Alternatively, if a
customer advises of a change to their income or assets before the 16
week review, these details must be updated. When income or asset details
are updated, the system will finalise the bereavement review.

A review will not be triggered if:

-   the total of the couple's combined income and/or assets would not
    impact on the survivor's single rate of payment (either a decrease
    or an increase in rate)
-   the deceased partner did not own any assets that are likely to be
    transferred to the customer
-   the surviving partner has already updated their income and asset
    details within 16 weeks after the date of death

Only manually issue a SA220 for one of the following reasons:

-   the customer or nominee is unable to update their income and assets
    online
-   to replace an SA220 that has already been issued
-   the customer did not advise of all income and asset updates during
    the Bereavement Review

In all other circumstances, the SA220 is not to be manually issued. This
will be completed as part of the bereavement review, if needed.

Centrelink Bereavement Statement

Surviving partners receiving a pension will be issued a Centrelink
Bereavement Statement 8 weeks after their partner's date of death. The
Centrelink Bereavement Statement provides:

-   a summary of the income and assets held in the survivor's name on
    the date it is issued
-   the income and assets held in the late partner's name and
    overpayments as at the date of death
-   an invitation to appoint a nominee while the customer is grieving

This is to help the customer to compare details of their actual
circumstances to those that Centrelink has recorded and advise changes.
An executor or administrator of the deceased estate can also use the
statement to help with the grant of probate and finalisation of the
estate.

The customer is advised in the Centrelink Bereavement Statement to
notify of any changes to their income and assets. Customers who have
been sent the statement may also be selected for a 16 week bereavement
review, depending on their circumstances.

Joint tenancy ownership

When parties own property as joint tenants:

-   all parties have equal ownership and interest in the property, and
-   a right of survivorship exists

The 'right of survivorship' means if one of the joint tenant dies, the
property will automatically pass to the surviving joint tenant.

Tenant in common arrangement

When parties own property as tenants in common:

-   all parties' shares and interest in the property may not be equal.
    It depends entirely on the agreed shares of the parties
-   there is no right of survivorship

If one of the parties dies, their interest in the property forms part of
the deceased person's estate and does not automatically pass on to any
co-owners/s of the property.

Asset transfer

If the deceased customer owned assets with their partner under a joint
tenancy ownership arrangement, full ownership of the assets legally
transfers to the surviving partner.

If the asset was owned under a tenant-in-common arrangement with their
partner, transfer of ownership is subject to the late partner’s will.

However, for social security purposes, if assets are owned in joint
names with the deceased partner, the surviving partner is only assessed
as owning 50%. The system will continue to assess the surviving partner
as owning 50% of the asset, until they advise of the transfer of assets.

Generally, the date of effect of the asset change is the date the asset
is received.

If the asset transfer has been advised for one of the following reviews
but no 'date the asset was received' was provided, use the date Services
Australia was advised as the date of event:

-   bereavement review
-   service profiling review, or
-   response to a Centrelink Bereavement Statement

Reversionary income stream

If the surviving partner is granted a reversionary income stream, assess
it from the date it is first entitled to be received.

A lump sum arrears payment received by the reversionary beneficiary,
accrued between the death of the primary beneficiary and when the
reversionary beneficiary starts to receive regular payments, is assessed
as income from the income stream. This means the income is assessed over
the period to which it relates. This may result in a debt for that
period if the customer has been receiving an income support payment.

From 9 May 2018, if the assessment of the lump sum arrears results in a
debt during the bereavement period for the surviving spouse,
consideration should be given to waiver provisions contained under Class
of Debt, Section 1237AB(1) of the Social Security Act 1991. The
legislative instrument 'Social Security (Waiver of Debts – Bereavement
Period) Specification 2017' permits this action if all provisions are
satisfied.

Note: any debt outside the 14 week bereavement period cannot be waived
under the legislative instrument. The legislative instrument is not
retrospective. This means that any of these debts that occur before 9
May 2018 cannot be waived under Class of Debt waiver provisions.

Delays in the estate being finalised

Generally, the grant of probate and the finalising of the estate will
occur within 12 months of the date of death.

The bereavement review can be extended for up to 2 years from the date
of partner's death to allow for delays in the granting of probate and
disputes in finalising the estate. The review can be extended by a
Service Officer in Process Direct or by the customer using their
Centrelink online account. When extending the review, the Service
Officer should enquire about the reason for the request.

If the deceased partner's estate has not been finalised within 2 years,
the surviving partners record should be updated based on the income and
assets that the customer owns at that time and the review completed. The
customer will need to advise of any further transfers from the estate
when it is finalised under the general notification provisions.

Service Profiling and reviews

Service Profiling will override the need for a bereavement review. If a
Service Profile review occurs, the customer will not be subject to a
bereavement review.

The service profiling tool excludes Age Pension, Disability Support
Pension (DSP) and some Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers from all
Service Update selection during the 14 week bereavement period.

The Resources page has links to forms and a timeline of the bereavement
review.

Related links

Appointing nominees

Centrelink Bereavement Statement

Death of one member of a pension couple

Income streams

Assessing an Income and Assets Update (SA220) form

Assessing an overseas Income and Assets Review (AUS220)

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

How to code and action a manual review

Interest in an estate

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Creating an Online Advice (OLA) including within an existing activity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
