
Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) 099-06000000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains general information about the Lump Sum
Bereavement Payment (LBP). It contains procedures about entitlement to
an LBP and how to calculate the LBP. An LBP is payable to certain income
support customers after the death of their partner, and in some cases to
a Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customer after the death of
a person they were caring for.

Government intent

When a person contacts Services Australia after the death of a person or
child, the primary outcome for customers and the policy departments is
that appropriate bereavement assistance and services are provided.

LBP information

LBP is a one-off payment paid to the customer in addition to any other
bereavement assistance that may be payable.

The LBP is intended to ensure that the surviving partner receives at
least the amount that would have been paid to the couple during the
bereavement payment period, had the person not died. The LBP is the
difference between the surviving partner's new single rate and the
member of a couple rate that would have been payable. An LBP is not
payable if the new single rate is more than the previous combined member
of a couple rate or if the member of a couple rate continued throughout
the bereavement period because the death was notified late.

The LBP is calculated and paid automatically when the person is recorded
as deceased if both members of the couple were pensioners. If one or
both members of the couple were long term social security recipients as
allowees, the LBP must be manually calculated and issued. Surviving
partners who receive JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance and who
are eligible for LBP must also be assessed for Partner Bereavement
Payment.

The way the LBP is worked out depends on who is entitled to receive it
and when the death is notified and recorded.

Rent Assistance is included in LBP calculations for both the previous
combined member of a couple rate and the survivor's new single rate.

If the surviving partner dies at the same time as or shortly after their
partner's death, any LBP not yet paid relating to their partner may be
paid to an appropriate person (for example, executor of the estate).

LBP requirements

LBPs to partners and to non-partner carers are tax exempt only up to the
tax free amount. Any amount of the LBP over the tax free amount is
taxable income. A manual tax adjustment may be required. See Adjusting
tax details for Bereavement Payments.

Bereavement payments cannot be paid to a person who is in prison or
psychiatric confinement because they have been charged with an offence.
However, if they are acquitted of the offence, they may be entitled to
bereavement assistance even if some time has passed.

Carers in receipt of CA (adult) who also receive an income support
payment (other than Carer Payment) that does not qualify them for a
bereavement payment may be entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment on the
death of the adult care receiver in certain circumstances.

DVA customers

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) may be responsible for paying the
LBP.

If the surviving partner is a DVA only customer, DVA assesses
entitlement to the LBP. See Initial contact after the death of a member
of a couple and the surviving partner is a DVA recipient.

For partnered customers who also receive Defence Force Income Support
Allowance (DFISA) payments, the amount of DFISA lump sum bereavement
payment that is due to the surviving partner is calculated by Services
Australia and transmitted to DVA for payment. DFISA ceased from 1
January 2022. In cases where DFISA is payable, a manual follow up will
be created automatically when death action is undertaken on the primary
payment and directed to SCS. See Calculation of Defence Force Income
Support Allowance (DFISA).

FHA customers

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers who are partnered may be
entitled to an LBP.

FHA is paid in the SAP system. In most cases, the LBP is calculated and
paid automatically when the person's partner is recorded as deceased.

If the surviving partner is receiving a DVA payment, a referral to the
DVA specialist team should be made for them to assess LBP entitlement
and manually calculate.

FHA is a time limited payment and is payable for a cumulative period of
4 years (1,460 days) only. The amount of bereavement payment is not
affected by the amount of time remaining on the deceased partner's
payment 'clock', including when they had less than 14 weeks FHA
eligibility remaining on payment.

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) and LBP

From 20 March 2020, PBV is a one-off lump sum payment available to the
surviving partner who is claiming or receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
or Youth Allowance (YA) following the death of their partner.

Eligibility for LBP remains for JSP and YA customers who are long term
social security recipients and whose partner was a long-term social
security recipient or a pensioner. Some customers may therefore be
eligible for both PBV and LBP; however, they are only entitled to
receive one bereavement payment.

If a customer is eligible for both PBV and LBP, the LBP should always be
paid to the customer.

If the PBV will be or will likely be greater than the LBP, an SA490
Partner Bereavement Payment application is to be issued, inviting the
customer to request to be paid a PBV. On the form, the customer will
relinquish their LBP entitlement before they can be paid PBV.

When the form is processed, an adjustment to the bereavement payments is
made, by offsetting of LBP already paid with the PBV.

Extra care must be taken to only invite customers who will be paid more
PBV than what they have received of LBP. This is because an overpayment
will occur if the PBV value is lower.

A JSP or YA customer cannot relinquish their PBV to receive LBP. The
exception to this rule are JSP or YA customers who transfer to another
Income Support Payment (e.g. Disability Support Payment (DSP) or Carer
Payment (CP)) that qualifies them for LBP. The PBV paid can be offset
against the LBP to reduce the PBV qualification debt.

Contents

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
