
Suspension of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA) 099-09070020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances in which a customer's Widow
Allowance (WA) or Partner Allowance (PA) payment may be suspended.

Closure of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

WA and PA will cease on 1 January 2022. To avoid a break in payment,
customers will need to transfer to Age Pension on or before this date.

No new claims for WA or PA can be granted. A WA or PA customer's payment
can be restored if it has been suspended and the customer becomes
qualified again.

When payments should be suspended

If the customer is not qualified for payment temporarily, or for a
specific period, as a result of changes in their circumstances payment
should be suspended.

Reasons for suspension

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of entitlement, and full
arrears are issued if payment is subsequently restored. Reasons for
suspension may be:

-   failure to complete a Transfer to Age Pension task/SA383
-   returned direct credit payment
-   failed to attend interview
-   failed to return correspondence
-   correspondence returned to the Service Centre for whereabouts
    unknown

Customer contact

Before a payment is suspended, information must be requested from the
customer under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1. The
decision maker must be satisfied there is sufficient evidence the
customer is either temporarily not qualified for the payment or the
payment is not payable.

For information on requesting information, see Requesting information.

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, contact must be attempted
with the nominee before the payment is suspended.

Notification of suspension

Customers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If
an automatic letter is not issued by the system a manual Q134 or Q999
letter must be sent and include:

-   the reason for the suspension
-   date of effect
-   the information or documentation required to enable payments to be
    restored
-   reference to the relevant act, and
-   the customer's review and appeal rights

When the payment is suspended additional appropriate actions are also
required, for example, issue letter, code manual review, DOC the
decision.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable (adverse) decision, the Decision Maker (DM)
must provide the customer with an explanation of the decision and an
opportunity to provide further information or evidence relevant to the
decision. The DM must also tell the customer of their review and appeal
rights. See Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK).
This includes unfavourable decisions made by Service Officers within
Smart Centres.

If a DM is not speaking with a customer at the time of making a
decision, they are required to make 2 genuine attempts to contact a
customer prior to finalising an unfavourable decision.

Customer contacts after suspension

When a customer contacts regarding a suspended payment, the reason for
suspension should be explained. The Service Officer should also provide
information about the required documentation or advise the customer what
is required so that the payment can be restored.

WA or PA is suspended for non-lodgement of a Transfer to Age Pension
request

If WA or PA is suspended for non-lodgement of a Transfer to Age Pension
request, SO's must discuss transferring to Age Pension as WA and PA and
will cease on 1 January 2022. To avoid a break in payment, customers
will need to transfer to Age Pension on or before this date. Customers
that have already turned Age Pension age and are residentially qualified
should transfer to Age Pension as soon as possible. Staff must complete
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) at first point of contact for these
customers.

Working credits and NIL rate

Before suspending a customer's payment, care should be taken to
establish the customer is temporarily not eligible for payment. Working
credits may enable the customer to keep some of their income support
payment while they are working. If the customer's income reduces their
fortnightly rate to nil, and some of that income is employment income,
the customer's payment may remain current at nil rate for up to 6
fortnights. They may also retain eligibility for certain benefits.

Vulnerable or at risk customers

If a vulnerable or at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.

Restoration of payment

In order to get the payment restored, the following possible actions may
be required:

-   If correspondence has been returned to the Service Centre marked
    'address unknown', address details must be updated. If address has
    not changed, make an appointment for customer to verify address
    details
-   If direct credit returned, to restore the payment customer must
    provide bank account details
-   If customer did not attend an interview, the appointment should be
    rescheduled, and it may be necessary for the customer to attend an
    interview at the Service Centre in order to have the payment
    restored
-   If the customer has not returned required forms and/or
    correspondence, the correspondence must be returned before payment
    can be restored

The Resources page contains an attachment that outlines the legislative
basis for suspending payments.

Related links

Creating a Q134 letter

Requesting information (CLK)

Transfer to Age Pension

Restoring payments after bank account details provided

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Correspondence returned to a Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Steps in the review and appeals process

Manual intervention for automatic suspension and cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
