
Death of a Parenting Payment (PP) child 099-02040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the bereavement assistance available to PP
customers upon the death of a PP child.

Initial contact

Before any action can be taken, the death must be confirmed.

The customer should be offered a referral to a social worker.

Bereavement period

There are no lump sum bereavement payment provisions for PP on the death
of a PP child. If the customer has no other qualifying PP child in their
care, they can continue to receive PP for the 14 week bereavement period
that starts on the day of the child’s death. At the end of the 14 week
bereavement period the customer will need to claim another income
support payment.

Note: the customer may also be entitled to a family assistance
bereavement payment.

The customer must be advised to contact within 14 days of the PP
cancellation date (the end of the bereavement period) to claim
alternative income support.

Customer has more than one PP child

If the customer has another PP child in their care, they may still be
qualified for PP. However, for PP single customers, the income free area
will reduce so the application of the income test may affect their rate
of payment. In these cases, bereavement assistance is not available
through PP.

Newborn child died before PP granted

If PP is claimed within 4 weeks of the child's date of birth, PP may be
paid for a 14 week bereavement period, where a child has died soon after
birth.

Stillborn child

Customers are not entitled to PP (or a bereavement payment) for a
stillborn child. However, Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) can be paid if
the customer is not eligible for Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

The Resources page contains links to the Bereavement/Double Orphan
Pension Helpdesk and the Parenting and Relationship Status Programmes
Team’s intranet page.

Related links

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme child

Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income and assets tests

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests

Social Work Service referral

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Death of a dependent child of a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) customer

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
