
Widow Allowance (WA) customer going overseas 099-09050000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when, and for how long, Widow Allowance (WA) was
payable to a customer while they were outside Australia. New claims for
Widow Allowance have not been available since 1 July 2018. This
information is for manual historical assessments only.

Temporary absence

WA is portable for the maximum portability period of up to 6 weeks for
temporary absences no matter what the reason for travel, after which the
payment will suspend for a portability related reason.

If the customer is unable to return within this time, there is
discretion to extend the period of portability under certain
circumstances.

Leaving to live in another country

If the customer advises they are leaving Australia to live in another
country, qualification for Widow Allowance and any add-ons or
supplements ceases from the date of departure. If a cancelled customer
returns to Australia, they must prove they are an Australian resident to
be granted a payment. They must make a claim for another income support
payment relevant to their circumstances because from 1 July 2018, no new
claims for WA can be granted.

Payments cancellation and restoration

If the customer remains outside Australia after their payment has
stopped for a portability reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, their payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment being suspended.

If the customer returns to Australia more than 13 weeks after the end of
their portability period, WA will cancel. A customer who loses
entitlement to WA cannot reclaim as, from 1 July 2018, no new claims for
WA can be granted.

Study outside Australia

If the customer is travelling outside Australia for more than 6 weeks to
study units of their approved full time Australian course, their payment
is portable indefinitely as long as the customer stays enrolled.
Customers must provide proof of the reason for their absence.

Add on payments

Add-on payments will usually continue while the customer is outside
Australia as long as the departure is temporary and the customer remains
qualified for the payment, for example, continues to pay rent.

If the customer is leaving Australia to live in another country, most
add-on payments will cancel on departure.

Other conditions may apply for Remote Area Allowance (RAA) and Pension
Supplement:

-   RAA is only payable for 8 weeks after the customer leaves the remote
    area
-   Pension Supplement (paid to Age Pension age customers) at the full
    rate is only payable for the first 6 weeks. If a discretionary
    extension is granted, only the Pension Supplement Basic Amount is
    payable beyond the 6 weeks maximum portability period

Portability period

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns must be used to assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while outside Australia wherever
possible. This procedure is to assist the Service Officer to record the
departure manually when the script is not available.

The portability period starts on the day the customer leaves Australia.
For portability purposes, a person is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia, regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as they are
considered to be inside Australia on that day, regardless of the time of
return, and therefore no longer affected by portability. If a customer
departs and returns on the same day, for example, airline crew, this is
not considered a departure from Australia for portability purposes.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The
system assesses portability of the payment, regardless of whether the
customer notified or not.
Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations when customers must advise of a departure
before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex, the
system will prompt them to contact Services Australia.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia. The Resources page
has a link.

The Resources page contains contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS), 3 scenarios of WA portability, and links to the Services
Australia Website for information for customers about portability of
payments and travelling overseas with Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme
(PBS) medicine.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Discretion to extend portability period

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Portability of Add-ons

Pension Supplement overseas absences

Student studying outside Australia

View/update overseas travel online

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
