
Processing Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) claims 099-22050623

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to process Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)
in Process Direct. This includes online claims, Assisted Customer Claims
(ACC) and existing customers. PBV claims are processed by a specialist
team.

Processing PBV in Process Direct

Use Process Direct to review the PBV claim information and to process
the claim once all required information is available.

A PBV work item is created when:

-   a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) claim has been
    submitted online or via Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) and the
    person’s partner has died within the last 4 weeks, or
-   the notification of death has been actioned for a member of a
    couple. This will generate a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity on the
    surviving partner’s record

Process Direct:

-   contains information provided by the customer or their
    correspondence nominee online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional information into the PBV claim activity
-   lists any documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   has functions to view scanned documents, request information and
    make referrals

RapidConnect and mutual obligation requirements

Customers who apply for PBV are exempt from RapidConnect and mutual
obligations for 14 weeks from the date of the partner’s death.

Automatic claim processing

PBV claims are not eligible for automatic claim processing and will be
allocated to a specialist team.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker when running the script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback to the Business
Enablement and Quality Branch.

Reassessment of PBV claims

Customers can request a reassessment of their claim within 13 weeks of
rejection. If the customer contacts more than 13 weeks after the
rejection letter was sent, they must reclaim JobSeeker Payment (JSP).

Make sure all required information is available before re-indexing the
original claim.

Separate procedures apply if PBV was rejected due to:

-   not supplying documents (FSD)
-   not lodging or reporting on time (DNL, FRP)

Customers can request a reassessment of rate of PBV if they were paid at
the non-pregnant rate and later notifies they are pregnant. They must
provide medical evidence before the reassessment of rate can occur.

Intent to claim for vulnerable customers

Customers are considered vulnerable if they experienced a vulnerable
circumstance at any time in the 8 weeks before contact and this was the
reason they were unable to submit their claim on the contact date. See
Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Related links

Job seeker online claim appointment

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Activity test exemptions for Youth Allowance (student) customers when
their partner dies

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
