
Widow Allowance (WA) 099-09000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for historical assessments/information only.

This document links to information about the qualifications for Widow
Allowance (WA), an income support payment only available to eligible
women.

WA payments

WA was originally intended to provide income support to woman born on or
before 1 July 1955, that were widowed, divorced or separated since
turning 40 and had no recent workforce experience.

WA payments ceased on 1 January 2022. Any customers that were current on
WA on this date were transferred to Age Pension.

WA closed to new claims

As a part of the Working Age Payments Reform measure announced in the
2017-18 Federal Budget, WA was closed to new claims on 1 July 2018.

From 1 July 2018, claimants who would have qualified for WA must claim
either:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) if they are under Age Pension age, or
-   Special Benefit (SpB) if they are over Age Pension age and not
    residentially qualified for Age Pension

Sunset Widow Allowance exemption

The Sunset Widow Allowance exemption was a mutual obligation requirement
exemption that applied to claimants granted JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
after 1 July 2018 who would have qualified for WA. It was also applied
to women who were partnered at the time they claimed JSP, but then later
separated and met all of the WA eligibility criteria.

WA cessation

WA ceased on 1 January 2022. All recipients were of Age Pension age on
or before this date.

Customers that had not claimed/transferred to Age Pension and were
current on payment on 1 January 2022 were automatically transferred to
Age Pension on this date.

WA customers that were not residentially qualified for Age Pension on 1
January 2022 had a residence exemption applied to the Additional
Residence Details (ARD) screen to facilitate transfer to Age Pension on
this date.

Notifiable event possible impact on WA

When a WA customer notified multiple events within 14 days and the first
notifiable event resulted in an adverse decision and the second
notifiable event resulted in a favourable decision which nullified the
earlier event, WA should not have been cancelled.

Portability period

For customers who lost entitlement after being absent from Australia for
more than the maximum allowable portability period, WA was stopped. If
the customer returned to Australia within 13 weeks of the loss of
entitlement date their payment may have been restored. However, if they
did not return within 13 weeks, their WA was cancelled and the payment
could not be regranted as WA has not been able to be granted since 1
July 2018.

The Resources page contains a list of files that have been expired due
to Widow Allowance (WA) ceasing.

Contents

Change of circumstances for Widow Allowance (WA) customers

Related links

Cancellation of Widow Allowance (WA)

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Suspension of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
