
Death of one member of a pensioner couple 099-02020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to follow when a member of a pension
couple dies. A pensioner couple is where both members of a couple
receive a pension (either from Centrelink or from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs). After the notification of the death of a pensioner,
the surviving pensioner's rate is adjusted to the single rate.

Confirmation of death

When a person contacts by phone or in person to advise of the death of a
customer, they will need to give the customer's full name, date of death
and 2 of the following:

-   last address in full
-   date of birth and age at death
-   Customer Reference Number (CRN)
-   partner's name

If the person cannot give these details, a Service Officer must confirm
the death before the death action is finalised.

If multiple notifications are received about the death of the same
person, Service Officers must not create a new activity. Instead, check
the record and annotate the original DOC to state details are correct
and who advised.

Executor of the estate details must be recorded correctly to allow
Services Australia to make appropriate contact, if needed.

Tell the person notifying of the death, that information used for
Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare payments and services is
transferred within Services Australia. However, additional contact with
1 of the agency's programs separately may be needed to update relevant
information, depending on individual circumstances.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the period in which the customer passed away:

-   is known, this must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   is not known, the payment must still be stimulated

After the payment is stimulated, the customer must be taken off
reporting before recording the death action.

Payments for surviving pension partner

The surviving partner of a pension couple is entitled to a Lump Sum
Bereavement Payment (LBP) if, at the time of their partner's death, each
member of the couple was pensioner for LBP purposes.

If the surviving partner is a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
pensioner, DVA assesses entitlement to the LBP. See Initial contact
after the death of a member of a couple and the surviving partner is a
DVA recipient.

The calculation of the LBP can vary depending on the customer's
circumstances. For example, the couple may have been separated due to
illness at date of death.

No lump sum is payable if the new single rate of the surviving partner
is more than the previous combined member of a couple rate.

Surviving partners receiving a pension that needs them to be caring for
a person will continue to receive payments for the duration of the
bereavement period. At the end of this period, the customer must qualify
for a payment in their own right to continue receiving income support
payments from Services Australia. Carer Payment (CP) (if the deceased
partner is the care receiver) is subject to this provision. Pension
payments subject to this provision are:

-   Carer Payment (CP) - if the deceased partner is the care receiver
-   Carer Payment (XWP) - if the deceased partners is the only or last
    payment level Carer Allowance care receiver

Carer Allowance (CA) Bereavement Payment

If the surviving partner was receiving CA and an income support payment
(other than Carer Payment), they will be entitled to a CA bereavement
payment if:

-   their partner was the deceased care receiver, and
-   their partner was either not getting an income support payment, or
    was receiving a social security benefit but was not a long term
    benefit recipient at the time of death

Assessment of income and assets

If the deceased customer owned assets under a joint tenancy ownership
arrangement, full ownership of the assets legally transfers to the
surviving partner. However, for social security purposes, if assets are
owned in joint names with the deceased partner, the surviving partner is
only assessed as owning 50%.

The system will continue to assess that the surviving partner owns 50%
of the asset, until the surviving partner advises of the transfer of
assets. If the surviving partner is granted a reversionary income
stream, it is to be assessed from the date it is first entitled to be
received.

A lump sum arrears payment received by the reversionary beneficiary is
assessed as income from the income stream if:

-   accrued between the death of the primary beneficiary, and
-   when the reversionary beneficiary starts to receive regular payments

This means the income is assessed over the period to which it relates.
This may result in a debt for that period.

Effective from 9 May 2018, debts can be waived under the legislative
instrument 'Social Security (Waiver of Debts - Bereavement Period)
Specification 2017' made under subsection 1237AB(1) of the Social
Security Act 1991, where:

-   bereavement provisions apply, and
-   the assessment of lump sum arrears result in a debt during the
    bereavement period for the surviving spouse

Note: any debt incurred after the Act's 14 week bereavement period has
ended would not be waived under the provisions of this legislative
instrument. The legislative instrument is not retrospective. This means
that any debts that occur before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived under class
of debt waiver provisions.

A review may be needed to check if assets solely owned by the deceased
or income paid to the deceased will be transferred to the surviving
partner, such as:

-   superannuation
-   compensation, or
-   other payments

If a bereavement review is needed, an Income and Asset Update form
(SA220) auto-issues 16 weeks after the date of death. If the surviving
partner advises of a change in circumstances before the review, update
details immediately.

A Centrelink Bereavement Statement is issued to the surviving pension
partner 8 weeks after the death, except if the customer will lose
qualification for their payment at the end of the bereavement period
(for example Partner Allowance, or Carer Payment if the care receiver
was the partner).

If the surviving partner starts work, or is currently working, working
credits or the work bonus may enable them to keep some of their income
support payment while they are working, see Working credit and Work
Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age.

If their income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and some of that
income is employment income, they may remain current at nil rate for up
to 6 fortnights and retain certain benefits. See Employment income nil
rate period. Note: if the person's deceased partner was working and had
any working credits, these credits cannot be transferred to them.

Surviving pension partner is in residential aged care

For Aged Care means assessment purposes, the home is exempt from
assessment as an asset, if:

-   someone enters residential care and is a homeowner, and
-   their partner continues to live in their home

Note: it will continue to be exempt as long as the partner is living in
the home.

If the partner living in the home passes away, and there is no other
protected person living in the home, it remains an exempt asset for
Social Security purposes for 2 years for the Aged Care recipient.

Instalments paid in the name of the deceased person

A surviving partner is entitled to keep any instalments paid in the name
of the deceased customer during the bereavement period.

If an instalment is returned to Services Australia, any appropriate
person is entitled to claim those payments. An appropriate person can be
the next of kin, solicitor or executor handling the estate, or the
person who has paid or is liable to pay the funeral expenses.

If a payment has been returned from a financial institution, and is
recorded on the deceased person's record, the payment can be reissued.

The Resources page has contact details for the DVA Clearance Team (SCS),
links to the Services Australia website for the Payment and Service
Finder and information on death and bereavement. It also has links to
the Needing help after someone has died? (HD001) pamphlet and the Local
Activities Database.

Related links

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Bereavement reviews

Social Work Services

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Death of a member of a Pensioner and allowee couple

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of both members of a couple

Death of the partner of a Partner Allowance customer

Death of an income managed customer

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer when payment was returned
from financial institution

Centrelink Bereavement Statement

How to reissue concession cards

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Working Credit

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments

Initial contact after the death of a member of a couple and the
surviving partner is a DVA recipient

Aged Care means assessment - Protected person

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
