
Qualification for ABSTUDY Lump Sum Bereavement Payment 099-02020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the qualification criteria of Lump Sum
Bereavement Payment (LBP) for customers in receipt of ABSTUDY Living
Allowance.

ABSTUDY LBP

ABSTUDY LBP may be available to an ABSTUDY Living Allowance customer
only when their partner dies.

An ABSTUDY customer who has a dependent child who dies will not be
subject to any bereavement assistance under the ABSTUDY scheme but can
be eligible for family assistance.

If an ABSTUDY customer advises of the death of a child stillborn on or
after 1 March 2014, they may be eligible for Stillborn Baby Payment
(SBP).

Qualification

An ABSTUDY customer will be eligible for LBP if:

the student or Australian Apprentice qualifies for one of the following
Awards:

-   Schooling B Award
-   Tertiary Award
-   Masters and Doctorate Award, and

the student or Australian Apprentice is in receipt of ABSTUDY Living
Allowance at the time of the event, and has been in receipt of Living
Allowance continuously for a period of 52 weeks prior to the date of
their partner's death, or

if the student or Australian Apprentice has not been in receipt of
ABSTUDY Living Allowance continuously for the previous 52 weeks, they
must have been in receipt of ABSTUDY Living Allowance on the date which
is 52 weeks prior to their partner's death, and Living Allowance has not
ceased for more than six weeks in that 52 week period and

the student or Australian Apprentice is a member of a couple and

the person's partner dies and

immediately before their partner died, the partner was:

-   receiving ABSTUDY Living Allowance, a Social Security benefit,
    allowance or any combination of the above allowances for the
    previous 52 weeks, or was in receipt of one of these allowances on
    the date 52 weeks prior and not had more than six weeks loss of
    recipient status in that 52 week period, or
-   was in receipt of a Social Security Pension and

The rate of the new single fortnightly ABSTUDY Living Allowance payable
to the student or Australian Apprentice is lower than the previous
combined member of a couple rate paid

Note: this customer and partner qualification is the same as the
requirement for Bereavement Payment for Social Security benefits where
customers are deemed as 'long term social security recipients'. See
Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP). The
ABSTUDY requirement is based on the Social Security Act requirement.

Notification of the death of their partner must occur within 14 days of
the date of death or the person is not eligible for Bereavement Payment.

Manual Follow-up

A Manual Follow-up (MFU) is created on the surviving partner's record
where qualification for LBP has been met. This identifies that an
ABSTUDY LBP is to be calculated and paid, see Calculation of a Lump Sum
Bereavement payment.

Note: if an MFU is not created, it normally means qualification for LBP
has not been met. However an MFU will also not be created if either the
customer or partner were suspended at the time of death, or if partner
records are in separate environments. Status of customer and partner
records should be checked where it looks like qualification may have
been met but an MFU is not produced.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website
with information on what to do when someone has passed away.

Related links

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
