
Initial notification of death 099-12000000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist staff when a person
contacts Services Australia to advise of the death of a recipient or a
claimant, their partner, a dependent child, or a care receiver. The
person needs to provide as much information as possible so that the
death can be confirmed.

Notifying a death

Notifications of a death are used to update Centrelink, Child Support
and Medicare records. A notifier can advise of the death:

verbally

in writing

on the form:

-   Advice of death (SA116)
-   Advice of death - adult (SA116a)
-   Advice of death - child (SA116b)

in person at a service centre

See the Resources page for a link to the Advice of death form (SA116) on
the Services Australia website. This website page includes links to the
SA116, SA116a and SA116b.

Confirm the details when notified of the death of a customer. See:

-   Centrelink, Confirmation of the death of an adult or child
-   Child Support, Deceased Child Support Customer Management
-   Medicare, Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment requirements

It is the responsibility of all staff to ensure the notifier is provided
with products and services appropriate to the individual's needs and to
make an appropriate service offer.

Sharing a notification of death

Notification of death data are received from various external and
internal sources. The following data exchanges are currently used:

-   Automatic notification from the State and Territory
    Registrar-General’s Offices (RGO) to Centrelink
-   Following receipt of data at Centrelink from RGO the information is
    shared with Medicare, Department of Veterans' Affairs and Child
    Support
-   Manual notification to Centrelink from Child Support using Fast Note

When Services Australia is notified of the death of a person, their
record must be actioned. For:

-   Centrelink, see Confirmation of the death of an adult or a child
-   Child Support, see Deceased Child Support Customer Management
-   Medicare, see Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment requirements

Multiple notifications received

Notifications may be received from multiple sources for the same death
(such as from executor, funeral director, data matching). Before
processing, first check the customer’s record to ensure the death
notification has not already been actioned. If additional information
has been provided, ensure it has been recorded on the deceased person’s
record.

Social work services referral

Offer the notifier the services of a social worker, where appropriate.
The relatives of the deceased may also be offered the services of a
social worker.

If the person is unable to take up the offer at the time, more
information is available on the What to do when someone dies page on the
Services Australia website.

Financial Information Service

The Financial Information Service is a free, confidential service
available to all Australians who may need help to make informed
decisions about investment and financial issues following a death. Note:
this service does not provide advice on specific investments.

Contact with Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare

Contact with:

-   Centrelink may still be required following a person’s death, for
    example, where a new claim for payment or new card is required, or a
    change in other circumstances needs to be notified
-   Child Support may still be required following a person’s death, for
    example, to discuss changes made to child support payments and/or
    entitlements
-   Medicare may still be required following a person’s death, for
    example, a new card is required, or a change in other circumstances
    needs to be notified

Assistance with funeral expenses

Funeral assistance is offered by various commonwealth and state
departments. See the Payment and Service Finder.

See the Resources page for contact details for assistance with funeral
expenses only (not for other expenses such as grocery costs and mortgage
payments).

The Resources page contains links to funeral assistance contact details,
Services Australia website links, intranet links, a link to the
Australian Death Notification Service, form and publications.

Contents

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Bereavement letters

Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details

Deceased Child Support Customer Management

Related links

Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment requirements

Deceased Child Support Customer Management

Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff

Initial contact after someone has died

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Sending Account Payable letters

The Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
