
Death of a single pensioner 099-02020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when a single customer
passes away and they were getting a social security pension.

When a different procedure applies

A different procedure applies when a:

-   single social security benefit customer dies
-   family assistance customer dies
-   Parenting Payment Single customer dies

Notification provisions relating to the death of a single customer

To avoid any debt to the deceased customer's estate, the death needs to
be recorded before the end of the entitlement period that follows the
entitlement period in which the single pensioner died.

At times of bereavement, those required to notify of a death require
additional adjustment time before approaching government agencies.

The 28 day rules applies if someone is required under social security
law to notify Services Australia of a customer’s death when a customer
who dies has:

-   a carer receiving Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) or
-   a nominee

Note: if a person notifies the agency of a customer's death and advises
employment income at the same time, the employment income must be
assessed. If details of the employment income are not known at that
time, they should be disregarded and the death action should not be
delayed.

Death must be confirmed before death action finalised

Before the death action can be finalised on the record, the death must
be confirmed. Where multiple notifications of death are received
regarding the same customer, Service Officers must not create a new
activity. They should instead, check the deceased's record and annotate
the original DOC to state the details are correct and who advised of the
death.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the period in which the customer passed away:

-   is known, this must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   is not known, the payment must still be stimulated

After the payment is stimulated, if possible the customer should be
taken off reporting before recording the death action.

Payments made after death

When a single pensioner dies, a final payment is made that covers the
full entitlement period in which they die. The system automatically
calculates the last payment up to the end of the entitlement period in
which the death occurred. Payments are automatically cancelled from the
first Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) + 1 day after death.

Any payments made after the first EPED in which the death occurred are
automatically calculated as overpayments and will be recovered. This
occurs even if the death was notified within 28 days.

If a payment has been returned from a financial institution on the
deceased person's record, the payment can be reissued to the customer's
executor.

Single pensioner is care receiver

When a single pensioner dies and they were also a care receiver,
bereavement assistance may be available to the carer. This depends on
whether the carer was receiving Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance for
the pensioner care receiver. For more information, see Death of an adult
or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment (CP) and Death of
an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
what to do following a death, the Payment and Service Finder for burials
assistance, and the publication Needing help after someone has died?
(HD001).

Related links

28 day rule for bereavement

Death of a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer

Death of a single social security benefit customer

Death of an income managed customer

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental leave scheme and bereavement

Initial contact after someone has died

Issuing Payment Summaries

Reissuing a group payment paid to an organisation in error

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Social work service referral

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
