
Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) 099-19060348

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about Partner Bereavement Payment
(PBV). PBV is payable to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(YA) customers after the death of their partner.

Government intent

When a person contacts Services Australia after the death of their
partner, appropriate bereavement assistance and services are provided to
the customer.

PBV information

PBV is a one-off lump sum payment paid to the JSP or YA customer in
addition to any other bereavement assistance that may be available, such
as exemptions from mutual obligation requirements.

The PBV is based on a multiple of the customer's daily rate of JSP or
YA, plus an additional component if the customer is pregnant.

PBV can be paid to new claimants of JSP and YA, as well as existing
customers, and is available to independent and dependent YA job seekers,
students and apprentices.

PBV requirements

For a customer to receive PBV:

-   they must be receiving JSP or YA, that is, the rate of JSP or YA
    must not be nil
-   both they and their deceased partner must have been an Australian
    resident when the partner died. Customers paid JSP or YA under the
    New Zealand (NZ) 10 year residence exemption are not eligible for
    PBV, because they are NZ non-protected Special Category Visa (SCV)
    holders
-   the customer or their correspondence nominee must notify of the
    partner's death. Note: death notification can be accepted from a
    third party
-   the customer and the deceased person were a couple when their
    partner died
-   the customer must not have re-partnered when they notify of the
    death
-   the customer must notify of the death within the 14 week bereavement
    period. If pregnant and the pregnancy due date is more than 14 weeks
    after the partner's death, then the customer can notify of the death
    at any time until the child is born or pregnancy ends i.e., during
    this extended bereavement period

Pregnant customers must provide verification of their pregnancy and due
date before they can be paid PBV at the pregnant rate. If the customer
has already received PBV at the non-pregnant rate, and later provides
verification of pregnancy during the bereavement period or extended
bereavement period, then they can receive a top-up adjustment to their
PBV.

PBV is tax exempt only up to the tax free amount. Any amount of the PBV
over the tax free amount is taxable income. A manual tax adjustment may
be required. See Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments.

PBV and Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Eligibility for LBP remains for JSP and YA customers who are long term
social security recipients and whose partner was a long-term social
security recipient or a pensioner.

Some customers may be eligible for both PBV and LBP. However, they are
only entitled to receive one or the other.

If a customer is eligible for both PBV and LBP, they must make a written
request via the Partner Bereavement Payment application (SA490)
relinquishing their LBP entitlement before they can be paid PBV. This
includes customers who have already been paid LBP and wish to receive
PBV instead. In this case, an adjustment of bereavement payments is
made, by offsetting of LBP with PBV. The customer is then paid a net
amount of PBV, where PBV entitlement is more than LBP. If the PBV is
less than LBP, then an overpayment may occur.

Once a customer has been paid PBV, they cannot forgo it in order to
receive LBP. Special rules apply to JSP or YA customers who transfer to
another income support payment that qualifies them for LBP.

Contents

Assessing entitlement to a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Calculation of a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

Related links

Processing Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) claims

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
