
Initial contact by customer after death of partner when the partner is not in receipt of payment 099-01010050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions to be taken and advice to be given if
a member of a couple dies and the deceased partner was not in receipt of
an income support payment at the time of the death.

Correct procedures must be followed as other procedures may apply

Other procedures apply if a:

-   pensioner dies and the surviving partner receives an income support
    payment from the Department of Veterans’ Affairs
-   customer dies and their surviving partner is not in receipt of a
    Centrelink income support payment

Assistance for surviving partner

The surviving partner may be eligible for assistance from Services
Australia. For example:

-   Parenting Payment (PP) - for single customers with a qualifying
    dependent child/children who do not have the support of a partner
-   Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) can be paid to new claimants and
    existing customers on JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
    (YA). It is available to YA jobseekers, students, apprentices and
    dependent YA customers
-   the customer will have their payment reassessed to the single rate

The surviving partner will not be entitled to a Lump Sum Bereavement
Payment (LBP).

Service Officer responsibilities

Service Officers should identify if a customer is eligible for an income
support payment and other products.

If the surviving partner is distressed at the time of advising the
death, consider contacting the social work service.

If the person is unable to provide information to confirm the partner's
death at the time of contact, a Service Officers must confirm the death
before any action is taken.

The person notifying of the death should be advised that information
used for Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare payments and services is
transferred within Services Australia. However, additional contact with
1 of Services Australia's programs separately may be required to update
relevant information, depending on individual circumstances.

Reassessment of assets

If the surviving partner was a joint owner of the couple's assets, full
ownership legally transfers to the surviving partner. However, the
system will still only assess that the surviving partner owns 50% of the
property until the surviving partner advises of the transfer of assets.
A bereavement review may be conducted 16 weeks after the death of the
partner to determine which assets have been transferred to the survivor.

Surviving partner working

If the surviving partner starts work, or is currently working, working
credits may enable them to keep some of their income support payment
while they are working. If their income reduces their fortnightly rate
to nil and some of that income is employment income, they may remain
current at nil rate for up to six fortnights and retain certain
benefits.

Requirement to be partnered or caring

Surviving partners receiving an income support payment that requires
them to be partnered or caring for a person will continue to receive
payments for the duration of the bereavement period. Payments that may
be subject to this provision are:

-   Partner Allowance (PA)
-   Carer Payment (CP) - where the deceased is the care receiver

At the end of the bereavement period, the customer must qualify for a
payment in their own right to continue receiving income support payments
from Services Australia.

Customers should be advised that information used for their Centrelink,
Child Support and Medicare payments and services is shared within
Services Australia.

Care receiver partner

If the customer was receiving payments as a carer for their partner, and
the care receiver was not in receipt of an income support payment,
bereavement assistance may be available to carers, depending on:

-   whether the carer receives Carer Allowance (CA)
-   whether the carer receives an income support payment, and
-   what type of income support payment is received

If the carer is in receipt of:

-   CA only, the carer is not entitled to a bereavement payment
-   Carer Payment (CP) only, the carer is entitled to a continuation of
    CP for the duration of the bereavement period. The carer is not
    entitled to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment
-   both Carer Payment (CP) and CA, the carer is entitled to a
    continuation of CP for the duration of the bereavement period. The
    carer is not entitled to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment
-   CA and an income support payment that is not CP, the carer is
    entitled to a CA bereavement payment

The Resources page contains a link to the publication 'Needing help
after someone has died?' (HD001), 'Request for Verification' (SS257)
form and Payment and Service Finder. It also contains links to the
Services Australia website for information about what to do following a
death.

Related links

Bereavement reviews

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Calculation of a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Centrelink Bereavement Statement

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Initial contact after the death of a member of a couple and the
surviving partner is a DVA recipient

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Social work service referral

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
