
Initial contact after someone has died 099-01010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to be followed for Centrelink
customers when a person contacts Services Australia to advise of the
death of a customer, the partner of a customer, a dependent child of a
customer, or a care receiver. The person needs to provide as much
information as possible so that the death can be confirmed.

Social work services referral

Offer the caller/customer the services of a social worker. If required,
the relatives of the deceased may be offered the services of a social
worker also. If the customer is unable to take up the offer at this
time, refer them to additional information if needed. The information
can be obtained through the bereavement theme booklet or local social
worker. The customer should receive, via mail or over the counter, a
copy of the Centrelink 'Needing help after someone has died?' (HD001)
theme booklet at initial contact with Services Australia.

Assistance with funeral expenses

Funeral assistance is offered by various commonwealth and state
departments. For information, see Funeral assistance or access Service
Finder. Note: the contact details are for assistance with funeral
expenses only, and not for other expenses such as grocery costs and
mortgage payments.

Cultural considerations

There are also many cultural considerations that Service Officers need
to be aware of as customers from different cultural or religious
backgrounds may react differently to the death of a loved one. For more
information, see Cultural considerations when someone dies.

Multiple notifications received

Where multiple notifications are received in relation to the death of
the same person, Service Officers must not create a new activity.
Instead, check the record and annotate the original DOC to state details
are correct and who advised.

Centrelink entitlements

If the customer or their partner is receiving a Centrelink payment,
there may be an entitlement to a lump sum payment, or to some further
payment(s), after the death of their partner, dependent child or care
receiver.

If the person is not receiving a Centrelink payment, the surviving
partner may be eligible for JobSeeker Payment or Youth Allowance with
bereavement provisions including backdating to the date of death.
Partner Bereavement Payment and Activity Text Exemptions can be
accessed.

Family Assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme entitlement not claimed
by a deceased customer may be claimed by another person, usually the
person now caring for the child. Eligibility for the period up to the
customer's death is assessed using the deceased customer's
circumstances.

The surviving partner of a deceased member of the Pension Bonus Scheme
(PBS), who died on or after 1 January 2008 and had not lodged a claim
for their Pension Bonus before they passed away, may be entitled to the
Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP).

The type of financial assistance that can be provided depends on a
number of factors including whether the customer or partner was
receiving a payment before the death, the customer's relationship status
and their financial situation.

Process to be followed

The notification period for the occurrence of a bereavement event is 28
days.

When advice is received regarding the death of a customer, there is a
process that needs to be followed by the Service Officer. The
entitlement to bereavement assistance (including a lump sum payment)
varies depending on a number of factors. These may include:

-   if the customer was registered in the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)
-   the type of payment received by the customer
-   if they were partnered, the partner's payment type, if any, and
-   the length of time they have been receiving payments

As a result of these determining factors, Service Officers will need to
follow the relevant procedures as listed:

Death of an income support customer or their partner

-   Actioning notification of the death of a student
-   Death of a single social security benefit customer
-   Death of a member of an allowee couple
-   Death of a member of a pensioner and allowee couple
-   Death of the partner of a Partner Allowance customer
-   Death of both members of a couple
-   Death of a single pensioner
-   Death of one member of a pensioner couple
-   Death of a customer and their partner is not in receipt of a
    Centrelink or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) income support
    payment

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement

-   Death of a carer
-   Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer
    Payment (CP)
-   Death of a lower score adult and the effect on Carer Payment (CP)
-   Death of a dependent child of a lower Adult Disability Assessment
    Tool (ADAT) score adult
-   Simultaneous death of care receivers and the effect on Carer Payment
    (CP)
-   Death of a child care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance
    (CA)
-   Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance
    (CA)

Parenting Payment (PP) and bereavement

-   Death of a Parenting Payment (PP) child
-   Death of a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer
-   Death of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer
-   Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental Leave scheme and bereavement

-   Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme customer
-   Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme child
-   Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Initial contact after a stillbirth
-   Death of a Double Orphan Pension child

The person notifying of the death should be advised that information
used for Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare payments and services is
shared within Services Australia. However, additional contact with one
of Services Australia's programs separately may be required to update
relevant information, depending on individual circumstances.

The Resources page contains a link to the publication Needing help after
someone has died? (HD001) and the Payment and Service Finder. It also
contains a link to the Services Australia website with information on
what to do following a death.

Contents

Initial contact after the death of a dependent child

Initial contact after a stillbirth

Initial contact after the death of a member of a couple and the
surviving partner is a DVA recipient

Initial contact after the death of a partner of a non-customer couple

Initial contact by customer after death of partner when the partner is
not in receipt of payment

Initial contact after the death of a potential family assistance and
Paid Parental Leave customer

Related links

Bereavement letters

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Cultural considerations when someone dies

Death of a single pensioner

Death of a single social security benefit customer

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental Leave scheme and bereavement

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment
(PBBP)

Parenting Payment (PP) and bereavement

Processing a claim to receive the family assistance entitlement of a
deceased person

Qualification for ABSTUDY Lump Sum Bereavement Payment

Requests for information after someone has died

Social work service referral

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Initial notification of death

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
