
About Bereavement services 099-01000000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the approach taken by Services
Australia approach when customers need help after someone has died or
are preparing for bereavement.

Government intent

When a person contacts Services Australia after the death of a person or
child, the primary outcome for customers, and the policy teams is that
appropriate bereavement assistance and services are provided.

Offer appropriate services

It is the responsibility of the Service Officer to ensure the agency is
providing all the products and services appropriate to each customer's
needs and to make an appropriate service offer.

Rather than contacting the agency to ask about a particular payment, a
customer can describe their circumstances and in return receive a
'service offer' that consists of the most appropriate products and
services. The Payment and Service Finder can help the customer identify
these, see the Resources page for a link.

This reference material provides the information necessary to understand
the agency's approach to customers who need help after someone has died
or who are preparing for bereavement.

The agency delivers these products and services on behalf of the
Department of Social Services (DSS).

Types of assistance

Assistance includes:

Bereavement payments:

-   short term financial assistance to help people adjust to changed
    financial circumstances following a death
-   includes lump sum payments and in some cases, continuation of
    particular payments for the duration of the bereavement period

Partner Bereavement Payment - for JobSeeker payment and Youth Allowance
customers

Exemptions from mutual obligation, activity test or participation
requirements during the bereavement period - for JobSeeker Payment,
Youth Allowance, Parenting Payment and Special Benefit customers

Exemptions from some waiting periods - for JobSeeker payment and Youth
Allowance claimants.

Continued entitlement to income support payments for the survivor during
the bereavement period

Where a customer is single, payment of pension up until the end of the
entitlement period in which the person died

Assistance may also be available to a non-customer following the death
of their partner, once the death has been confirmed and an appropriate
payment is claimed, for example, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA) or Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP).

Where a family assistance payment customer dies, the person now caring
for the deceased's children may be entitled to any payments the deceased
has not been paid and any ongoing payments.

Types of services

Services include:

-   Social Workers
-   Financial Information Service (FIS)
-   Multilingual Phone Service (MPS)
-   Indigenous Service Officers (ISO)

The Resources page contains a link to the Payment and Service Finder.

Related links

Initial contact after someone has died

Financial assistance after death occurs

Requests for information after someone has died

Cultural considerations when someone dies

Payment and Service Finder

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
