
Remote community customers Medicare card number collection for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net 101-06100020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Medicare card number collection
for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net for
remote community customers.

On this Page:

Remote community customers

When a customer lives in a remote community, the Indigenous Service
Officer (ISO) will attempt to collect the Medicare card number from the
customer at the next contact.

Where a customer:

-   is identified as a remote customer, and
-   a valid Medicare card number has not been recorded on the Centrelink
    computer system for the customer

An online document will be recorded on the system. This will enable an
ISO to identify customers in their region from whom a Medicare card
number is to be collected (that is, both Indigenous and non-Indigenous
customers).

Role of ISO

The ISO will attempt to collect the Medicare number from the customer
during their six weekly community visit. The ISO may also use
alternative methods for the collection (where appropriate) which may
include providing the community agent with the names of any customers,
or where appropriate, use the community health centres.

When the number has been collected, the Agent or ISO may phone the
Centrelink Call Centre to have the number manually recorded on the
Centrelink computer system.

Identifying remote community customers

Customers will be identified as living in a remote community by the four
character community code recorded on the Centrelink computer system. In
addition, there are some postcodes that have been provided by ISOs as
requiring inclusion in this group.

Note: an individual's Medicare number can also be used for establishing
a link with the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Related links

Requesting Medicare card numbers from customers for the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Recording Medicare card numbers for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
