
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for historical assessments/information only.

This document provides an overview of the Coronavirus Supplement, which
stopped on 31 March 2021. The Coronavirus Supplement was introduced to
provide help to eligible customers and was available from 27 April 2020.

Coronavirus Supplement

The Coronavirus Supplement was first introduced on 27 April 2020 to
allow the Government to provide additional support to Australians
impacted by the Coronavirus Pandemic. The Coronavirus Supplement stopped
on 31 March 2021.

From 27 April 2020 until 24 September 2020, recipients of eligible
payments received a temporary Coronavirus Supplement of $550 per
fortnight for recipients of eligible income support payments.

The Coronavirus Supplement was extended from 25 September 2020 to 31
December 2020 at a rate of $250 per fortnight.

The Coronavirus Supplement was further extended from 1 January 2021 to
31 March 2021 at a rate of $150 per fortnight.

The supplement ended on 31 March 2021, and a permanent increase of $50
per fortnight for working age payments applied from 1 April 2021.

Eligibility for the Coronavirus Supplement is dependent upon payability
for the eligible supplement income support payment.

The Resources page has details about the rate period to customers during
the transition periods.

Coronavirus Supplement eligible income support payments

The following payments were Coronavirus Supplement eligible income
support payments:

JobSeeker Payment (JSP), including all payments transitioning to JSP or
stopping:

-   Sickness Allowance (SA)
-   Widow Allowance (WA)
-   Partner Allowance (PA)

Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker, students and apprentices)

Parenting Payment (PP)

Special Benefit (SpB)

ABSTUDY Living Allowance

Austudy

Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Payments not listed above did not receive the supplement.

Payability of Coronavirus Supplement

Customers did not need to apply for the supplement. Payment of the
Coronavirus Supplement was made automatically to customers receiving an
eligible payment. Coronavirus Supplement was backdated for eligible
claims.

Customers on an eligible payment had to receive a minimum of $1(this
includes amounts under $1, for example $0.48) of payment within their
regular Entitlement Period in order to receive the supplement for that
reporting period.

This could be made up of add on payments such as Rent Assistance (RA) or
Energy Supplement, Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA), Pension Supplement,
Remote Area Allowance (RAA) and Youth Disability Supplement.

Note: the following are not included in the supplements and add-on
payments for Coronavirus Supplement:

-   Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS)
-   Utilities Allowance
-   Transition to Independent Living allowance (TILA)
-   Education Entry Payment (EdEP)
-   Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS), and
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL)

If the customer's payment reduced due to income declared or a compliance
penalty and they did not receive at least $1, they did not receive the
supplement for that fortnight.

Coronavirus Supplement is a taxable payment

The Coronavirus Supplement was a taxable payment and was considered
income for the following:

-   Taxable income for a Tax Return
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) estimate for the purposes of FTB and Child
    Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Child Support (CS) for the purposes of a CS assessment or debt

The Supplement will be included in the payment summary for the
appropriate financial year. Customers in receipt of a taxable payment
may elect to have tax deductions made from their basic payment each
payday. See Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions.

Families who receive FTB or CCS will need to consider revising their
2019-2020 and 2020-2021 family income estimate to include this payment.
See Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments.

The Supplement will be included when calculating a financial penalty
under the Targeted Compliance Framework.

Coronavirus Entitlement Period

The Coronavirus Supplement Entitlement Period is not the same as the
customers fortnightly reporting period.

The Coronavirus Supplement Entitlement Period should not be used to
assess payability of the supplement.

The Resources page has a list of the Coronavirus Supplement Entitlement
Periods.

Income Management

The Coronavirus Supplement was income managed. The same Income
Management rules that apply to the customer's regular payments for
Income Management and the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) applied.

NEIS (New Enterprise Incentive Scheme)

NEIS participants could access the Coronavirus Supplement while
participating in the NEIS program.

Until 31 March 2021, income support recipients starting NEIS could stay
on their current income support payment or transfer to NEIS Allowance.

Existing NEIS Allowance recipients could apply for income support
through Services Australia and access the Coronavirus Supplement,
instead of receiving NEIS Allowance.

From 1 April 2021, NEIS participants in receipt of JobSeeker Payment
(JSP) and certain other payments will be progressively transferred to
NEIS Allowance.

Viewing the Coronavirus Supplement

The Coronavirus Supplement will show on the Payment Summary (PS),
Payment Detail (PD), One Off Payment (OOP) and One-Time Payment Summary
screens. To see a further breakdown of eligibility dates specific for
the customer, view the One Time Payment Main Menu (OTPMM). This screen
(OTPMM) is only visible via Customer First.

For Farm Household Allowance recipients, the Coronavirus Supplement was
paid through the SAP system. The payment will show on the Payment List
screen.

Coronavirus Supplement Debts

ICT changes implemented on 23 May 2020 resulted in the raising of debts
Coronavirus Supplement negative adjustments since its implementation.

From 8 August 2020, an additional ICT change was made to make sure that
correct offsetting occurs for Coronavirus Supplement.

Staff need to escalate via mySupport, (using the primary payment the
customer receives in the search function), if the Coronavirus
Supplement:

-   was not paid to the customer
-   amount paid was incorrect, or
-   debts are not offsetting correctly

See the Resources page for a link to mySupport.

See Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) debts for more details on debts.

The Resources page has more Coronavirus Supplement details.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
