
Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children 101-06020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for customers making a claim for a
Health Care Card (HCC) for a foster child in their care. The Foster
Child Health Care Card (FST) is not subject to an income test for the
foster carer.

Eligibility for FST

To qualify for an FST, the foster child must:

-   be in foster care
-   be living in Australia with an Australian resident or a special
    category visa holder, and
-   meet the Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child age related requirements or
    the Regular Care Child requirements

Informal care arrangements:

Customers do not need to be formal foster carers, for example caring for
a ward of the state. They can be any person caring for a child who is
not their natural or adopted child and may include a child placed in the
permanent care of the carer by a Court Order.

Formal care arrangements:

A formal foster care arrangement is defined as care managed by a state
or territory child protection or welfare authority and should be
confirmed by a letter from the State Welfare Authority or court order.
Shared care does not affect eligibility.

The foster carer must be responsible for the day to day care of the
child. The child may live away from the foster carer to study for
example at a boarding school.

While an Approved Care Organisation (ACO) cannot qualify for a HCC in
respect of a child, children in the care of an ACO may qualify for a
HCC. They must not be considered dependent upon an individual (i.e. FTB
is not being received by an individual in respect of the child). Such
children should be invited to claim a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
in their own right.

Customers in receipt of a Double Orphan Pension (DOP) are also eligible
to apply for an HCC for the child.

The card reduces the cost of Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS)
medications for foster children. It may also entitle them to concessions
offered by State or Territory organisations for foster children.

Foster carer already has HCC

If the foster carer is also a customer and receives instalments of
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A at the maximum rate for the foster child
(or would except for a reduction due to maintenance action or
maintenance income), then they will be issued a FTB HCC automatically
that will also cover the foster child.

If the FTB HCC, including the coverage for a foster child, is cancelled
(for example when FTB is CAN-INC), to ensure continuity of coverage for
the foster child, the customer should be advised to:

-   claim online
-   lodge a customised claim (SS489), or
-   lodge a paper claim (SS050) for a Foster Child HCC

Customers who already have a concession card of their own and take on
the care of a foster child may choose to:

-   suppress display of the child's address details on the Foster Child
    Health Care Card (FST HCC), or
-   suppress delivery of the FST HCC

These options are available as preferences for concession cards.

Foster carers should test their eligibility for FTB

Invite foster carers to apply for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for the
foster child. See Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Foster carers may claim a Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) in
addition to being automatically qualified for an FTB Health Care Card
for a foster child in their care.

Names and persons covered on HCC card

Although the FST is mailed to the foster carer, only the foster child is
named on and covered by the card

The FST is issued to an individual foster child and cannot be
transferred or used for another child.

Online claims

[A self service option is available for customers] Customers must be
registered with myGov and have a linked Centrelink online account.

Once registered, to start an online claim for FST they must:

sign in to myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account

make sure their personal details are correct

-   from the menu, select the My Details > Personal and contact
    details > My profile to make updates

select Payments and Claims > Claims > Make a claim from the menu

-   for more information, see Claiming options for FST in Process

Assisted Customer Claims

Service Officers can run Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) with the customer
to collect and record the claim information. ACC is similar to the
online claim workflow and contains the same questions to ask the
customer.

Start ACC with the customer. Encourage them to complete the rest at home
in their own time. By submitting the claim online, they can monitor the
progress of their claim through their Centrelink online account or
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

If the customer asks the Service Officer to continue ACC, complete ACC
and tell the customer of any documents they need to provide or action
they need to take to submit their claim. The customer will need to:

-   answer all mandatory questions
-   provide all required documents
-   verify their identity if there is no Identify Confirmation (ICI)
    recorded

Exceptions may apply for vulnerable customers. To submit their claim,
the customer will need to:

-   access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account or
    Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to upload their documents and
    submit the claim, or
-   accept the verbal declaration read by a Service Officer

By ticking the Declaration box on the Review your claim page, the
Service Officer confirms that they have read the declaration script and
the customer accepts it. Once a verbal declaration is completed and the
ACC submitted, a DOC confirming that the customer accepts the verbal
declaration displays in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   the Customer Claim Summary

If a customer is unable or declines to make a verbal declaration, the
Service Officer must:

-   invite the customer to log on to their online services, accept the
    declaration and submit their claim, or
-   provide the customer with a Customer Declaration Form (CDF). The
    claim must not be submitted without the CDF being completed and
    signed

If a customer emails or calls for help with their online claim, the
Service Officer can use the Customer Online View to see what the
customer sees when they use their Centrelink online account.

See Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for
additional ACC processing information.

Completing the paper claim - SS489 or SS050

If the customer is unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim and
an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is not available a paper claim will
need to be issued and completed as follows:

-   complete a customised Claim for Foster Child Health Care Card
    (SS489) issued when the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow
    has been run, or
-   complete a Claim for a Health Care Card (SS050)

SS489 or SS050 lodged at service centres must be checked to ensure each
question has been answered, the claim form has been signed, and that all
required documents have been provided.

Where the customer and/or correspondence nominee has not provided all
documents, the Service Officer is to remind the customer and/or
correspondence nominee of what they need to provide and that any delays
in providing these documents will delay the processing of their claim.
The paper claim must still be accepted.

SS489 or SS050 claims may also be lodged via [A self service option is
available for customers] Upload documents service, post and fax.

When the processing team receives the claim, they will thoroughly check
the claim and contact the customer and / or correspondence nominee to
request further information if needed.

Nominees who have active online claim access, plus a current link to a
principle (who also has active online claim access) may lodge a claim on
behalf of the principle for FST.

Customers receiving FTB for a foster child can be automatically assessed
for an FST.

Confirming identity of a foster child

A foster child will generally have an existing Centrelink record on a
former carer's record. Examining these circumstances is enough to verify
date of birth details for the child.

A foster child may not have an existing record, e.g. change of name,
previous carer/s never claimed, placement in foster care immediately
following birth. A letter from the relevant State or Territory agency
will suffice in these cases. It must clearly state the child's name and
date of birth. This information may be in or separate to a letter of
identification for Identity Confirmation purposes.

Foster child does not have identification/record

If unable to provide identification, a letter of introduction or
identity confirmation from a relevant State or Territory agency is
acceptable in meeting the requirements for alternative Identity for
children in foster care requesting a FST.

Eligible for LIC rather than FST

The child should be encouraged to test their entitlement for a LIC in
their own right rather than the FST where:

The child does not meet the FTB child age related requirements for a
FST. For example:

-   The adult does not have legal responsibility for the day-to-day
    care, development and welfare of the child and there is not a family
    law order or parenting plan in place and the child is not in the
    care of anyone else who has legal responsibility for them

The child is in the care of an Approved Care Organisation (ACO) and the
child is not considered dependent on an individual. That is, FTB is not
being received by an individual in respect of the child

Backdating claim for FST

FST claims may be backdated to the date eligibility commenced to cover
expenses already incurred for the foster child.

If a claim's start date is to be backdated, customers may be able to
claim reimbursement for past period expenses for the foster child, for
example PBS medication purchases.

The customer should be advised to obtain a PBS receipt for the
prescription/medical treatment. The customer can then take the receipt/s
and concession card to Medicare, to request a refund of medical
expenses. The Resources page contains further information on saving
money on medicine, and how to request a refund.

Child signature on concession card

Social Security law does not require that a concession card be signed. A
signature is only one method of determining that the person using the
concession card is the person entitled to use it. If the child:

-   is old enough to write their name on the card and can sign again the
    same upon request, it may be appropriate for the child to sign the
    card
-   cannot sign the card, then any person with legal guardianship can
    sign the card on the child's behalf. The guardian should indicate in
    the signature block that they are signing on another person's behalf

Centrelink only provides the concession cards, not the concessions. The
concession provider decides whether or not to accept a concession card
that is not signed by the person named on it.

Digital card

Customers can use the digital wallet in the app or the myGov app wallet.
See Resources for a link. It allows customers to use their concession
card using their smart device. It is at the discretion of the concession
provider whether they accept the digital card so it is important that
customers have their physical card with them.

The Resources page contains the privacy notice for FST customers, a
table of additional information about the effect of FST on other Health
Care Cards and links to forms, the Services Australia Website and Level
2 Policy Help Desk.

Related links

Health Care Card (HCC)

Preferences for concession cards

Age qualifications for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) or a Foster
Child Health Care Card (FST)

Residence requirements

Identity Confirmation

Foster care

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Portability of concession cards

Extra concession information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
