
Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC) 101-06030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how ex-Carer Allowance (CA) (child) care
receivers may be eligible for an Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care
Card (EHC) when they turn 16. Service Officers can help customers claim
or re-claim online.

Qualification for EHC

To be qualified for an EHC, the ex-Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver
must meet the following:

-   had a disability or medical condition that previously qualified
    their carer for a CA (child) Health Care Card for the care recipient
    on the day before the child turned 16
-   be at least 16 and have not turned 26
-   meet residence requirements
-   be in Australia when lodging a claim
-   has supplied Identity Confirmation
-   be a full-time student
-   has a current address
-   not be imprisoned

Note: the carer does not need to have received CA as a fortnightly
payment, only the CA HCC, for their care receiver to be eligible for the
EHC.

An ex-CA care recipient's partner and/or dependants (if applicable) are
not eligible to be included on the card.

There are no multiple exclusion rules for the EHC, that is, if a
customer has multiple entitlements to a Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC) and an EHC, and then both can be granted.

Common claimant types

Examples of when an EHC claim may be appropriate for ex-CA care
receivers:

-   16-25 year old full-time student has a disability or medical
    condition that previously qualified their carer for CA (child) on
    the day before the care receiver turned 16
-   16-18 year old secondary student remains a dependent Family Tax
    Benefit (FTB) child and they or their parents are not eligible for a
    HCC or Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   16-25 year old full-time student now qualifies their carer for CA
    (adult). Unlike CA (child), CA (adult) is not accompanied by a HCC
-   16-25 year old full-time student does not hold a Mobility Allowance
    HCC

Some 15 year old care receivers whose disability or medical condition
attracted Carer Allowance (CA) (child) for their carer will no longer
qualify for a HCC once they turn 16, despite having the same condition
and facing the same pharmaceutical costs.

Note: the EHC is issued in the care receiver's name and is not subject
to an income or assets test.

For EHC renewals, see Renewing the Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health
Care Card (EHC).

Informing the customer via correspondence

Carers are sent an invitation to request a Carers Child to Adult Online
Transfer when their child care receiver turns 15 years and 6 months.
Carers of children with a terminal condition are sent an invitation when
their care receiver turns 17 years and 9 months, inviting them to
transfer payment under child care receiver provisions to payment under
adult care receiver provisions.

The letter includes information about the Ex-Carer Allowance Health Care
Card.

Online claims

[A self service option is available for customers] Customers must be
registered with myGov and have a linked Centrelink online account. For
more information, see Claiming options for EHC.

Customers can lodge completed claims for EHC up to 3 months before
turning 16 years old.

Assisted Customer Claims

If the customer is deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online
claim Service Officers can run Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) with the
customer to collect and record the claim information. ACC is similar to
the online claim workflow and contains the same questions to ask the
customer.

Start ACC with the customer. Encourage them to complete the rest at home
in their own time. By submitting the claim online, they can monitor the
progress of their claim through their Centrelink online account or
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

If the customer asks the Service Officer to continue ACC, complete ACC
and tell the customer of any documents they need to provide or action
they need to take to submit their claim. The customer will need to:

-   answer all mandatory questions
-   provide all required documents
-   verify their identity through the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in
    Process Direct (PD)

Exceptions may apply for vulnerable customers.

To submit their claim, the customer will need to:

-   access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account or
    Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to upload their documents and
    submit the claim, or
-   accept the verbal declaration read by a Service Officer

By ticking the Declaration box on the Review your claim page, the
Service Officer confirms that they have read the declaration script and
the customer accepts it.

Once a verbal declaration is completed and the ACC submitted, a DOC
confirming that the customer accepts the verbal declaration displays in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   the Customer Claim Summary

If a customer is unable or declines to make a verbal declaration, the
Service Officer must:

-   invite the customer to log on to their online services, accept the
    declaration and submit their claim, or
-   provide the customer with a Customer Declaration Form (CDF). The
    claim must not be submitted without the CDF being completed and
    signed

If a customer emails or calls to request assistance with their online
claim, the Service Officer can use the Customer Online View to see what
the customer sees when they use their Centrelink online account. See
Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims for
additional ACC processing information.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website and
information about the privacy notice provided to customers making an
online claim for EHC.

Completing paper claim - SS490 (FCSO) or SS456

If the customer is unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim or
an Assisted Customer Claim is unavailable, a paper claim can be issued
and completed as follows:

-   a customised Claim for Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card
    (SS490) which is issued by running the First Contact Service Offer
    (FCSO) workflow, or
-   an Application for a Health Care Card for former recipients of a
    Carer Allowance Health Care Card (SS456) form

SS490 or SS456 lodged at service centres must be checked to ensure each
question has been answered, the claim form has been signed, and that all
required documents have been provided.

Where the customer and / or correspondence nominee has not provided all
documents, the Service Officer is to remind the customer and / or
correspondence nominee of what they need to provide and that any delays
in providing these documents will delay the processing of their claim.
The paper claim must still be accepted.

SS490 or SS456 claims can be lodged via [A self service option is
available for customers] upload documents service, post and fax.

When the processing team receives the claim, they will thoroughly check
the claim and contact the customer and / or correspondence nominee to
request further information if needed.

Eligible nominees who have active online claim access, plus a current
link to a principle (who also has active online claim access) may lodge
a claim on behalf of the principle for EHC.

Customers can lodge completed paper claims for EHC up to 3 months before
turning 16 years old.

Backdating of start date

Claims may be backdated if the ex-CA care receiver received, and paid
for, a medical service or treatment. The claimant must have been a
full-time student and aged between 16 and 25 throughout the entire
period from the date of medical service/treatment up to the claim date.
Verification of the medical service is required to be able to apply
backdating.

As the EHC was introduced from 1 October 2007, it cannot be backdated
prior to that date. Subject to the claimant's circumstances satisfying
the backdating rules, Service Officer may backdate EHC claims to the
date of medical service or treatment up to 40 weeks prior to the current
system date. Claims that need backdating to an earlier date will need to
be referred to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk - Concessions requesting
implementation of a manual override.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers can use the digital wallet in the app to see a copy of their
EHC. The digital card does not replace the physical card for external
organisations and how it is used is at the discretion of the concession
provider.

The Resources page contains information on available concessions, a link
to the Application for a Health Care Card for former recipients of a
Carer Allowance Health Care Card (SS456) and a link to the Level 2
Policy Helpdesk Online Query Form.

Contents

Renewing the Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Related links

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Portability of concession cards

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) turning 16 years of age

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews

Home schooling arrangements for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy,
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
