-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Business Hub is used for Cape York enhanced
Income Management (enhanced IM) purposes.

On this Page:

Secure communication channel

Business Hub is a framework for exchanging secure electronic
communications between Services Australia (the agency) and external
parties. It is accessed via the agency’s website.

For the purpose of the Income Management program, the Business Hub is
utilised as a secure communication channel between the agency and a
referring authority, the Family Responsibilities Commission, for
Enhanced Income Management under the Cape York Initiative.

Income Management referring authority

Income Management referring authorities are determined by legislation.
The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) may make a decision to
refer a customer for the Income Management program where it is
beneficial to the customer or their family.

Customers may be referred to ensure identified priority needs of the
customer and their family are being met. Customers can also volunteer
through the FRC to participate in the Income Management program.

All customers referred from the FRC who meet eligibility for the Income
Management program will be income managed under enhanced IM..

Business Hub interactions

The following interactions are available the Family Responsibilities
Commission:

-   Mutual Client Search for Income Management or enhanced Income
    Management
-   Personal Information Disclosure (PID)
-   Notice to Commence Income Management or enhanced Income Management
-   Revocation of Income Management or enhanced Income Management
-   View current expenses
-   Requests for Further Information

Daily Reports

Daily Reports provide the Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) with
a copy of all the interactions completed in the Business Hub the
previous business day.

The FRC are automatically notified via a Daily Report when an enhanced
IM customer has had a change in circumstances actioned on their record.
This can include things such as a change of address, payment suspension
etc.

The Resources page contains links to contact details

Related links

Actioning Business Hub requests

Exchange of information with Income Management and enhanced Income
Management referring authorities

Enhanced Income Management under the Cape York Initiative

Personal Information Disclosure for Disclosure for Cape York enhanced
Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
