
Registration for Income Management deductions, Electronic Verification of Rent (EVoR) or Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) 101-09010040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how businesses apply and are assessed for the
Income Management deductions, Electronic Verification of Rent (EVoR) and
Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) programs. This document also
includes the process to be followed for processing an update to an
Australian Business Number (ABN) for an approved business.

Business Applications (BA)

When a new Business Application (BA) is received by Services Australia,
it is recorded in the Centrelink system and a business Customer
Reference Number (CRN) issued. If the business has an existing
Centrelink record and business CRN, the new application will be added to
the existing record. The BA is assessed against the eligibility criteria
applicable to the program being applied for. If the business is assessed
as suitable to be approved, the business will be advised in writing and
granted access to the service.

If a BA is received:

-   by fax, it is digitally scanned and recorded on the Centrelink
    system
-   in person at a service centre, it is faxed and the original given
    back to the business
-   by post to the relevant Third Party Programmes team (TPP), it should
    be faxed to be digitally scanned

For BasicsCard, see BasicsCard merchant eligibility and approval

Businesses must be a legal entity to use Income Management, CCeS or
EVoR. A legal entity is an association, corporation, proprietorship,
trustee or individual that has legal standing according to the law.

A legal entity has legal capacity to enter into agreements or contracts,
assume obligations, incur and pay debts, sue and be sued in its own
right and to be held responsible for its actions.

Businesses must have all of the registrations, licenses and
accreditations required by any Commonwealth, state, territory or local
government.

Unincorporated entities

The business will need to identify the legal entity to enter into a
contract.

The options for the business are:

-   For a member (person) of the business (with an ABN) to contract with
    the agency (the person signs an individual undertaking and enters
    into the contract in their personal capacity and as a representative
    of the business)
-   For the Third Party Organisation (TPO) to register as an
    incorporated entity
-   If there is an associated trust, a trustee can lodge an application
    on behalf of the trust
-   An unincorporated entity can explore having an overarching legal
    entity take responsibility - such as an 'umbrella' business

For Indigenous Businesses check the Office of the Registrar of
Indigenous Corporations website. The Resources page contains a link to
this website. Some Indigenous Businesses may be registered under the
Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act (CATSI Act).

Individual undertaking

An individual undertaking is required for an unincorporated entity to
contract with the agency. This is the person who signs the individual
undertaking and enters into the contract in their personal capacity and
as a representative of the business. If this changes, a new Business
Application (BA) needs to be signed.

Trusts

The agency cannot enter into contracts with Trusts. The Trustee of the
Trust needs to be established. A contract may be entered into with the
trustee on behalf of the trust as long as the trustee is a valid legal
entity itself.

Partnerships

The agency can only enter into a contract with a partnership if all the
partners are identified. Only one partner needs to sign the Business
Application (BA).

If the partner leaves the partnership, the contract/agreement remains
valid as the remaining partners assume all rights and obligations under
the contract jointly.

If the partnership dissolves entirely, a new BA is required.

Adding or varying an ABN/ACN

A change in Australian Business Number (ABN)/Australian Company Number
(ACN) usually means there is a change of the legal entity, which will
require a new Business Application (BA).

In some instances where the only change is the ABN/ACN and all other
details such as the owner, the address and contact details of the Third
Party Organisation (TPO) remain the same, the decision may be made to
retain the same Customer Reference Number (CRN).

If the CRN is to be retained always make sure that a new BA has been
obtained. If the business is approved for multiple programs, a new
Business Application has to be lodged for each of these programs.

Assessment required by the Program Support Manager in Third Party
Programmes team to retain the same CRN:

Has there been a change in the entity only, and the rest of the
information remains the same including:

-   Owner
-   Address of business
-   Authorised officer/s
-   Contact officer details
-   Websites and branding (no significant changes)

Centrelink Confirmation eServices and Electronic Verification of Rent:

-   Program Support Managers need to make sure that consent wording is
    updated to reflect the correct entity and the current list of users
    are correct

For Quality Assurance purposes, make sure that the assessment is
documented stating what the old ABN was and what the ABN is currently

Program Support Managers can email the Deduction and Confirmation Branch
if there is any doubt retaining the same CRN.

The Resources page contains links to business services on the Services
Australia website, intranet links and other useful external websites.

Related links

Customer consent for Centrelink Confirmation eService (CCeS)

Programme Assurance Review reports for Third Party Organisation (TPO)

Actioning a review for Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Verification of income (excluding employment income) for Random Sample
Surveys (RSS)

Adding or changing a service reason for Income Management or Centrelink
Confirmation eServices (CCeS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
