
Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders 101-03090050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 20 March 2017, Energy Supplement grandfathering arrangements will
apply for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders. Only CSHC
holders who are grandfathered for Energy supplement will receive the
payment from 20 March 2017 onwards.

This document outlines information about the Energy Supplement paid to
some Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders.

Energy Supplement changes for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card Holders (CSHC) from 20 March 2017

The Energy Supplement was introduced as part of the Household Assistance
Package to compensate people for the introduction of the carbon price.
As the carbon price no longer exists, the Energy Supplement will no
longer be paid from 20 March 2017 to CSHC holders who do not meet the
grandfathering provisions.

Grandfathering rules will determine a CSHC customer's ongoing
entitlement to Energy Supplement from 20 March 2017.

Customers who will be grandfathered:

-   CSHC customers who received the Energy Supplement in respect to 19
    September 2016, will continue to be paid Energy Supplement as long
    as they remain entitled to the CSHC
-   Customers who were in receipt of a qualifying income support payment
    (ISP), either through Services Australia or Department of Veterans'
    Affairs (DVA), on 19 September 2016, and they successfully apply for
    the CSHC within 42 days of the ISP cancellation
-   Customers who were in receipt of Energy Supplement with their
    pension on 31 December 2016 and they were automatically granted a
    non-income tested CSHC from 1 January 2017 as part of the Rebalance
    the Assets Test changes. See Non-income tested (NOI) concession
    cards for more information about these card holders

Customers who will not be grandfathered:

-   New CSHC customers granted from 20 March 2017 will not get the
    Energy Supplement
-   Customers who start to receive or do not have a continuous
    entitlement to the CSHC between 20 September 2016 and 19 March 2017
    will get Energy Supplement for every day they were eligible in that
    period and then they will stop receiving Energy Supplement from 20
    March 2017

Energy Supplement

Services Australia will make quarterly supplement payments on 20 March,
20 June, 20 September and 20 December each year to eligible CSHC holders
who:

-   are grandfathered for Energy Supplement
-   have provided payment destination details, and
-   have not requested that the supplement be suppressed

If the customer ceases to be a CSHC holder before the next payment date,
any owed amount is paid on cancellation.

The supplement is:

-   An arrears payment calculated on a daily rate based on the
    customer's marital status (single or partnered)
-   Paid each quarter on or shortly after the test days of 20 March, 20
    June, 20 September and 20 December. A quarter commences on a test
    day and ends the day before the next test day. Payments are made
    within a few days after the test day
-   A non-taxable payment
-   Not means-tested, so grandfathered CSHC holders get the amount in
    full
-   An optional payment. Customers not wishing to be paid the supplement
    can decline the payment at any time
-   Portable, for more information see Portability of Add-ons

The supplement is only payable to a bank account and is not paid by
cheque, in accordance with section 1061UA of the Social Security Act
1991. See References page for links.

Energy Supplement eligibility

Customers must be:

-   residing in Australia
-   in Australia (the supplement can be paid for the first 6 weeks of a
    temporary absence from Australia)
-   receiving a qualifying Energy Supplement payment, or
-   be a or holder of a CSHC who is grandfathered for Energy Supplement

Payment frequency and rate

The Energy Supplement payment frequency table lists the payment
frequency based on the type of qualifying payment the customer receives
and their circumstances.

For more information about the payment of Quarterly Energy Supplement
frequency and rates, see Quarterly Supplement.

The Resources page contains examples for grandfathered of Energy
Supplement and links to information about Energy Supplement for
customers and staff.

Related links

Energy Supplement

Energy Supplement for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) recipients

Payment options for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Pension Supplement

Payment rates and thresholds

Quarterly Supplement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
