
Health Care Card (HCC) 101-06020000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Health Care Cards (HCC). Services
Australia under the Social Security Act 1991 issues a HCC. It verifies a
customer's entitlement to Commonwealth health concessions such as
reduced costs for prescriptions under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS).

HCC concessions

The HCC provides access to concessions provided by State and Local
Governments for health, household, educational, recreational and
transport services. Concessions may also be available from private
businesses. Provision of these concessions is at the discretion of the
provider organisation.

Claiming HCC

Not all HCCs are automatically issued. Customers are required to claim
for certain HCCs, such as:

-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)
-   Foster Child Health Care Card should be claimed separately if the
    customer is not claiming or receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for
    the foster child

Automatic issue

HCCs are automatically issued to the following customers who are
residing in Australia and whose information is up-to-date and correctly
recorded:

-   Customers receiving an eligible payments
-   Mobility Allowance customers not already on a pension (card lists
    customer only). Note: if Mobility Allowance is cancelled due to the
    customer becoming a funded participant of the National Disability
    Insurance Scheme (NDIS), the customer will retain entitlement to
    their Mobility Allowance HCC
-   Customers receiving the maximum rate of income tested FTB Part A
    paid by instalment
-   Customers who would be eligible for maximum rate FTB Part A except
    that they only have care of a Regular Care Child
-   Customers whose FTB Part A is reduced only by the Maintenance Income
    Test
-   Customers who receive FTB for a foster child - card displays name of
    foster child only
-   Carer Payment (CP) customers who receive CP for short-term or
    episodic conditions
-   A Carer Allowance (CA) child whose carer qualifies for a Carer
    Allowance payment - card displays name of child only
-   A CA child whose carer does not qualify for a fortnightly payment
    but who meets certain eligibility requirements. The card displays
    name of child only
-   Customers receiving Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Confirming concession entitlement for FTB customers

There are some circumstances where the FTB customer's HCC is not
renewed/issued.

If an FTB customer requests a letter to confirm concession entitlement
for a past period, check the FAO Reconciliation and Claim Summary (FRCS)
screen to ensure actual taxable income details for the period would have
entitled to the customer to maximum FTB Part A paid by instalments
through the agency. Customers may have received a concession card (as
shown on the Concession Card Issue Summary (CCIS) screen) during the
financial year due to an income estimate provided.

However, after reconciliation with income details transmitted from the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO), the actual taxable income may have
been higher than the estimate provided. This will be shown on the
Concession Entitlement Summary (MCCS) screen as a deleted line.

Card issue

If a customer is on a two weekly reporting regime, their initial HCC is
generated after their first Reporting Statement is lodged.

For a customer on any other reporting regime or no reporting required,
the card (if a priority card) should be issued to the customer
automatically within 14 days of the grant being finalised.

If the payment status is ASSessed and is scheduled to become CURrent
within 14 days, the card should be issued prior to the payment becoming
current but the start date displayed on the card will be the date the
payment becomes current (for example, JobSeeker Payment (JSP) is
processed on 3 March with a future start date of 15 March. HCC will be
issued on 3 March displaying a start date of 15 March).

When a customer is granted their payment or concession card, an interim
voucher may be issued immediately.

Priority cards

If the customer or partner is eligible for a Pensioner Concession Card
(PCC) in their own right, the PCC is the priority card, and any FTB HCC
to which they are entitled is not automatically issued. The customer can
ask for the FTB HCC to be issued as an ongoing automatic issue or a one
off issue.

Dependent partners of PCC customers may test their entitlement to a LIC.

Concessions for partner and children

Individuals named as dependents on concession cards may be entitled to
concessions, but this is at the discretion of the service provider. For
example, some State Governments provide transport concessions only to
the card holder and dependent children, but not to any partner listed on
the card.

Customers can request their concession card to be issued without their
partner's name, but still show details of any dependent children. For
more information, see Preferences for concession cards.

A partner will only display as a dependant on the HCC if they meet the
requirements of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999, section
240B. To qualify, the partner must:

-   be in Australia and an Australian resident, a special category visa
    holder residing in Australia, or the holder of a qualifying visa, or
-   a New Zealand citizen, and the holder of the card is in Australia
    and is receiving a social security pension or benefit solely because
    of the operation of the scheduled international agreement between
    Australia and New Zealand

Date of grant

This is the date on which entitlement to a concession card was last
granted. In most cases this corresponds with the date a person's income
support or income supplement payment was granted.

A difference between the date the payment is granted and the 'date of
grant' on the concession card would usually be due to the customer
travelling overseas or variations in income for Family Tax Benefit
affecting HCC entitlement.

If a customer's Health Care Card start date is backdated, such as when
claiming an income support/supplement payment that has an associated
concession card, the customer may be able to claim reimbursement for
expenses, such as Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medication
purchases, incurred in the period from the backdated start date to the
present. Advise the customer to obtain a PBS receipt for the
prescription/medical treatment. The customer can then take the
receipt/s, together with their concession card, to service centres
offering Medicare services, to request a refund of medical expenses.

CCeS and Concession Entitlement Validation

Customer Confirmation eService (CCeS) assists concession providers
accurately determine a cardholder's entitlement. If a concession
provider does not use this service, it may be necessary for the agency
to manually confirm concession entitlement periods. The Concession
Entitlement Validation (CEV) system allows confirmation of concession
entitlements for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and Medicare Safety
Net.

Continuation of HCC in employment income nil rate period

Customers who are eligible for Working Credit continue to be entitled to
the HCC for up to 12 weeks if they are in an employment income nil rate
period on any of the following payments:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) customers excluding
    single principal carers and customers who have been assessed by an
    Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) as having a partial capacity
    to work
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP). Note: there are some system
    limitations for Parenting Payment (PP) where payment is not
    automatically cancelling after the employment income nil rate
    period. See Employment income nil rate period
-   Austudy (AUS) if in an employment income nil period
-   ABSTUDY (ABY) Living Allowance if in an employment income nil rate
    period

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) customer returns to full-time work

JSP and YA job seekers, who return to full-time work, lose qualification
for their payment because they are no longer unemployed, not because
they have employment income that puts them over the income limit. These
customers can continue to be paid until their working credits are
depleted but they are not entitled to the HCC continuation in the
employment income nil rate period. They may still, however, be entitled
to the 26 week extension period if they have been in continuous receipt
of certain payments for 52 weeks prior to cancellation. Refer to
'Extension of HCC entitlement for employment affected customers' section
for a list of qualifying payments.

Customers who are in the Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy 26 Week Suspension
Period may retain concession card entitlement during the suspension
period in some circumstances. See Extended Entitlement to concession
cards for more information.

Self-employment income

A person who is no longer eligible for payment because of an increase in
self-employment income would qualify for an extension concession card if
they have been in continuous receipt of certain payments for 52 weeks
prior to cancellation. Refer to 'Extension of HCC entitlement for
employment affected customers' section for a list of qualifying
payments.

Due to a current system problem, customers may not be issued an
extension concession card automatically by the system. In these cases,
refer the case to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk to request assistance.
When completing the online query form, ensure that the 'Enquiry Detail'
category reflects 'Concessions'. See the Resources page for a link to
the Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online Query form.

Extension of HCC entitlement for employment affected customers

If a customer's payment ceases as a result of a return to work or an
increase in income from employment by the customer or partner, they are
issued with a HCC for 26 weeks if they have been in continuous receipt
for 52 weeks of any of the following payments:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers, other
    than single principal carers and customers who have been assessed by
    a JCA as having a partial capacity to work
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)

These customers may also be entitled to the 12 week HCC continuation
period. The 26 week extension includes the 12 week continuation period.

Customers receiving PPS and single principal carers who receive JSP or
YA (job seeker) have a continuation of their PCC during the employment
income nil rate period, and receive a HCC for the balance of the 26 week
extension period (that is, 14 weeks).

Note: Youth Allowance, Austudy (students and apprentices) and Abstudy
Living Allowance customers are not eligible for the additional 26 week
extension, only the initial 12 weeks during the zero rate period when
due to employment income.

See Extended Entitlement to concession cards

Carer Payment (CP) customers

Carer Payment (CP) customers who are eligible for CP based on short-term
or episodic care, will be eligible for a Health Care Card (HCC) for the
same period of time as they are entitled to CP. The maximum length of
the HCC will be for 6 months.

Effect on entitlement if customer is imprisoned

Customers whose income support payment is cancelled following their
incarceration also lose their entitlement to their HCC. These customers
are not able to claim a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) while in
prison.

Replacement HCCs

Customers can request replacement HCCs which are sent to their postal
address and may take up to 14 days to arrive. If a replacement card is
needed urgently, the customer must attend a service centre to obtain an
interim concession card.

The Resources page contains a table of concessions available HCC
cardholders, links to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk, the Services
Australia Website for information about the Health Care Card (HCC) and
Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) and a link to Centrelink rate charts.

Contents

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Health Care Card (HCC) not renewed/issued for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

How to reissue concession cards

Related links

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Employment income nil rate period

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Concession Entitlement Validation Online Enquiry

Extended Entitlement to concession cards

Fraud

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
