
Concession Enh1ment Validation Online Enquiry 101-06060040

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about the exchange of information between
Centrelink and Medicare regarding customer concession status.

On this Page:

Centrelink data exchange

Medicare is responsible for determining eligibility to the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and the Medicare Safety Net (MSN).
The aim of these schemes is to provide access to low cost pharmaceutical
items and bulk doctors services to the Australian community via
Commonwealth subsidies.

To assist Medicare with the administration of these programs, Centrelink
is responsible for providing data to Medicare about customers' identity,
concession status and details of any Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
payments.

Concession providers, such as pharmacists, are required to satisfy
themselves that the customer has a current concession entitlement (for
example: sight the customer's Centrelink concession card).

Checking customer's concession status

Any checking of a customer's concession status for PBS purposes is done
by Medicare following a request for payment by the pharmacist. The check
is conducted against a database maintained by Medicare with updates
provided by Centrelink. For the pharmacists who have adopted PBS on-line
this checking is done at the time of the actual service. All other
pharmacies will continue to provide claims to Medicare after the date of
supply. These claims will be assessed with Medicare receiving
confirmation of the customer's entitlement in real time at the date of
supply, as the entitlement is known at the date and time of the enquiry.

PBS online

PBS Online offers an online claiming system by allowing pharmacies to
submit a claim to Medicare each time a PBS funded prescription medicine
is purchased by a customer. A pharmacy using PBS Online will be able to
receive confirmation of the customer's entitlement as at the date and
time of the enquiry. Access to limited historical data is also
available, if required.

Customers presenting receipts at a Medicare Shop front will be able to
receive confirmation of their entitlement at the date of supply, as it
is known at the date and time of the enquiry.

This procedure is primarily concerned with Phase 1 of the Concession
Entitlement Validation (CEV) Online Enquiry project. Further phased
enhancements were respectively scheduled for December 2006 and June 2007
releases.

The Phase 1 online enquiry encompasses two separate processes, these
are:

-   matching the citizen's identity information between Medicare and
    Centrelink, at the point in time the citizen becomes entitled to a
    concession
-   responding to a query from a pharmacy regarding a citizen's
    concessional entitlement

Medicare determines the PBS eligibility for the individual based on the
individual's concession entitlement.

Related links

Concession cards and information

Family assistance procedures for Medicare Service Centres

Medicare Safety Net and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) validation with
Medicare

Medicare card number collection for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Requesting Medicare card numbers from customers for the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Remote community customers Medicare card number collection for the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Recording Medicare card numbers for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Extra concession information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
