
Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) 101-06040010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines options for claiming a Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC) and the documents required to grant or reject LIC claims.

Options for claiming LIC

Eligible customers receive payments or concession cards from the date
they actually submit a complete claim with all relevant supporting
documentation.

Different processes apply for customers in vulnerable circumstances.

[A self service option is available for customers] Online claim
Customers must be registered with an active Centrelink online account
before they can submit their claim. Partnered customers must complete
separate online claims if they both want to claim. Documents required
can include confirmation of identity, residency and income verification
Note: customers receiving a pension or benefit are not recommended to
claim LIC online as they will be asked to re-enter personal information
they have already provided

Paper claims
Customers are required to complete a:

-   customised Claim for Low Income Health Care Card (SS487) issued via
    the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow, or
-   Claim for a Health Care Card (SS050) if they are unable to claim
    online

Documents required can include Identity Confirmation, residency and
income verification. Customers and their partners can both claim LIC on
a single paper claim, if required

Nominees may lodge an online claim on behalf of their principle if the
nominee is registered online and the nominee arrangement is on record.

Starting LIC online claims

Once registered with an 'active' online account, customers need to:

Sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account

Ensure their personal details are correct. Select the My profile link to
make updates:

-   on the My profile page, information from the customer’s record is
    pre-populated
-   customers need to select Update Section for any sections such as
    Address or Relationship details that require an update

Note: accommodation details are covered within the claim questions

-   For each part of My profile updated, they need to select Save
-   Select Payments and Claims > Claims > Make a claim from the menu
    option
-   On the Make a claim page select Get started link under the
    Concession Cards heading
-   Answer the streaming questions on the Check your eligibility for a
    concession or health card page to check if they are claiming the
    most suitable income support payment. If the customer would not be
    eligible for a concession or health card based on their answers to
    these questions, the online claim will advise them why they may not
    be eligible and refer them to the Payment and Service Finder or to
    contact Services Australia to discuss a more suitable payment. They
    can select Back to return to the Make a claim page to begin another
    claim type
-   After completing the streaming questions, select Continue

The Next steps section advises the customer of any further information
or documentation required for their claim to be submitted.

Customers must provide all their required documents and verify their
identity (if there is no Identify Confirmation (ICI) recorded) to be
able to submit their claim. Exceptions will be made for some vulnerable
customers.

For more information, see Apply for a payment or concessions card
options online.

[A self service option is available for customers] Customers can submit
or cancel their online claims and withdraw a submitted claim via their
Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. When a
customer submits an online claim, details are uploaded to the customer's
Centrelink record. The online claim information can be viewed on the
customer record.

Upload document

[A self service option is available for customers] Customers can upload
required documents online.

Some uploaded documents are not to be used for processing purposes.

Assisted Customer Claims

Service Officers can run Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) with the customer
to collect and record the claim information. ACC is similar to the
online claim workflow and contains the same questions to ask the
customer.

Start ACC with the customer. Encourage them to complete the rest at home
in their own time. [A self service option is available for customers] By
submitting the claim online, they can monitor the progress of their
claim through their Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app.

If the customer requests the Service Officer continue ACC, complete ACC
and tell the customer of any documents they need to provide or action
they need to take to submit their claim. The customer will need to:

-   answer all mandatory questions
-   provide all required documents
-   verify their identity if there is no Identify Confirmation (ICI)
    recorded

Exceptions may apply for vulnerable customers.

To submit their claim, the customer will need to:

-   access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account or
    Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to upload their documents and
    submit the claim, or
-   accept the verbal declaration read by a Service Officer

By ticking the Declaration box on the Review your claim page, the
Service Officer confirms that they have read the declaration script and
the customer accepts it.

Once a verbal declaration is completed and the ACC submitted, a DOC
confirming that the customer accepts the verbal declaration displays in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   the Customer Claim Summary

If a customer is unable or declines to make a verbal declaration, the
Service Officer must:

-   invite the customer to log on to their online services, accept the
    declaration and submit their claim, or
-   provide the customer with a Customer Declaration Form (CDF). The
    claim must not be submitted without the CDF being completed and
    signed

If a customer emails or calls for help with their online claim, the
Service Officer can use the Customer Online View to see what the
customer sees when they use their Centrelink online account. See Viewing
and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for additional
ACC processing information.

Completing paper claim - SS050 or SS487

If the customer is unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim,
they will need to:

-   complete a customised Claim for Health Care card (SS487) issued via
    the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow, or
-   complete a Claim for a Health Care Card (SS050)

[A self service option is available for customers] Nominees may lodge an
online claim on behalf of their principle if the nominee is registered
online and the nominee arrangement is on record.

However if the claimant is unable or unsuitable to complete an online
claim they should contact in person or by phone and complete the FCSO.
FCSO will issue a customised SS487. This includes customers who are:

-   Claiming the Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy. The 8 week LIC
    assessment period ends on the date the LIC new claim is lodged
-   Not eligible for a Health Care Card (HCC) under the Family
    Assistance Income Test. They can test their eligibility for a LIC by
    lodging an SS050

The customer, partner or correspondence nominee can lodge the claim if a
signed statement from the customer has been provided detailing the
person to whom they give permission to lodge the claim.

A LIC can be claimed by both members of a couple by completing a single
customised SS487 or SS050. Partnered customers claiming LIC online must
each lodge a separate claim.

Documents required for claims

All customers lodging a SS487, SS050 or online LIC claim must each
provide:

-   Proof of Australian residence if not previously recorded. If a newly
    arrived resident or customer born overseas is unable to provide
    proof of arrival documents, the Residence verification script should
    be used to establish residence
-   Identity Confirmation. A list of acceptable documents is provided on
    the Confirming your identity to Centrelink (SS231)
-   Proof of income for the 8 weeks LIC assessment period, this includes
    details of investments, bank accounts and any lump sum payments
    received

If either customer or partner has:

-   earnings already provided due to receiving an income support payment
    and the details are recorded on the customer's or partner's record
    cover the 8 week LIC assessment period, no further verification is
    required
-   real estate or business income (including self-employment) that has
    been assessed in the previous 12 months for income support payments
    no further verification is required
-   trust or company income, no further verification is required if
    previously assessed for income support payments
-   other income, check that the information on their records is correct
    and ensure current verification procedures are followed

For more information, see Documents required for Centrelink new claims.

Automatic completion of online claims

Some online claims do not require Service Officer intervention and
automatically complete once submitted by the customer. Automatic
completion occurs when the claim is to be:

-   GRANTED and there are no significant changes to the customer or
    partners income and assets. Significant changes include an increase
    of $10,000 or more in existing savings and any changes to other
    financial investments or new financial investments
-   REJECTED due to the customer having employment income over the
    threshold or the combined customer and partner employment income is
    over the threshold

Note: where claims cannot be auto completed, the status of the activity
will change to In Process and the LIC/NCL activity will be allocated to
a Service Officer for processing.

Backdating LIC claims for medical service or treatment

Claims may only be backdated for a medical service or treatment if the
customer remained eligible for the entire period between the date of
medical service or treatment and the date of claim. For LIC, this means:

-   verifying that the income in the 8 weeks ending on the date of
    medical service or treatment was below the allowable income limit
    applicable to the customer, and
-   the claimant must verify that relevant income remained below the LIC
    threshold for the entire past period ending on the date the claim
    was lodged

Service Officers may backdate LIC claims to the date of a medical
service or treatment rendered to the claimant or an eligible dependant
up to 40 weeks before the Date of Receipt (DOR) of claim. If the claim
is to be backdated more than 40 weeks, record all relevant information
on a DOC and refer to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk to consider and
record a manual override.

See Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims for more
information about backdating a LIC claim.

Advice to customer when backdating LIC claim

The claim start date can only be backdated if the customer has lodged a
paper or online claim.

If the start date is backdated, customers may be able to claim
reimbursement for past period expenses, for example Pharmaceutical
Benefit Scheme (PBS) medication purchases. Advise the customer to obtain
a receipt for the prescription/medical treatment. They can take the
receipt/s and their concession card to Medicare to request a refund of
medical expenses.

The Resources page has a link to Getting a refund when you don't have
your cards on the Services Australia Website.

Backdating the LIC start date

The claim date of receipt (DOR) may need to be adjusted when:

-   indexing the LIC new claim and the DOR is more than 3 months in the
    past, to prevent the system error E244ZZ - Cannot backdate DOR of a
    LIC NCL for more than 10 months in the past
-   processing an existing LIC NCL activity that was registered with a
    DOR more than 5 months in the past, to prevent the system error
    E051LI LIC NCL cannot be completed for this date of commencement

See Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims for information
about adjusting the claim DOR to backdate a LIC claim.

The default start date will be derived by the system from the DOR. This
date will automatically populate the Start Date: field.

The date may need to be corrected if claim processing was delayed, if
medical treatment was required, and/or implementation of a review
officer decision. Update the date on the LIC Start Date (LSD) screen if
the correct start date is up to 40 weeks prior to the DOR.

Recording a start date more than 40 weeks before the DOR will need to be
referred to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Concessions for
implementation of a manual override. The start date cannot be a future
date.

Current YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY customers are issued a Health Care Card
(HCC) automatically, and will not be eligible for a LIC.

Customer with urgent medical needs or in financial hardship

Consider processing the LIC claim urgently if a customer asks for a LIC
immediately and:

-   they will be placed in financial hardship because of a delay in
    processing their LIC claim, or
-   they have an urgent medical need such as a doctor's appointment or a
    prescription

When the LIC is granted, the customer can attend their local Service
Centre to obtain an interim voucher.

The Resources page contains information on the Privacy notice for
customers, an example of backdating provisions and links to relevant
forms, the Centrelink rate charts page, Intranet sites and the Services
Australia website.

Related links

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Dependents listed on a customer’s concession card

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) renewals

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC)

Payment rates and thresholds

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Assessing salary sacrificing/salary packaging arrangements for
employment income

Health Care Card (HCC)

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Extra concession information

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Rejecting a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claim

Searching for a customer on the system

Portability of concession cards

Recording and correcting employment income details

Fraud

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
