
Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for customers making a claim for a
Health Care Card (HCC) for a foster child in their care. This card is
not subject to an income test for the foster carer.

On this Page:

Foster carers should test their eligibility for FTB

Foster carers should also be invited to apply for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) for the foster child, and, if eligible, they will be issued a
Foster Child HCC automatically.

The Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) is issued to the foster carer
but only the foster child is named on and covered by the card. The card
is issued automatically for periods of six months.

It enables foster carers to purchase Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS)
medications at reduced costs for foster children and may entitle them to
concessions offered by State or Territory organisations for the foster
children.

Eligibility for FST

To qualify for a FST for a foster child, the foster child must:

-   be in foster care
-   be living in Australia with an Australian resident or a special
    category visa holder, and
-   meet the Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child age related requirements or
    the Regular Care Child requirements

Customers do not need to be formal foster carers (for example caring for
a ward of the state). They can be any person caring for a child who is
not their natural or adopted child and may include a child placed in the
permanent care of the carer by a Court Order.

Customers in receipt of a Double Orphan Pension (DOP) are also eligible
to apply for a HCC for the child.

Claim process for FST

To claim the FST, foster carers can:

-   complete an FST claim online, or
-   complete a customised Claim for Foster Child Health Care Card
    (SS489) issued when First Service Contact Offer (FCSO) has been run,
    or
-   complete a Claim for a Health Care Card (SS050)

Customers receiving FTB for a foster child can be automatically assessed
for an FST.

Eligible for LIC rather than FST

The child should be encouraged to test their entitlement for a LIC in
their own right rather than the FST where:

The child does not meet the FTB child age related requirements for a
FST. For example:

-   The adult does not have legal responsibility for the day-to-day
    care, development and welfare of the child and there is not a family
    law order or parenting plan in place and the child is not in the
    care of anyone else who has legal responsibility for them.
-   The child's personal income is over the FTB child income limit.

The child is in the care of an Approved Care Organisation (ACO) and the
child is not considered dependent on an individual. That is, FTB is not
being received by an individual in respect of the child.

Backdating claim for FST

FST claims may be backdated to the date eligibility commenced (no
earlier than 1 July 2001) to cover expenses already incurred for the
foster child.

If a claim's start date is to be backdated, customers may be able to
claim reimbursement for past period expenses for the foster child (for
example PBS medication purchases).

The customer should be advised to obtain a PBS receipt for the
prescription/medical treatment. The customer can then take the receipt/s
and concession card to Medicare, to request a refund of medical
expenses. The Resources page contains further information on saving you
money on medicine, and how to request a refund.

Foster carer already has HCC

If the foster carer is also a customer and receives instalments of FTB
Part A at the maximum rate for the foster child (or would except for a
reduction due to maintenance action or maintenance income), then they
will be issued a FTB HCC automatically that will also cover the foster
child.

If the FTB HCC, including the coverage for a foster child, is cancelled
(for example when FTB is CAN-INC), the customer should be advised to
claim online, lodge a customised claim (SS489), or lodge a paper claim
(SS050) for a Foster Child HCC to ensure continuity of coverage for the
foster child.

Customers who already have a concession card of their own and take on
the care of a foster child have several card preference options
available. They can choose to have the:

-   Foster child included on their card as a dependant (or not).
-   Foster child issued (or not) with a FST with only the foster child's
    name on it. Note: the child can be listed on both the carer's and
    the child's cards.
-   Address display suppressed on any card issued to the foster child.

These options are available as preferences for concession cards.

Child signature on concession card

Social Security law does not require that a concession card be signed. A
signature is only one method of determining that the person using the
concession card is the person entitled to use it.

-   If the child is old enough to write their name on the card and is
    able to identically reproduce this signature upon request, then it
    may be appropriate for the child to sign the card.
-   If the child is not able to sign the card, then any person with
    legal guardianship is able to sign the card on the child's behalf.
    The guardian should indicate in the signature block that they are
    signing on another person's behalf.

Centrelink only provides the concession cards, not the concessions. It
is ultimately the concession provider who determines whether to accept a
concession card that is not signed by the person named on it.

Express Plus application digital wallet

Customers with an Express Plus application can view and display a
digital copy of their FST in their digital wallet. The digital card does
not replace the physical card and how the digital card is used is at the
discretion of the concession provider.

The Resources page contains a table of concessions available for Foster
Child Health Care Card (FST) cardholders. Links to the Claim for a
Health Care Card (SS050), Confirming your identity (SS231) and the Level
2 Policy Help Desks. It also contains links to the Human Services
Website for a link to Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income limits
information and a link to the Grandparent advisers, support for
non-parent carers and Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS).

Related links

Online claim for Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)

Health Care Card (HCC)

Preferences for concession cards

Age qualifications for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) or a Foster
Child Health Care Card (FST)

Residence requirements

Identity Confirmation

Foster care

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit for individuals

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Portability of concession cards

View or update Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) online claim

Extra concession information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
