
Energy Supplement 101-03090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Energy Supplement which replaced the Clean Energy
Supplement. This non-taxable supplement provides ongoing assistance to
customers receiving an income support payment (ISP). The supplement
frequency and rate all depend on the type of payment the customer is
receiving and their circumstances.

Energy Supplement ceased for some Commonwealth Senior Health Card (CSHC)
and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers from 20 March 2017.
Grandfathering arrangements may apply. There are no changes for ISP
customers.

Energy Supplement eligibility

Customers must be:

-   residing in Australia
-   temporarily absent from Australia (the supplement can be paid for
    the first 6 weeks of a temporary absence)
-   receiving a qualifying Energy Supplement payment

Customers can receive Energy Supplement as part of their ISP.

Energy Supplement payment options

Customers receiving ISP fortnightly will receive the Energy Supplement
fortnightly by default but can choose to be paid quarterly.

The payment frequency of Energy Supplement aligns with the payment
frequency of Pension Supplement Minimum Amount. This means, customers
who receive Pension Supplement quarterly, ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate
customers and Grandfathered CSHC holders will automatically receive the
Energy Supplement quarterly. If the pension supplement minimum amount is
paid fortnightly, Energy Supplement will be paid fortnightly. The
quarterly Energy Supplement is generally made with the customer's income
support payment on the first payday after the quarterly test dates of 20
June, 20 September, 20 December and 20 March.

FTB Grandfathered customers can update their FTB payment choice to
choose how they will receive the Energy Supplement as part of their FTB
entitlement.

Customers may receive Energy Supplement in respect of both their ISP and
FTB payments.

FHA customers can only receive Energy Supplement fortnightly.

These payments are tax-free and are exempt income under social security
and family assistance law.

Energy Supplement payment rate

Energy Supplement rates depend on the type of qualifying payment the
customer receives and their circumstances. The rate is automatically
determined by the system.

For customers on a manual rate, the Energy Supplement component needs to
be manually identified and coded.

Means testing

The Energy Supplement is added to a customer's Maximum Basic Rate before
the income test is applied.

The Energy Supplement is reduced by application of the income or assets
test:

-   after adding any Rent Assistance (RA) entitlement
-   before adding minimum Pension Supplement entitlement

Pension customers (excluding Parenting Payment Single (PPS) under Age
Pension age) entitled to the minimum Pension Supplement amount after
means testing will receive the maximum rate of Energy Supplement.

Energy Supplement for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers

Recipients of FHA who are over 22 are automatically entitled to the
Energy Supplement, paid at the same rate as if they were eligible for
JobSeeker Payment. The rate of this supplement is not affected by an
individual reaching pension age.

Energy Supplement for CSHC customers

For information about eligibility and payment rates for CSHC customers.
See Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders.

Energy Supplement for FTB customers

For information about eligibility and payment rates for FTB customers.
See Energy Supplement for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) recipients.

The Resources page contains examples of Energy Supplement calculations
and links to information about Energy Supplement for customers and
staff.

Contents

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card customers

Energy Supplement for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) recipients

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Pension Supplement

Rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
