
How to reissue concession cards 101-06010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to issue a Health Care Card (HCC), Low Income
Health Care Card (LIC), Pensioner Concession Card (PCC), Ex-Carer
Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC), Foster Child Health Care Card
(FST) or Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC). A request can also be
received online or by phone self service.

How to request a replacement concession card

Customers may contact Services Australia if they need a replacement
concession card.

Customers can request replacement concession cards via:

-   [] Request a document option online, or
-   [] phone self service

If the customer is requesting a replacement card online, they will need
to provide a reason for reissue.

A replacement card cannot be issued within 14 days of the card's expiry
date. If a replacement card is needed urgently, then customers must
attend an office in person to obtain an interim concession card.

Reasons for replacing a concession card

A replacement concession card may be needed because the original card
was lost, damaged, not received or have transferred from one payment to
another. Partnered customers are able to request to have their
concession card reissued without their partner's name listed. This may
be for privacy concerns the customer may have.

A check of the current concession entitlement, including the period for
which the card is issued, can be made on the Concession Entitlement
Summary (MCCS) screen for the customers current entitlement details or
check Concession Dependant Summary (MCDS) screen for a dependent child's
current entitlement details.

The Concession Card Details page or the Card Issue Summary (CCIS) screen
displays details of current and historical cards issued, not current
entitlement.

Address for concession card

Replacement concession cards will be sent to the customer's postal
address. They may take up to 14 days to arrive. Where the customer has
more than 1 address type recorded on the agency’s computer system, the
customer may nominate preferences. For example, which address is
displayed on the card and which address is used as a mailing address. If
the customer is requesting a replacement card online they will need to
provide a reason for reissue.

Concession cards are automatically replaced when a customer advises the
agency of a change of address.

Actioning a customer request

When a customer contacts the agency to request a replacement card, the
Service Officer must check that the customer is still entitled to
receive a concession card and that their details remain correct.

-   The person is in receipt of a qualifying payment for an
    automatically issued HCC or PCC
-   The person is entitled to an extended entitlement to a concession
    card
-   Their address details are correct
-   The person’s income details remain under the applicable income limit
    for continued entitlement to LIC or the CSHC
-   The reason why a replacement card is needed, for example whether
    card is lost or destroyed
-   Existing card preferences should be checked and confirmed as
    accurate

Concession card preferences

Details of any current or historical card preferences can be viewed on
the Concession Card Preference Summary (CCPS) screen. Existing card
preferences should be checked and confirmed as accurate before a
replacement concession card is issued.

Preferences allow:

-   partnered customers to request to have their concession card issued
    without their partner's name listed (not applicable for CSHC, EHC,
    FST)
-   customers to nominate a preference for the postal and/or display
    addresses for the card

For further information, see Preferences for concession cards.

Transferring from 1 payment to another

Customers are not automatically issued a new concession card when
transferring from 1 payment to another. When a customer transfers from 1
payment to another and retains entitlement to the same type of
concession card, a new card is not automatically issued to the customer.
The customer can request a replacement card at any time.

Any card issued after the transfer activity is processed will show the
primary payment at time of issue. This includes annually reissued cards
which are sent 1 month prior to the expiry date of the current card.

Home Equity Access Scheme

Customers paid under the Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) are not
entitled to a PCC if they do not receive any part of their entitlement
under the normal income /asset test.

To determine if a customer is fully paid under the Scheme see Home
Equity Access Scheme.

Customers who receive their entire payment under the Scheme may be
eligible for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

New concession card after death of partner or dependent child

When a cardholder's partner or dependent child dies, a new card without
the deceased's name is not automatically issued on notification of the
death. The customer may request a new concession card that does not
display the name of the deceased person at any time; otherwise a new
card without these details will be sent the month prior to the expiry
date of the current card.

Customers leaving Australia

The Department of Home Affairs advises the agency when a customer leaves
Australia. Where the customer has an active link with The Department of
Home Affairs the customer's return date will be automatically updated
when the customer returns to Australia.

However, customers are still required to advise absences before
departure to avoid being overpaid and to find out how their payments or
concessions will be affected. For more information, see Portability of
concession cards.

Customers returning to Australia

Customers who were residing overseas and subsequently returns
permanently to Australia, may be eligible for a concession card to be
issued when they return.

For all pension customers see Return to Australia procedures for service
centre and Smart Centre staff for pension payments.

For non-pension customers and card holders see Return to Australia
procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff for non-pension
payments and cards.

The Resources page contains links to the Level 2 Policy help desk and
Concession Cards Intranet pages and a link to the Services Australia
website where customers can request a replacement concession card
online.

Related links

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for non-pension payments and cards

Dependent child changes

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Preferences for concession cards

Concession Entitlement System

Documents and Statements options online

Using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
