
Concession cards and information 101-06000000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures that provide information about
concession cards and services delivered by Services Australia.

Government Intent

Concession cards and services delivered by Services Australia can help
customer's access cheaper health care services and medicines.

Concession Card assistance

Concession cards assist people receiving income support, low income
earners and their dependants to access concessional rate pharmaceuticals
and other medical services funded by the Australian Government. These
cards may also give customers access to other concessions provided and
funded by State and Local Governments. Select links below for extra
information about initial and ongoing eligibility criteria for
concession cards, when cards are issued and circumstances where access
to concessional entitlement are limited or cease.

For a table containing additional information about the eligibility of
cardholders, partners, dependents and the issue and reissue cycle, see
the Resources page.

Health Care Card (HCC)

A HCC can be used to obtain concessional medicines through the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). It also provides access to a
limited range of State and Local Government health, household,
educational, recreational and transport concessions.

The following customers are automatically issued with a HCC:

-   Customers receiving an eligible income support payment
-   Carers receiving Carer Allowance (child) receive a HCC in the
    child's name only
-   Customers receiving Mobility Allowance (MOB). Note: customers whose
    Mobility Allowance is cancelled due to the customer becoming a
    funded participant of the National Disability Insurance Scheme
    (NDIS) retain entitlement to their Mobility Allowance HCC
-   Customers receiving the maximum rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
    Part A as fortnightly instalments (or who would except for the
    Maintenance Income Test)
-   Customers who would receive maximum FTB Part A except that they only
    have care of a Regular Care Child
-   Customers who receive FTB for a foster child - card displays name of
    foster child only
-   Carer Payment (CP) customers who receive CP for short-term or
    episodic conditions
-   Customers in receipt of certain income support payments for 52 weeks
    whose payments have been cancelled due to income will also qualify
    for an automatically issued HCC for up to 26 weeks. The procedure
    Extended Entitlement to Concession Cards contains further
    information
-   Single principal carers on JobSeeker payments whose payment ceases
    because of a return to work will retain their Pensioner Concession
    Card (PCC) for 12 weeks and then be eligible for a HCC for a further
    14 weeks
-   Community Development Employment Projects (CDEP) wages participants
    receiving a CDEP Participant Supplement (CPS), where they qualify
    for a social security payment that attracts a HCC. Note: JobSeeker
    Payment, Parenting Payment Partnered and Youth Allowance are payable
    only at a nil rate to CDEP wages participants, as CDEP wages are an
    alternative to an income support payment

A Carer Allowance (CA) child may also qualify for a HCC if the carer
does not qualify for a Carer Allowance payment. The carer must complete
a Claim for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance - Caring for a child -
under 16 years (SA337) and have the treating doctor complete a Treating
Doctor's Report (SA333tdr). For further information, see Coding a claim
for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is under 16.

Ex-Carer Allowance Health Care Card (EHC)

When a CA child turns 16, they automatically lose qualification for a
HCC. They may be eligible to claim an Ex-CA (child) Health Care Card
(EHC).

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

A LIC is a HCC for which a claim is required.

A LIC can be used to obtain concessional medicines through the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). It also provides access to a
limited range of State and Local Government health, household,
educational, recreational and transport concessions. Customers will need
to follow up what concessions are available with the concession
provider.

This card can be claimed by:

-   Customers not receiving social security payments who are low income
    earners
-   Full-time students or Australian apprentices receiving ABSTUDY,
    Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Customers who receive less than the maximum Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
    Part A
-   Customers who are not claiming FTB by instalments
-   Customers who are not an FTB child aged over 16 years
-   Young dependent people who are not entitled to payments as their
    parental means test is too high
-   Children who do not meet the definition of an FTB child and are not
    considered to be a dependent of an adult. The child may be in formal
    or informal foster care, a ward of the state, in State/Territory
    government care or in approved care

Service Officers may backdate a LIC start date to a date of medical
service or treatment rendered to the customer or an eligible participant
up to 40 weeks before the claims was lodged provided the customer was
qualified for the entire period. See Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
for more information.

If backdating to an earlier date is required, seek help from the Level 2
Policy helpdesk.

Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)

Foster carers can claim a Foster Child Health Care Card.

Customers do not need to be formal foster carers (for example caring for
ward of the state). They can be any person caring for a child who is not
their natural or adopted child, such as a grandparent. The FST HCC is
issued to the foster carer but only the foster child is named and
covered by the card.

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

A PCC is automatically issued upon qualification, then every 2 years to:

-   Customers who receive a social security pension
-   From 1 January 2008, Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customers,
    who were granted on or after 1 July 2006 and who have a partial
    capacity to work as assessed by an Employment Services Assessment
    (ESAt)
-   Jobseeker Payment (JSP) customers who have a partial capacity to
    work as assess by an ESAt
-   A single JSP customer who is the principal carer of a dependent
    child
-   Customers aged over 60 who are receiving JSP or Special Benefit
    (SpB), and the person has been receiving one or more of these
    payments for a continuous period of not less than 39 weeks ending
    immediately before the qualification day

Note: customers aged over 60, who have been in continuous receipt of one
of these payments or a social security pension for at least 39 weeks
immediately before a benefit transfer to another of these payments, will
retain their entitlement to the PCC.

Customers who qualify for a PCC are entitled to additional concessions
from Federal, State and Local Government authorities and some private
organisations. As some of these concessions are provided and funded by
State and Local Governments they can vary from state to state. For more
information, see Extra concession information.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Customers need to make a claim to receive a CSHC.

They need to have reached Age Pension age to qualify.

A CSHC can be used to obtain concessional medicines through the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). For example, some people can get
help with their hearing aids.

This card may entitle cardholders to State or Local Government
concessions but these may vary from State to State and cardholders need
to check with the relevant State or Local government authority. See
Extra concession information.

Person named on card is unable to sign

There may be situations where the person named on the card is unable to
sign it. For example, the customer may be unable to sign because of a
disability, or they may be a child who has not yet developed a
signature, etc.

Social Security law does not require that a concession card be signed. A
signature is only one method of determining that the person using a
concession card is the person entitled to use it. This can be
established by identification methods other than a signature.

A person is not required to have any particular mental capacity to sign
a concession card. The appropriate person to sign may vary depending on
the circumstances:

-   If a child is old enough to write their name on the card and is able
    to identically reproduce this signature upon request, then it may be
    appropriate for the child to sign the card
-   If a person is not able to sign the card, then any person with legal
    guardianship is able to sign the card on the child's behalf. This
    includes nominees. The guardian/nominee should indicate in the
    signature block that they are signing on another person's behalf
-   Many adults are unable to read or write and it is a long established
    principle that an 'X' placed on a document by such a person
    constitutes their signature for legal purposes

It should be noted that the agency only provides the concession cards
through Centrelink, not the concessions. It is ultimately the concession
provider who determines whether to accept a concession card which has
not been signed by the person named on it.

How the death of a customer affects their concession entitlement

Income support customers

Concession entitlement for the customer ceases on the day before date of
death, as the day the customer passes away is considered part of the
bereavement period.

Executors/family members who contact Services Australia regarding
organisations (that is hospitals or pharmacies) charging full price for
services received on the date of death, should be advised that they will
need to discuss this with the service concerned.

Concession card only customers

Customers issued with the following concession cards from Services
Australia, will also have their concession entitlement cease on the day
before date of death:

-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

When a CSHC customer advises of the death of their partner, a review
should be initiated to ensure the customer is still qualified for CSHC
or if the customer may have entitlement to an income support payment.
There is no system produced review for this and Service Officers need to
manually follow up the details with the customer either by phone or via
mail. Customers should be given 21 days to respond.

Care receiver

When a Carer Payment care receiver dies and the carer is entitled to
continuation of Carer Payment (CP) during the bereavement period,
entitlement to PCC also continues.

If a customer was receiving CP to care for a child with a short-term or
episodic condition and the child dies, the customer retains entitlement
to their HCC and CP during the bereavement period, regardless of the
medical report end date.

Effect on entitlement if customer is imprisoned

Customers whose income support payment is cancelled following their
incarceration also lose their entitlement to their automatically issued
HCC or PCC. These customers are not able to claim LIC, EHC or a CSHC
while in prison.

Issuing new concession card

A new concession card is automatically issued to customers:

-   when a change of name or address has been recorded
-   when a new person qualifies as a dependant of the cardholder
-   when there has been a change of concession type (that is HCC to PCC)
-   when the customer has applied for a new concession type by lodging a
    claim

Note: if the card applied for is lower in the card hierarchy than any
existing concession card, the new card will not be issued automatically
by the system.

A new concession card will not be issued when a person ceases to be an
eligible dependant of the card holder. If requested by the cardholder, a
replacement card without the dependant listed may be issued manually.

For information about how to reissue a concession card see How to
reissue concession cards.

Transfer from one payment to another

Customers are not automatically issued a new concession card when
transferring from one payment to another and retain entitlement to the
same type of concession card. For example, when a customer transfers
from Disability Support Pension (DSP) to Age Pension. As the customer
was entitled to a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) whilst on DSP, a new
card will not be issued to the customer unless the customer requests a
new card.

Any new card issued after the transfer activity is processed will
display an abbreviated code to reflect the primary payment current at
the time of issue. This includes the reissued card which is sent one
month before the expiry date of the current card.

An exception to this is if a customer is transferring from the standard
pension to Blind Pension. A new card will be issued due to the physical
appearance of the card being slightly different.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers can see a digital copy of their concession card in the digital
wallet in the app.

There may be circumstances when customers should continue to use their
physical card, but a digital concession card allows them to present
their concession card using a smart device.

Concession cards returned to Services Australia

Concession card/s can be returned to Services Australia for a variety of
reasons. See Concession cards returned to Services Australia.

The Resources page contains links to forms, publications and user guides
relating to Centrelink rate charts and information about concessions
cards.

Contents

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) concessions

Health Care Card (HCC)

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

Concession Entitlement System

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Extra concession information

Medicare card number collection for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Medicare Safety Net and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) validation with
Medicare

NSW Half Fare Transport Concession Scheme

Non-income tested (NOI) concession cards

Dependents listed on a customer's concession card

Related links

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Publications

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

How to Reissue concession cards

Extended entitlement to Concession Cards

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Apply for payment or concession card options online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
