
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about adding and removing
characteristics for a business approved for Centrelink Confirmation
eServices (CCeS). The information is only for staff in the Third Party
Programmes team and National Business Gateway.

Characteristic overview

The characteristic profile recorded for a CCeS business determines what
information is to be supplied to the business through the CCeS service.
This information is generally pre-defined based on the business category
(also referred to as market sector) recorded for the business, however
limited changes can be made if required.

Only the minimum amount of customer information required by the business
to confirm a customer’s eligibility for a concession, rebate or service,
is provided to a business.

When adding or removing characteristics on a business record,
characteristics may need to be updated on both the CCeS agreement and on
the work unit (if one exists).

Standard characteristic set

Characteristic sets are usually standard sets of customer information
that a business typically needs to confirm a customer’s eligibility for
a concession, rebate or service.

Businesses can access a list of the standard characteristic sets and
what customer information it will provide to them in the CCeS procedural
guide for businesses, available on the Services Australia website. See
Resources for a link to the website page.

Non-standard characteristic set

A business may be allocated a non-standard characteristic set if the
standard profile does not include all the customer information it
requires to confirm a customer’s eligibility for a concession, rebate or
service.

Requests from a business to add or remove characteristics

A business can make a request to update (add or remove) its
characteristics depending on the information it requires to confirm a
customer’s entitlement to a concession, rebate or service. The request
must be submitted in writing to the Third Party Programmes team,
advising what customer information is needed and the reasons why.

The Third Party Programmes team will assess the request to establish if
there is a legitimate need for the additional customer information. If
there is any doubt about the request, the business must be asked to
provide evidence about why it needs additional characteristics and
customer information. Only the minimum amount of customer information
required for confirmation of eligibility for a concession, rebate or
service, is to be provided to a business.

Refer to the Process page for information on how to update CCeS
characteristics on a business record.

Requests to add new characteristics in the CCeS service

If a business requests additional customer information that is not
currently available through CCeS, it can lodge a request to the agency
for a new CCeS characteristic to be built in to the service. The
business would need to undertake an external costing process with the
agency and it will be responsible for paying a fee to cover the agency’s
costs in making that information available through CCeS.

The agency’s ability and timeframe to deliver any requested changes in
CCeS, will depend on other legislative and ICT priorities, and may be
subject to change at any time.

Requests for new characteristics should be referred to the CCeS team.

Security resource needed to update characteristics

Staff updating CCeS characteristics must have the security resource in
the ICT Security Portal of:

-   CCSUPD-Customer Confirmation Update (ISP Category: Mainframe
    Applications - INCOME SECURITY)

The Resources page contains links to business pages on the Services
Australia website, contact details, intranet links and a CCeS business
application form.

Related links

Registration for Income Management deductions, Electronic Verification
of Rent (EVoR) or Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS)

Updating or adding business details for Deduction and Confirmation
programmes

Withdrawing a business' approval to use a deduction and confirmation
service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
