
Check independence through work history online 101-08220010

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can check if they are independent
because of their work history. This will mean their Youth Allowance (YA)
and ABSTUDY is paid at the independent rate.

Access the service

Customers registered online under 22 years of age can [] use their
Centrelink online account to access this service.

Evidence calculator

Customers can verify their earnings and hours using the evidence
calculator. It does this by:

-   averaging under the full time (30 hour) criterion
-   calculating the hours worked for the part time (15 hour) rule, or
-   calculating the amount earned for the 75% of National Training Wage
    earnings rule
-   confirming participation in the workforce for at least 3 of the last
    4 years (for ABSTUDY only)

The service will ask a series of questions, including their work
details. The Results page will tell the customer of the potential
outcome and provide them with a receipt number.

Where the customer provided details online a COC interaction is created
on the customers record along with a DOC indicating the interaction ID.

Service Officers assessing a customer's independence criteria must
ensure the COC interaction is checked once the customer provides their
supporting evidence, Service Officers are to calculate the verified
earnings or hours.

Customers can have the COVID-19 concession period applied if COVID-19
impacted their employment. Customers do not need to provide evidence for
the period.

Verifying independence eligibility

To complete the independence assessment, a Service Officer will need to
verify the customer's evidence of employment.

Customers have 14 days to supply their payslips to Services Australia.

The customer can:

-   post the evidence
-   [] upload it online, or
-   take it to their local service centre

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website and
the myGov website. It also includes a link to online accounts (including
hours of operation for suitable customers).

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using Centrelink self service

Manage study details option online

Assessing independence when a customer is self-supporting through
full-time paid employment

Assessing independence for full time or concessional study load students
from regional and remote areas under the self-supporting through
employment criterion

Assessing independence when a student has undertaken approved
agricultural work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
