
Forms 101-08070030

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Resources

This document outlines information about the different types of forms
available to customers.

Purpose of forms

When a customer contacts Services Australia to apply for a payment,
product or service, they may be required to complete specific forms.
Forms may be used to claim, to advise changes in circumstances, to test
continuing eligibility, and to review circumstances during ongoing
contact with Services Australia.

Many payments can now be claimed online and customers can also advise
certain changes in circumstances using self service options. In some
cases, customers must claim online or use the relevant self service
option.

Customers can access many forms via the Services Australia website. See
the Resources page for link. Forms can also be mailed out to customers
or can be obtained in person at a service centre.

Services Australia website

There are a number of ways customers can access forms at
servicesaustralia.gov.au, including:

-   Forms link under Customer Information at bottom of home page
-   Select the 'life event' that matches their circumstances, and then
    the relevant payment type and how to claim (customers may instead be
    directed to the online claim option)
-   Search box at the top of each page

Forms are regularly updated, so customers are encouraged to download
forms only when they intend to complete them, ensuring they always have
the most up-to-date version.

A variety of forms and fact sheets have been translated into a number of
languages, and these can be viewed on the Information in your language
page by clicking on the scrolling language button at the top of the page
and to the left of the search box.

International claim forms can also be accessed on the website. These can
be used to claim a Centrelink payment while living in an agreement
country.

Online forms for staff

There is an online forms database available for staff to look up the
specific forms for each payment area.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Forms page.

Related links

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card Options online

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

Services Australia website

Publications

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
