
Rejecting a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claim 101-06040060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when a claim for a Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC) is to be rejected.

On this Page:

Qualification criteria for a LIC

When a customer lodges a claim for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
and they do not meet the qualification criteria for LIC the claim will
be rejected. A letter is issued explaining why the claim was rejected.
The letter should also tell the customer of their review and appeal
rights.

Unfavourable decision

When an unfavourable decision is to be made, such as a rejection, the
Decision Maker (DM) must provide the customer with an explanation of the
decision and an opportunity to provide more details or evidence relevant
to the decision. The DM must also tell the customer of their review and
appeal rights. This includes unfavourable decisions made by Service
Officers in Smart Centres.

If the DM is not speaking to the customer at the time of making a
decision, they need to make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer
before finalising an unfavourable decision.

Rejecting a LIC claim

If the LIC claim is to be rejected, all relevant details from the claim
should be recorded on the customer's record. In most cases, the system
will automatically reject the claim (for example, not residentially
qualified, income is over the threshold). For some rejection reasons the
rejection will need to be recorded manually via the system (for example,
failed to supply documents (FSD)).

Online claims to be rejected ‘FSD’, may be streamline rejected without
the need to code all details from the claim. Check contact details to
make sure the notice of rejection is issued to the correct address.

If the rejection reason is 'FSD', the decision DOC must list all
documents not provided at the time of the rejection.

A customer whose claim is rejected for a residence related reason may
have the claim rejected based on information the customer has provided.
However, in some cases visa, citizenship and movement information
provided directly from the Department of Home Affairs datalink may cause
the claim to be rejected. If the datalink with Department of Home
Affairs has provided the information, this takes precedence over any
conflicting information provided by the customer.

Related links

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Cancellation, and rejection codes for Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST HCC) or Ex-Carer
Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Reviews and appeals

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
