-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Medicare Safety Net and
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) validation with Medicare.

On this Page:

Medicare Safety Net

The Medicare Safety Net is designed to protect Australians from paying
major medical costs outside of the hospital system. It introduces a
lower cost threshold for customers entitled to concessions administered
by the Department of Social Services (DSS) and/or who are receiving
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A or who have a Regular Care Child in
their care.

All families and couples need to register for the Medicare Safety Net,
even if all family members are listed on one Medicare card. The
following important points should be noted:

-   each family member needs to be identified so their medical costs can
    be counted toward the family's Medicare Safety Net
-   the family only needs to be registered once
-   registering is free
-   individuals are automatically registered, but should ensure their
    contact details are updated with Medicare
-   individuals, families and couples are all eligible for the same
    threshold amounts, therefore if families or couples are registered,
    all their medical costs will be combined and these thresholds can be
    reached sooner

FTB Part A

Centrelink's role is to provide Medicare with confirmation of customers
who are paid an amount of FTB Part A or who have actual care of a
Regular Care Child. Identity information is initially sent to Medicare
to assist them in matching Centrelink/Medicare records. Where Medicare
Australia is unsuccessful in matching the customer, Medicare will notify
Centrelink and Centrelink will attempt to collect a Medicare card number
from that customer.

Entitlement to lower threshold

The FTB Part A and Regular Care Child information will allow Medicare to
determine those customers eligible for the lower threshold of the
Medicare Safety Net.

Entitlement to the Medicare Safety Net lower threshold provides coverage
for either the current calendar year or the following calendar year. The
difference between this coverage depends on whether the customer has
received FTB Part A as instalments, or as a past period payment or as a
lump sum for a previous financial year through Centrelink.

Responsibilities

The responsibility for the determination and administration of a
customer's Medicare Safety Net entitlement start and end dates rests
with Medicare. Customers with relevant concerns should be advised to
contact Medicare, see Resources for a link.

Rent Assistance (RA) only payments made under More Choices for Families
(MCFF) do not qualify as an FTB Part A payment for Medicare Safety Net
purposes.

An individual's Medicare number can also be used for establishing a link
with the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare and a
link to the Medicare Safety Net page on the Services Australia Website.

Related links

Medicare card number collection for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) claims

Bereavement and family assistance payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
