
Recording Medicare card numbers for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net 101-06100030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Centrelink staff about the
recording of Medicare numbers for the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net.

Medicare requests

Centrelink will attempt to collect a customer and/or their dependent
children's Medicare card number(s) upon request from Medicare. A
customer can have multiple Medicare cards and therefore multiple
numbers. Only one valid complete 10 digit number needs to be recorded.
Once the number has been recorded, it will be passed to Medicare
electronically during overnight processing.

Customers may also supply their Medicare card number even though a
request has not been made by Centrelink. The Medicare card number should
be recorded on the Centrelink computer system.

Customers are asked to provide their Medicare card number by phone.

Customer declines to provide Medicare card number

If a customer declines to provide their Medicare card number for PBS
purposes, or withholds their consent for the number to be sent to
Medicare, the customer's Centrelink entitlements will not be adversely
affected - no cancellations, suspensions, or other penalties. The
decision by the customer should be recorded on the customer's Centrelink
record.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) customers

DVA issues 2 types of cards for its customers - a Gold Card and a White
Card. DVA White Card holders receive a Medicare Card. DVA Gold Card
holders do not receive a Medicare Card.

If contacted by a White Card holder, advise them that they need only
provide details of their Medicare card number and return the details in
the reply-paid envelope they receive with the letter.

If contacted by a DVA Gold Card holder, explain that the letter was sent
to them in error, apologise on behalf of Centrelink for any
inconvenience this may have caused and assure the customer their DVA
entitlements will not be affected.

Note: an individual's Medicare number can also be used for establishing
a link with the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Related links

Medicare card number collection for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Requesting Medicare card numbers from customers for the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Establishing a link for an individual with the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
