[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the roles of Agents and Access Points in
delivering services in rural and remote locations.

On this Page:

Enhancing customer access

Services Australia funds an extensive network of 211 Access Points and
365 Agents in rural and remote Australia to enhance customer access to
services. Access Points and Agents are contracted annually using a
standard funding framework. Contracted organisations (the 'Host') employ
Specified Personnel to deliver the Agent or Access Point services.
Specified Personnel are not agency staff.

Services Australia Access Point

Access Points provide free self-help facilities where customers can
conduct their business with the agency.

This includes:

a self service terminal (internet enabled computer)

fax, photocopying and scanning facilities for customers to:

-   upload documents
-   provide information to the agency or
-   for other related uses, such as job applications

free Wi-Fi, available 24x7, to let customers

-   access online services using their own devices and
-   download Express Plus mobile apps

information products, brochures and agency messaging via a digital sign

access to a telephone dedicated to call the agency and other
organisations (for example, other government departments and local
employment providers)

Medicare reply paid envelopes for customers to forward receipts to
support claims

Specified Personnel at the Access Point can sight and confirm copies of
identity documents. This stops a customer from having to send original
documents in the mail for their claims. Specified Personnel must
complete a manual visual check of photo identification to link the
customer to their identity.

Note: a stamp is not enough to confirm a manual visual check was
completed. Specified Personnel must specifically state a photo ID check
was completed by noting this on the confirmed copy of any identification
documents provided to the agency.

Apart from Identity Confirmation, there is no additional face to face
assistance provided at Access Points by the Specified Personnel.

Services Australia Agent

Agent sites are established in communities that require a more
significant agency presence than provided by an Access Point. The Agent
site has the same facilities as an Access Point, but has additional
support from Specified Personnel, including

-   help with accessing the agency’s self service resources
-   help with printing and completing forms
-   responding to customer enquiries and providing assistance, guidance
    or referral as appropriate
-   help with Identity Confirmation as Specified Personnel can provide
    details verbally to the agency

Specified Personnel are not agency staff and cannot:

-   make payments or decisions about payments
-   contact the agency to get information about a customer's payments or
    entitlements without the customer's permission
-   review, assess or vary payments
-   conduct an interview on behalf of the agency
-   access Centrelink customer information or
-   issue Electronic Banking Transfers (EBT), Basics Card, Medicare
    Cards or Health Care Cards

Office Locator can be used to search for the location of agency Agents
and Access Point sites.

The Resources page contains links to information on the Services
Australia Website and to Office Locator.

Contents

Reconnect

Referral to external specialists/services

Silver Service phone line for Specified Personnel at Agent sites

Related links

Alternative Identity

Australian Government Mobile Service Centres

Identity Confirmation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
