
Services Australia website 101-08060000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the services available to customers and
stakeholders via the Services Australia website.

Website

The Services Australia public website (servicesaustralia.gov.au) is
designed to help all customers and stakeholders, from those who need
income support to business and health professionals. The responsive
design enables new technologies such as interactive services to be used,
while ensuring that individuals can find relevant information. The
website design also adapts to a range of devices including smart phones,
tablets and desktop computers.

The website’s information structure is built around a life event model
of life event subjects, services, and topics.

Service directory page

The site is built around a comprehensive directory of the benefits,
payments and services delivered by Centrelink, Medicare and Child
Support service delivery brands. Eligibility, claiming and maintenance
information is described for each entry in the directory. See How to
refer customers to the website for the full list of services.

Life event groups and life events

These are mapped under an overarching life event group, such as Raising
kids. Life events group payments, services and information based on life
situations, such as Having a baby.

Top payments

Lists the most visited service pages.

Most useful information

Lists the content rated by other users in page polls as most useful.

News

Lists the most recent news related to the life event. 

Important topics

Features on the Homepage. This section highlights critical, emergency or
urgent matters for customers. 

Business, health professional, community groups and corporate audiences

There are separate areas of the site for business and employers, health
professionals, community and corporate information. They can be accessed
from the footer at the bottom of each page.

Website URLs

Specific URLs for servicesaustralia.gov.au are used to refer to website
content in publications, via phone or face to face. See How to refer
customers to the website to view the list of addresses available for
life event groupings, life events and all services and payments.

Printing from the website

All website pages are optimised for printing so that readers can create
a paper-based copy.

All service pages can be printed using the print icon near the top right
of the page. For all other pages, print as usual using the local
browser. See Accessibility in the Resources page.

Services available

-    [] Payment and Service Finder can help customers find out what
    payments they may be eligible for, estimate payment rates, or see
    the effect of a change in circumstances on Centrelink payments. It
    can also identify services available from Services Australia and
    community providers to support individuals with their specific needs
-   Converting text to speech is available on most pages. The text is
    highlighted as it is read, to support people with low literacy
    levels. Customers can listen while on the page or download it as an
    MP3 file to use later
-   [] Online accounts: customers can use rate estimators without being
    a registered user. Customers who are registered online can access a
    greater range of services, including applying for payments and
    updating details they have provided to the agency
-   eServices for business include Centrelink and Child Support services
    for business such as the Centrelink Confirmation eServices for
    businesses which helps organisations provide concessions to
    customers
-    Find us enables customers to access service centre addresses and a
    map showing their location. This information is updated weekly
-   Digital Assistants provide pre-approved responses to general
    questions relating to students, job seekers and families payments
    and services through a conversational ‘chat’

The website is regularly updated as payment rates or policy changes
occur. All content is subject to scheduled reviews. Regular news items
are also published on the website to keep customers up to date with
changes. Customer can subscribe to regular email of news items for their
life event group.

The website links to Secure Instant Messaging Service, allowing Child
Support and Medicare customers to send a message to the agency. These
messages are automatically forwarded to a Service Officer. In many
cases, this saves a call or visit to a service centre. This service is
no longer available to Centrelink customers.

In accordance with government guidelines, no personally identifiable
information is kept about individuals visiting the website.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and myGov
websites.

Contents

Digital Assistants

Related links

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Access to self service

Using self service

Troubleshooting self service

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Web and alternative accessibility assistance for customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
