
Schoolkids Bonus 101-03080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Schoolkids Bonus. This is a
payment that helped families and students with education related costs
of primary and secondary school studies. It was automatically paid to
people who were eligible on 1 January and 30 June during the 2013 to
2016 calendar years inclusive.

Cessation of Schoolkids Bonus and notification period

Schoolkids Bonus was abolished from 31 December 2016.

The final instalment of Schoolkids Bonus was for the 30 June 2016 bonus
test day.

The final payment of the Schoolkids Bonus Leaver Payment was for the 30
June 2016 bonus test day and covered the 1 January - 30 June 2016
education period. It was payable if a student completed secondary school
during that education period. It is not payable if a student completed
secondary school on or after 1 July 2016.

Notification period

Updating child education details online will no longer generate
Schoolkids Bonus payments:

-   the notification period to receive the 2016 Schoolkids Bonus
    payments and School Leaver Payments for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
    customers expired on 30 June 2017
-   the notification period to receive the 2016 Schoolkids Bonus
    payments for income support payment customers expired on 31 December
    2016

However, there will be some continuing Schoolkids Bonus assessments as
explained below.

Continuing assessments

Schoolkids Bonus payments (arrears) and adjustments (overpayments) will
continue to be assessed for the period Schoolkids Bonus was payable -
from the 1 January 2013 bonus test day through to the 30 June 2016 bonus
test day. Arrears will be assessed on a case-by-case basis and would be
payable in limited circumstances.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation or re-reconciliation of FTB Part A for the 2012-13,
2013-14, 2014-15 or 2015-16 financial years may result in a Schoolkids
Bonus arrears payment or overpayment.

FTB lump sum claim grants or recalculations for the same financial years
as above may also result in a Schoolkids Bonus payment or overpayment.

After the end of the financial year, if all other eligibility
requirements are met, a top-up payment of Schoolkids Bonus may be paid
as part of the FTB reconciliation process to FTB Part A customers who:

-   during the FTB instalment period did not receive Schoolkids Bonus
    due to their income estimate being above $100,000 and confirmed
    study level for the relevant child/ren before the end of the
    lodgement year, and
-   at FTB reconciliation had an actual adjusted taxable income of
    $100,000 or less for bonus test days in 2015 and 2016

or

-   during the FTB instalment period did not receive Schoolkids Bonus
    due to Prohibition of FTB instalments (PIP) and confirmed study
    level for the relevant child/ren before the end of the lodgement
    year, and
-   at FTB reconciliation were entitled to FTB Part A and had an actual
    adjusted taxable income of $100,000 or less for bonus test days in
    2015 and 2016

A special circumstances extension could apply to notify study details
for Schoolkids Bonus in FTB lump sum claims. In this case, a customer
claiming FTB for 2015-16 for example had until 30 June 2018 to meet FTB
claim requirements and to notify study details to be paid Schoolkids
Bonus for the 2016 bonus test days.

Income support payments

Automatic payments are no longer made.

If Schoolkids Bonus eligibility is identified by the system during the
assessment of a qualifying payment, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity is
created with keyword SKBISP. The Schoolkids Bonus payment will need to
be manually assessed and recorded.

Schoolkids Bonus assessment function not available

The Schoolkids Bonus assessment functionality was not available from 25
April 2020 to 5 June 2021.

This prevented:

-   manual coding of the Schoolkids Bonus over-ride screen
-   automatic Schoolkids Bonus top-ups
-   raising Schoolkids Bonus debts
-   offsets against existing Schoolkids Bonus debts

Where there was a change in Schoolkids Bonus entitlement, an automatic
reassessment occurred once the functionality became available.

Basic eligibility

Qualifying payments

To be eligible for Schoolkids Bonus, a person must have been in receipt
of one of the following qualifying payments on the bonus test day.

-   ABSTUDY (Living Allowance)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

The Department of Veterans' Affairs paid Schoolkids Bonus to eligible
customers of payments for a child under the Veterans' Children Education
Scheme (VCES) or Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education
and Training Scheme (MRCAETS).

The person eligible for Schoolkids Bonus was the customer of the
qualifying payment (for example, a parent or guardian receiving YA for a
17 year old dependant, a payment nominee, or a student receiving YA in
their own right.

Study requirements

The child or student had to be:

-   undertaking primary or secondary education or an eligible activity,
    and
-   aged under 19 or turned 19 in the calendar year in which the bonus
    test day occurred

Income test from 1 January 2015

To be eligible for Schoolkids Bonus for a bonus test day in 2015 or
2016, the adjusted taxable income of the family or young person must
have been $100,000 or less for the relevant financial year.

An exemption applied to certain students being paid in their own right.

Payments

If eligibility and notification provisions were met, one of the
following Schoolkids Bonus payments was paid following the relevant 1
January or 30 June bonus test day from 2013 to 2016 inclusive.

-   start up payment if a child started or was due to start primary or
    secondary level education or an eligible activity in the 6 months
    following the bonus test day
-   regular Schoolkids Bonus payment
-   School Leaver Payment if the student completed secondary school in
    the 6 months before the bonus test day and had undertaken primary or
    secondary education on at least 1 day in 2012

The Schoolkids Bonus amount depended on whether the primary or secondary
rate applied. The rate was subject to indexation.

Schoolkids Bonus payments are tax-free and are not assessed as income
for family assistance and income support entitlement.

One payment per child per bonus test day

Only one Schoolkids Bonus payment is paid per child unless an FTB Part A
child was subject to a shared care or blended family assessment on the
bonus test day. In these cases Schoolkids Bonus is apportioned
accordingly and the total amount for the eligible child would not exceed
100%.

If Schoolkids Bonus is paid to an FTB customer for a child for a bonus
test day, no Schoolkids Bonus payment can be made directly to the child
for the bonus test day.

If Schoolkids Bonus is paid directly to a student receiving an income
support payment in their own right for a bonus test day, no Schoolkids
Bonus payment can be made to another person (e.g. their parent or
guardian) for the student for the bonus test day.

If a duplicate payment has been made, for example, a payment made by
both Services Australia and the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA), a
debt should be raised by Services Australia due to delegations under the
legislation.

Debts

A Schoolkids Bonus debt could arise if the customer was not entitled to
the payment for any reason, including loss of entitlement to the
qualifying payment (for example, FTB Part A or Youth Allowance) or
income being above the $100,000 limit for the relevant financial year.

At the end of the 2014-15 or 2015-16 financial years, if the customer's
actual adjusted taxable income for the relevant financial year was more
than $100,000, their entitlement to Schoolkids Bonus was reassessed.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Schoolkids Bonus is reassessed during FTB reconciliation. If actual
adjusted taxable income is more than $100,000 an automatic SKB debt is
created and an automatic account payable issued. Debts are raised as
Schoolkids Bonus debts, not as a component of FTB.

If a Schoolkids Bonus was paid to an FTB customer and the student is
then granted an income support payment, consider who received the
Schoolkids Bonus payment in determining whether or not a debt is to be
raised.

Schoolkids Bonus debts can be recovered from an FTB top up or through
withholding of ongoing FTB fortnightly payments. Schoolkids Bonus
entitlement may be used to offset family assistance debts.

Income support payments (ISP)

Schoolkids Bonus was reassessed when information about the customer's
income was received or identified. In these cases, a manual override was
recorded to preclude payment of Schoolkids Bonus to income support
payment customers for the relevant financial year.

A Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity is now created if the system
identifies an increase in Schoolkids Bonus entitlement as a result of
ISP reassessment.

Schoolkids Bonus Override Screen

FTB Schoolkids Bonus Override screen can be coded if the Schoolkids
Bonus payment outcome is to be overridden. Service Support Officer's
(SSOs) are able to override an automatic decision to:

-   pay Schoolkids bonus, or
-   not pay Schoolkids bonus

Contents

Schoolkids Bonus School Leaver Payment

Related links

Education Tax Refund paid through the Tax system

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
or over

Qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
