
Economic Support Payment 101-20031226

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Economic Support Payment to eligible
customers to help stimulate economic activity.

On this Page:

Economic Support Payments

There will be four Economic Support Payments paid to eligible social
security, Farm Household Allowance, Family Tax Benefit and veterans'
customers (including card holders). There are different eligibility
criteria for the different payments.

The first and second Economic Support Payments will be $750 each. The
third and fourth Economic Support Payment will be $250 each.

The Economic Support Payment:

-   will be exempt from taxation and will not count as income
-   will not be used to offset debts, including child support debts
-   will not be recoverable as a debt, except for where it is determined
    to have been claimed fraudulently

There will be one payment per eligible customer for each round. For
example, if a person qualifies for the first payment in multiple ways
they will only receive payment once.

First $750 Economic Support Payment

The customer must be:

-   normally living in Australia and
-   receiving an eligible payment or concession card between 12 March
    2020 and 13 April 2020

Second $750 Economic Support Payment

A second $750 Economic Support Payment will be paid to customers who:

-   receive an eligible payment or concession cards on 10 July 2020, and
-   did not receive the Coronavirus Supplement at a rate greater than $0
    for the period 10 July 2020

Third $250 Economic Support Payment

A third $250 Economic Support Payment will be paid to customers who:

-   receive an eligible payment or concession cards on 27 November 2020,
    and
-   did not receive the Coronavirus Supplement at a rate greater than $0
    for the period 27 November 2020

Fourth $250 Economic Support Payment

A fourth $250 Economic Support Payment will be paid to customers who:

-   receive an eligible payment or concession cards on 26 February 2021,
    and
-   did not receive the Coronavirus Supplement at a rate greater than $0
    for the period 26 February 2021

Receiving the Economic Support Payment

Customers:

-   will not need to lodge a claim
-   who lodge a claim for one of the eligible payments or concession
    cards on the designated eligibility date, and the claim is
    subsequently granted, will receive this payment
-   who lodge a claim for one of the eligible payments or concession
    cards after the test date/period, and the start date is subsequently
    back dated to a period that covers the test date date/period, will
    receive this payment
-   who claim Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as instalments or a lump sum who
    lodge a claim after the test date/period, and the claim is granted
    and the period includes the test date/period, will receive this
    payment
-   wanting to claim FTB via lump sum, must submit their claim by the
    end of the relevant financial year. If special circumstances exist,
    the customer may be granted an extension to the 12 month timeframe,
    but no later than 30 June of the following financial year (that is,
    the extended lodgement year)
-   who are not receiving payment on the test date/period because they
    are suspended will not be immediately eligible. The payment will be
    paid when their payment is restored and the period covers the test
    date/period. Customers who have received some payments may continue
    to qualify for their Pension Concession Card, even if their payment
    has stopped. These customers will receive the Economic Support
    Payment

Waiting periods and payment preclusion periods

Customers who are serving a waiting or preclusion period during the test
date/period will not receive the Economic Support Payment. This includes
customers who are serving an Income Maintenance Period (IMP),
Compensation Preclusion Period or a waiting period after the application
of a cancellation for a Work Refusal failure or a third mutual
obligation failure.

If the waiting or preclusion period is reduced or waived and the
customer receives an eligible payment that covers the test date, they
will qualify.

Customers who are in a nil rate period (CZR) due to employment income
will be eligible to receive the payment.

Overseas

An eligible customer must be normally residing in Australia during the
test date/period to be eligible to receive the Economic Support Payment.

If a customer receiving an eligible payment or concession card is
overseas for an approved reason they will receive the payment.

Customers who get an eligible payment or concession card but are living
overseas permanently or temporarily overseas for an unapproved reason
longer than 6 weeks will not receive the payment.

Payment information

The Process page has further payment information on:

-   Payment delivery dates
-   Payment of Economic Support Payment and FTB
-   Payment notification
-   Payment not yet received but entitled
-   Customers with a pending new claim on the second Economic Support
    Payment test date
-   Income managed customers

The Resources page has a Checking for Economic Support Payment
qualification task card with more specific details and examples on
determining a customer's entitlement to the Economic Support Payment.

The Resources page has links to further Economic Support Payment details
and a link to the Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption System.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
