
Web and alternative accessibility assistance for customers 101-08080000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Services Australia web accessibility options and
support services.

Web accessibility

Web accessibility applies to the agency's online services and resources.
It allows people with disabilities to understand, navigate and interact
with the website and access our digital services.

Web accessibility also benefits other customers, including those with
changing needs, due to aging or disability. Customers may use assistive
technologies such as screen readers (Dragon Naturally Speaking, Jaws) or
screen magnifiers (Zoom text).

Accessibility in Services Australia website

Under the Disability Discrimination Act 1992, all Australian Government
agencies are required to ensure information and services are provided in
a non-discriminatory and accessible manner.

The Services Australia website has been designed to meet the Australian
Government standard Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 for
AA conformance.

Most text on the website can be converted from text to speech. This
assists people with poor vision or low literacy and provides an
alternative to reading text on a small screen.

The website supports browser functions such as changing the font size,
contrast or colour. The font size can be changed using the inbuilt web
browser settings for easier reading.

Supporting customers with assistive technology

Customers using assistive technologies may experience difficulties:

-   Using the online self service options, see Troubleshooting self
    service
-   Accessing downloadable documents such as Portable Document Format
    (PDF), Rich Text Format (RTF) and Word, see Contact us on the
    Services Australia Website

Note: PDF files are sometimes used on servicesaustralia.gov.au for large
documents and other resources, such as forms. If a PDF is not designed
to be exclusively printed, an accessible alternative file will accompany
it. Any PDF viewing software should open PDF files on the website.

PDF accessibility is being improved by including:

-   correct reading order
-   alternate text for images embedded
-   correct title
-   tagging
-   bookmarks

Supporting customers with PDF forms

The Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms outlines
ways to support customers who are unable to complete or view PDFs such
as:

-   translated publications
-   forms
-   large corporate documents

Nominees

Customers can nominate another person or organisation to liaise with the
department on their behalf when they experience difficulties in doing it
themselves, see:

-   Someone to deal with us on your behalf, on the Services Australia
    website
-   Nominees

By phone

A number of specialised phone services are offered to customers for
easier contact.

Disability, sickness and carers line

This is a dedicated phone number for enquiries about Centrelink payments
and services for people with disability, illness or injury, and their
carers.

Hearing and speech assistance

Customers who are deaf or have hearing or speech impairment can call
this free TTY service for enquiries about payments and services.

Customers can contact the Customer Relations Line to provide comment,
complaints or compliments on FreeCALL™

National Relay Service

The National Relay Service (NRS) helps people throughout Australia who
are deaf or have a hearing or speech impediment to telephone the wider
community through a third person. The National Relay Service is a
standard call and operates 24 hours a day, every day of the year.

Note: Service Officers can also use the NRS to contact customers by
phone, see Using the National Relay Service (NRS).

Multilingual Phone Service

If a customer prefers to communicate with the agency in a language other
than English, see Multilingual Phone Services. Customers can enquire
about services and payments in an available language for:

-   Centrelink between 8:00 am and 5:00 pm, local time, Monday to Friday
-   Medicare and Child Support services by calling the Translating and
    Interpreting Service (TIS National), see Booking an interpreter for
    an appointment

Publications in alternative formats

Some information is available in alternative format such as audio CD,
DVD, large print, braille, and e-text. Customers can contact the
Disability, Sickness and Carers line for enquiries and to request these
products.

Customers can access translated publications and interpreters and
translators on the servicesaustralia.gov.au website.

Consultation

To ensure everyone has access to payments and services, various
consultative networks have been established to examine service delivery
issues. Customers and peak bodies are consulted to develop policies,
implementation strategies, promotional material, system changes and
physical access.

Further information on Consultation with policy departments about
payments and Complaints and feedback can be found on Services Australia
website.

Managing complaints about accessibility

If a customer wishes to register a complaint, see Managing customer
complaints and feedback.

For specific web accessibility complaints, the Service Officer will send
a copy of the complaint to Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)
Secretariat. This will ensure the complaint is actioned and resolved as
quickly as possible. Capturing this information will help to improve
services for customers who experience issues when accessing our websites
and downloadable documents. The Resources page contains a link to the
WCAG Secretariat email.

The Resources page contains links to the contact details, Services
Australia, and National Relay Service websites.

Related links

Using self service

Self service for nominees

Troubleshooting self service

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

Nominees

Multilingual Phone Service (MPS)

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Identifying a package of services for vision impaired customers

Interpreter services

Using the National Relay Service (NRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
