-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the non-income tested Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC), non-income tested Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) and
non-pensioner Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) and who is entitled to
these automatically issued concession cards.

Eligibility for a NOI concession card

On 1 January 2017, changes to the asset test included an increase to
the:

-   asset free area, and
-   pension asset test taper rate to $3.00 per fortnight for every
    $1,000 of assets above the asset free area

Customers who had had their pension cancelled (CAN/ASS) on 1 January
2017 as a direct result of this change were automatically issued
non-income tested concession cards. If they were:

-   Age Pension age or over on 1 January 2017, a non-income tested LIC
    and a non-income tested CSHC were issued
-   Under Age Pension age on 1 January 2017, a non-income tested LIC was
    issued. The person can apply for the non-income tested CSHC when
    they reach Age Pension age

Customers who had their pension cancelled (CAN/ASS) on 1 January 2017 as
a direct result of changes to the pension assets test are automatically
eligible for a non-pensioner PCC. From 9 October 2017, a non-pensioner
PCC replaced the non-income tested LIC.

-   Recipients of a non-pensioner PCC do not need to be receiving a
    social security pension to qualify for the card
-   The card is not subject to an income assets test
-   The regular PCC residence and portability provisions apply
-   The non-pensioner PCC is valid from 9 October 2017. Customers who
    received a non-income tested (CSHC on 1 January 2017 can continue to
    use the CSHC)

Note: entitlement to the non-income tested cards (CSHC and PCC) is
directly linked to a 1 January 2017 cancelation date of effect for the
changes to the assets test for pensioners. Where a pension payment is
cancelled with a date of effect of on or before 31 December 2016, or on
or after 2 January 2017, they are not entitled to any non-income tested
card. These customers may claim a LIC or CSHC and will be subject to the
relevant income test requirements. For information on how a customer can
claim an income tested card, see:

-   Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Non income tested concession cards for customers on:

-   LIC will show a benefit status line of LIC/CUR-NOI
-   CSHC will show a benefit status line of SHC/CUR-NOI)

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers

Veterans whose service pension, income support supplement or Age Pension
was cancelled due to the asset test changes with a date of effect of 1
January 2017, who were pension age, automatically received a non-income
tested DVA Commonwealth Seniors Health Card.

Pension age for veterans who:

-   received a service pension and war widow/ers is 60 years of age
-   received an Age Pension and partners of veterans is 65 years of age

From 9 October 2017, DVA automatically reinstated and reissued PCCs to
veterans whose income support pension was cancelled on 1 January 2017
due to changes to the assets test.

Grandfathering for the non-income cards

Qualification for the non-pensioner PCC and non-income tested CSHC are
managed by a grandfathered status. The Process page contains screen and
coding information. Only Service Officers of APS 5 level and above can
change or add a customer's grandfathering status.

The grandfathering provisions, which allow the customer to receive a
non-income tested card/s, are revoked if the decision to cancel the
customer's pension on 1 January 2017 is reassessed. Examples where a
reassessment would revoke grandfathering are:

-   the pension is restored from the date of cancellation (1 January
    2017), or
-   the pension is cancelled for another reason, other than assets, with
    effect on or before 1 January 2017

Eligibility for the non-income tested card/s will be lost when the
customer ceases to meet any eligibility criteria (excluding the income
requirements) for the relevant card. Customers will retain
grandfathering if eligibility is lost and can re-apply for the
non-income tested card/s when their circumstances change. Where
eligibility is lost due to the portability provisions for the card, and
the customer returns to Australia within 13 weeks of cancellation,
non-income tested cards will automatically reissue on the customers
return.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website and
an external website for further information on the 1 January 2017
Rebalance Assets.

Related links

Extra concession information

How to reissue concession cards

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Portability of concession cards

Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal
re-claims) after a portability cancellation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
