
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the ATO for Services Australia
staff.

ATO agreement to provide tax information

In 2009 Centrelink entered into an agreement with the ATO to provide tax
information to the agency’s customers at service centres and Smart
Centres. This was updated in 2011 to become an arrangement between the
ATO and the agency.

The agreement continues for the agency to display a small suite of ATO
products at service centres, and for Service Officers in service centres
providing Centrelink services to provide customers with information on
where to obtain tax help.

This service will be provided by Service Officers during 'tax time',
from 1 July to 31 October each financial year.

Information and support provided

The ATO will support Services Australia by:

-   providing all required promotional information and materials for
    display in service centres
-   providing computer based training material to the agency to be
    rolled out to all Service Officers

Tax Help Centres

As part of the Shared Services Initiative with the ATO, service centres
that provide Centrelink services will be registered as Tax Help Referral
Centres. Tax Help is a network of community volunteers who provide a
free and confidential service to help people complete their tax returns
at tax time. These volunteers are people from within the community. They
are not ATO staff, however they receive training and support from the
ATO. Tax Help is available from 1 July to 31 October each year.

Customers requiring assistance completing tax returns

Customers who require assistance with completing their tax return should
be referred to the ATO Tax Help program. Service Officers will need to
provide the customer with a Tax Help referral slip with the phone
contact details of their closest Tax Help Centre. Service centres that
provide Centrelink services will have a pad of referral slips delivered,
along with the initial delivery of ATO products.

Service Officers will not be required to assess if a customer is
eligible for Tax Help. Customers who are referred to a Tax Help Centre
will be assessed at the centre.

The Resources page contains contact details, links to the products
distributed throughout tax time and Tax Help Centre locations.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
