
Multilingual Phone Service (MPS) 101-05100040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the composition and functions of the Multilingual
Phone Service (MPS). This is not an interpreter service. The MPS
provides the full range of services offered by Smart Centres. Customers
can call the MPS directly on 13 1202 to receive information and help
about Centrelink payments and services in their preferred language.

Legacy MPS staff have always serviced customers across all payment
types. Following on from the MPS review this service offer is being
redesigned. Staff who speak a language other than English may be
eligible to receive CLA when they use their language skills in the
course of their work in their main Business Line.

Available languages

The MPS has capability to service 34 languages. When Service Officers
are unavailable, engage with an on-demand interpreter (Interpreter
Connect).

If a multilingual Service Officer in the customer's preferred language
is not available, or the customer's language is not listed, the Service
Officer will access an on-demand interpreter service to help the
customer.

Services available through service centres

In the case where the customer whose preferred language is not English
visits a service centre, the assisting Service Officer should engage an
interpreter via the Language Services. An interpreter service, either
planned or unplanned, and which requires the assistance of a Service
Officer, are provided by the agency's Language Services. Language
Services should be contacted for interpreting services. See Booking an
interpreter for an appointment.

Promote the MPS to customers from culturally and linguistically diverse
(CALD) backgrounds by giving them a (CO436) business card which promotes
the 13 1202 number. Phoning the MPS can save the customer from visiting
a Centrelink service centre and make them feel more confident about
contacting the agency.

The Resources page has contact details for Language Services and
Multilingual Phone Service. Links on this page may be unavailable to
external audiences

Related links

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Principles for making callbacks by appointment for customers from a
culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) background

Guidelines for using interpreters

Translation of documents

Accessing translated information

Community Language Allowance (CLA)

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
