
Clean Energy Advance (CEA) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers 101-03090020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about the Clean Energy Advance (CEA)
that was paid automatically to eligible Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers for the 2012-2013 financial year prior to the introduction of
Energy Supplement (ES).

On this Page:

CEA Eligibility

FTB customers were automatically paid a CEA if, for 2012-2013:

-   They received more than a nil legislative rate of FTB Part A
-   FTB instalments were not prohibited due to non-lodgement of tax
    returns (PIP), and
-   They were in Australia and had at least one FTB child in their care
    in Australia (a CEA may have been paid when they returned to
    Australia, or on 1 July 2013). To have received the CEA for a child,
    the child must have been in Australia

An Approved Care Organisation (ACO) receiving FTB will also be paid a
CEA.

CEA amount

The CEA equated to 1.7% of the customer's maximum annual FTB Part A (per
child) and Part B (per family) rates for 2012-13. See the Resources page
for CEA rates.

For ACOs, the CEA equated to 1.7% of their FTB Part A entitlement for
each child in care.

The CEA was calculated as a daily rate based on FTB circumstances. If
paid before 1 July 2013, the CEA amount for the rest of the 2012-13
financial year was based on the customer's FTB circumstances on the day
of processing (future changes were not taken into account). If
circumstances changed the customer may have been entitled to a top-up
payment.

CEA payments

Initial payments were made in May 2012. Customers who became eligible
due to grant or reassessment of FTB received a CEA with their first or
next FTB payment. A pro-rata CEA was paid if eligibility started after 1
July 2012.

After the end of the 2012-13 financial year, customers may have received
a CEA as a result of FTB reconciliation. Customers who claimed FTB for
2012-13 as a lump sum had their entitlement to a CEA determined when
their claim was finalised.

A CEA top-up payment was automatically paid if a customer became
entitled to a higher FTB CEA amount than originally paid.

For a CEA or top-up to be paid, FTB lump sum claims must have been
lodged or FTB reconciliation requirements met by 30 June 2014.

If the customer was granted a special circumstance extension to lodge a
lump sum claim or lodge their income and FTB was assessed and paid then
CEA was assessed and paid if entitled.

ACOs received their initial CEA payment in June 2012. Top-ups were paid
to ACOs in July 2013.

The Resources page contains scenarios and examples of CEA calculations
for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers, links to information about the
Clean Energy Advance (CEA) and CEA rates.

Related links

Energy Supplement for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

Processing a returned payment

Steps in the review and appeal system

Approved Care Organisations (ACOs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
