
Actioning Business Hub requests 101-20073121

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assist an Income Management
Contact Officer (IMCO) in actioning requests generated by the relevant
Family Responsibilities Commission through the Business Hub.

On this Page:

Cashless Debit Card requests from the Family Responsibilities Commission

The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) have the option of
requesting the Australian Government to manage a customer's income
support and family assistance payments if they believe the customer will
benefit from the Cashless Debit Card program. It provides another tool
for the FRC to assist with the case management of families.

Outline of IMCO role

This procedure is for Income Management Contact Officers (IMCO) only.

Most requests received through the Business Hub are auto-processed by
the system and the relevant information is applied automatically to the
customer's record. However, this procedure assists with the manual
processing of Business Hub requests which is required when auto
processing fails.

The procedure will explain how IMCOs can:

-   locate outstanding requests
-   action Mutual Client searches with a 'no' match result
-   action a Personal Information Disclosure (PID)
-   action a Notice to Commence Income Management or the Cashless Debit
    Card received
-   action a Revocation of Income Management or Cashless Debit Card
    received
-   view PIDs that have been submitted by FRC through Business Hub
-   view current expenses and deductions
-   action a referral for Cashless Debit Card

System screens to access information

The Third Party Information Summary - Organisation (TPISO) screen is
used by Services Australia staff to view all requests/actions completed
through the Business Hub by the FRC. At default, the screen will show
both finalised and outstanding requests. The TPISO screen can be
accessed through the organisation record.

The Third Party Information Summary (TPIS) screen exists on the customer
record. This screen will only display completed Business Hub actions
against the individual customer.

An IMCO will need to check the TPISO screen daily, ensuring they only
process work attached to their area.

Switch Card Issuers

CDC participants who have previously been on the Cashless Debit Card
program in the NT, and had chosen Traditional Credit Union (TCU) as
their card issuer of choice, can choose to switch from TCU to Indue,
after they have been placed on to CDC Cape York. to See Switching
Cashless Debit Card Issuers.

Related links

 

Exchange of information with Income Management and Cashless Debit Card
referring authorities

Cashless Debit Card under the Cape York Initiative

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
