-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document gives an overview about the Centrelink Confirmation
eServices (CCeS). It describes how approved businesses can use it to
confirm customer concessional entitlements.

About CCeS

CCeS is a secure online service that provides an efficient and effective
method for businesses to confirm customer information with Services
Australia. For example, a business can check a customer’s concession
card type and status in CCeS, or their payment type and status.

Details from CCeS allows the business to make a determination as to
whether the customer is entitled to a concession, rebate or service it
offers under their policy requirements and rules. Services Australia is
not responsible for deciding if a customer is entitled to a concession,
rebate or service.

If a business uses the service to check customer information, it
generally means the customer will not have to give them the details. In
most cases, the business can tell the customer immediately if they are
eligible for a concession, rebate or service.

Businesses interested in applying to use CCeS, or who want to discuss
how the service may benefit them, can have their contact details
referred to the Third Party Programmes Team for follow up.

Businesses already approved for CCeS should contact the National
Business Gateway - Confirmation Services Helpdesk for technical support.

Businesses can find out more information about the service on the
Services Australia website. They can download the CCeS policy, terms and
procedural guide documents and the CCeS business application form
(SA391).

Applying for CCeS

Businesses need to apply and Services Australia must approve them to
access and use the service.

Before applying, a business must read the:

-   CCeS policy
-   CCeS terms
-   CCeS procedural guide

This is to make sure they understand and agree to the terms and
obligations of the contract.

To apply, businesses must complete the Services Australia Business
Application - Centrelink Confirmation eServices form (SA391). An
authorised officer of the business must sign the form. An authorised
officer is a person with the legal authority to act on behalf of the
business and enter into a contract with the agency.

The form must be:

-   signed in writing (digital or electronic signatures are not
    acceptable)
-   emailed or faxed, see the contact details on the Resources page

The agency will assess the form under the requirements in the CCeS
policy to determine if they can approve it. A business may be approved
with additional conditions if necessary.

Accessing CCeS

Businesses access CCeS through Centrelink Business Online Services
(CBOS).

Businesses must complete and submit a Business Online Services - User
details form (SA445) for each individual employee requiring CBOS access
and who will use CCeS. An authorised officer of the business and the
individual employee must sign the SA445 form.

The SA445 form is also used to update and remove users’ access to CCeS.

Types of businesses who use CCeS

Businesses must offer a concession, rebate or service to customers in
one of the business categories in the CCeS policy to be approved to use
CCeS.

The types of businesses that use CCeS include:

-   councils
-   transport authorities
-   water authorities
-   education authorities
-   banks
-   financial counsellors/planners
-   legal aid services
-   health services
-   housing and welfare agencies
-   energy authorities
-   telecommunications authorities, and
-   utilities (water and energy service providers combined)

Concessions offered by these businesses can include:

-   reductions in rates
-   transport costs (for public bus, rail and ferry services)
-   car registrations, and
-   the supply of electricity, gas and water

Note: pharmacies, chemists, General Practitioners (GPs) and medical
centres do not use CCeS to check customer’s Medicare or concession card
information and entitlements. They generally use the Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS) to confirm this type of information. See Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) for more details.

Information available in CCeS

A business will get customer information within CCeS based on their
‘characteristic set’ and the business category they are approved for.
Characteristic sets are usually standard sets of customer information
that a business typically needs to confirm a customer’s eligibility for
a concession, rebate or service.

This can include (but is not limited to) the following:

-   name
-   address
-   concession card type and status
-   payment type and status
-   income and asset details
-   deduction details

See CCeS procedural guide for businesses for more details about business
categories and what customer information is available in CCeS.

Privacy and security

In accordance with the Privacy Act 1988, it is mandatory for a business
to obtain consent from the customer before the business can verify and
confirm a customer’s details and concession entitlement with the agency.

Businesses must also ensure that the customer’s information they obtain
through CCeS is protected and secure at all times.

Privacy and Security information is available via the Centrelink
Confirmation eServices (CCeS) for businesses page on the Services
Australia website. See the Resources page for a link to this
information.

Confirmation eServices available

There are several confirmation eServices available to businesses in
CCeS. The service a business will use depends on the information they
need to confirm customer concessions.

Customer confirmation

Confirms a customer's details such as:

-   name
-   address
-   payment type
-   concession card status

This helps businesses confirm if a customer is entitled to their
concession, service or rebate without requiring the customer to collect
and provide evidence from the agency.

A 'yes' or 'no' answer is provided to the business to verify customer
details.

It can be used for Centrelink and Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
customers through single, batch and webservice enquiries.

Income confirmation

This service provides a business with a customer's income, asset and
payment details, similar to the Income Statement or Details Income and
Assets Statement that a customer can request.

This service can only be used for Centrelink customers through single,
batch and webservice enquiries. It cannot be used for DVA customers.

Superannuation confirmation

Administrators and trustees of super funds can use this service to help
determine a customer's eligibility for the Early Release of
Superannuation on financial hardship grounds. The service will provide a
'yes' or 'no' response if the customer meets one of the income support
requirements:

-   Customer is below preservation age plus 39 weeks, and had a
    continuous payment period of 26 weeks immediately before the
    application, or
-   Customer meets preservation age plus 39 weeks or more, and has a
    cumulative payment period total of 39 weeks after reaching their
    preservation age

This service can only be used for Centrelink customers via a single
enquiry.

How businesses use CCeS

When applying to use CCeS the business must indicate how it wishes to
use CCeS. Businesses can use the service to confirm customer data
through a:

-   Single enquiry - which allows a business to submit an enquiry for
    one customer. It provides an immediate response
-   Batch enquiry - can be used for large volume requests for multiple
    customers. Also provides historical income statements (including
    quarterly and financial year). A response is returned within 72
    hours
-   System to system (webservice) - this provides a direct connection
    between a business’s ICT system and Services Australia’s database.
    It provides an immediate response. A Secret Key is provided to the
    business which is used to authenticate the business for the use of
    the web service. The Secret Key must be protected from disclosure
    and a Secret Key Manager must be appointed by the business who is
    responsible for the management and use of the key

Expectations of businesses using CCeS

Businesses using CCeS must:

only access and use CCeS for the purpose of providing a concession,
rebate or service to their customer

confirm the identity of the customer before getting consent and using
CCeS. Do not use CCes to authenticate or establish the identity of a
customer

not make any enquiry about a customer without first getting their
consent

confirm and be able to prove the authority of a customer representative

make sure customer information is protected and secure at all times

immediately tell Services Australia when staff no longer need access to
CCeS

notify Services Australia of any changes to its business arrangements
including:

-   if the customer information that the business receives is no longer
    required
-   any security breaches that occur in respect of customer information

continue to meet the approval criteria while approved to use the service

comply with all laws that regulate the business’s activities such as
consumer protection, registration, financial and privacy laws and
confidentiality provisions in relevant acts

behave ethically, lawfully and fairly in their dealing with customers

It is the businesses' responsibility to make sure that their staff are
aware of their obligations under the CCeS policy, terms, procedural
guide, user guide and any additional conditions the business may have.
The business must make sure their staff do not:

-   look up their own or family, friends or business associates records
-   share password details with any other person
-   leave their computer unattended whilst logged into the service

Reviews

Reviews are undertaken by the agency to make sure that businesses
continue to:

-   satisfy the criteria for approval
-   comply with the CCeS policy, CCeS terms, the CCeS procedural guide
    and any additional conditions

The agency may suspend access or withdraw its approval for a business to
use CCeS at any time. This is to ensure compliance or if the business is
no longer suitable for approval to use CCeS.

See Review process for Third Party Organisations (TPO) for more details.

Customer consent

See Customer consent for Centrelink Confirmation eService (CCeS).

The business must verify the identity of the customer before getting
consent and using CCeS.

Customers can give their consent to businesses in writing, online or
verbally. An example of the standard consent wording and requirements is
available in the CCeS procedural guide.

Customers can contact the agency to request to block a business from
accessing their personal information through the service.

Businesses must collect consent from each individual customer before
they access their personal information. If eligibility for a concession,
rebate or service is based on the confirmed information of multiple
customers (for example, all household members listed on a housing
application) each customer must provide their own informed consent for
the business to use CCeS.

There may be situations where a business must provide customer
information from CCeS to a third party. For example, where they provide
a concession on behalf of a second business and are being audited. This
secondary disclosure is only permitted if the customer provides their
consent (in the consent record) to have their information disclosed to
the third party for the secondary purpose. See the CCeS Procedural Guide
for the extra wording that must be included in the consent record when
disclosing information to a third party.

Costs to use CCeS

CCeS is a free service and there are no costs to customers or businesses
to use CCeS.

If a business chooses to use the batch enquiry or system to system
(webservice) enquiry, testing is required and fees apply.

If a business asks for extra customer information that is not available
through CCeS, this may incur a fee to cover the agency’s costs. Requests
for changes to the CCeS service should be referred to the Deduction and
Confirmation Branch - CCeS team.

Enquiries about testing fees, processes and timeframes can be made
through the National Business Gateway > Confirmation Services Helpdesk.

Restricted access customers

If a business makes an enquiry in CCeS for a customer with a Restricted
Access record, customer information will still be provided to the
business with the exception of address information. A value of Unable to
Confirm is returned to the business instead for address information. For
example, if the business is wanting to confirm the customer’s name, date
of birth, address and pension card status; the service will confirm
‘Yes’ for name, date of birth and pension card but will return an
‘Unable to Confirm’ for the address. It is up to the business how it
responds to this result.

Businesses determine and apply their own policy and rules around what
information and evidence they need in order to confirm a customer’s
eligibility for a concession, rebate or service. Where CCeS cannot be
used by a business to confirm eligibility to a concession or rebate, the
customer will need to provide alternative evidence as determined
acceptable by the business (such as an income statement). The agency
cannot compel a business to provide any concession, rebate or service
for any reason.

Contact Address Verification (CAV) service

The Contact Address Verification (CAV) service enables approved housing
providers to obtain the current address and telephone details held by
Services Australia for a customer, and historical address details for up
to 2 years in the past. This information can help housing providers with
the assessment of housing applications for Centrelink customers who are
suffering from recurring homelessness, require supported housing and/or
have special housing needs.

Customers must give their consent for the housing provider to get their
details from Services Australia. Consent wording for CAV can be included
in the CCeS consent record.

If a housing provider is interested in using the CAV service please
refer the details to the Deduction and Confirmation branch - CCeS team.

See Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) access for Deduction and
Confirmation Programmes for details on CAV user access processes.

The Resources page contains links to the information on the Services
Australia website, and guidelines about protecting customer information.

Contents

Customer consent for Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS)

Income Statements and detailed income and asset statements

Related links

Withdrawing a business's approval to use a deduction and confirmation
service

Adding, changing or removing a service reason for Income Management or
CCeS businesses

Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) access for Deduction and
Confirmation Programmes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
