
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for a customer to add or withdraw
their consent for a business to obtain the customer's details and
concession entitlements.

Overview of CCeS

Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) is a secure online service that
provides an efficient and effective method for businesses to confirm a
customer's entitlement to a concession, rebate or service it provides to
Services Australia and Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers.

Businesses must be registered with Services Australia, and approval
granted for CCeS, before access to CCeS is made available.

For more information about CCeS, see Centrelink Confirmation eServices.

Once registered, customers can provide their consent to approved
businesses to confirm their entitlement to a concession, rebate or
service. Businesses cannot use the service without customer consent.

Customer consent

In accordance with the Privacy Act 1988, it is mandatory for a business
to obtain consent from the customer prior to enquiring into their
details and concession entitlement.

When obtaining consent, businesses must use wording substantially in a
form as notified by the agency, or otherwise contained in the CCeS
Procedural Guide. See the Resources page or a link to a copy of the
Procedural Guide, which are available via the Centrelink Confirmation
eServices (CCeS) for businesses page on the Services Australia website.

The consent allows the business to make enquiries into the customer's
details and concession entitlement through Services Australia. A record
of the customer consent must be maintained by the business for the
agency's verification, should this be required.

Businesses also approved for Electronic Verification of Rent (EVoR) or
Community Housing Organisations approved for CCeS and Centrepay may be
able to collect consent on a Multiple Consent form. See FAQs about
Multiple Consent on the Resources Page of Processing a Centrepay
Business Application.

Note: the customer may withdraw their consent at any time.

Adding consent

When a customer has given their consent for a business to verify their
details and concession entitlements by using CCeS, there is no
requirement to update the Centrelink record unless consent has
previously been withdrawn.

Withdrawing consent

A customer who has given consent for a business to enquire about their
details and concession entitlements via CCeS, can withdraw their consent
at any time. To do this, customers should notify the business that they
have withdrawn their consent for the business to confirm the customer's
concession entitlement.

If a customer does not wish to contact the business to withdraw their
consent, the customer can then notify Services Australia either verbally
or in writing (including the business' full name) to block the business'
access. Customers do not need a reason to withdraw their consent.

The customer can choose to withdraw their consent with one business or a
number of businesses where consent has previously been granted.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the National
Business Gateway - Confirmation Services Helpdesk, the CCeS intranet
page, and to relevant CCeS pages on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Registration for Income Management deductions, Electronic Verification
of Rent (EVoR) or Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS)

Adding, changing or removing a service reason for Income Management or
Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) businesses

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
