
Requesting Medicare card numbers from customers for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net 101-06100010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Centrelink staff about the
collection of a customer and/or their dependant's Medicare card
number(s) upon request from Medicare.

Medicare requests

The request from Medicare will only occur when Medicare are unable to
match their Medicare/Centrelink records. Centrelink's process of
requesting Medicare card numbers for Medicare is almost completely
automated.

When a request is received from Medicare, Centrelink performs a check to
see if a valid Medicare card number is recorded for Identity
Confirmation purposes. If a valid number is recorded, a passive consent
letter is sent to the customer asking them to contact only if they do
not wish their Medicare number to be released to Medicare. If a response
is not received from the customer within 14 days, passive consent is
recorded and the number is sent to Medicare.

Customers in remote areas

Where a customer has:

-   no Medicare card number recorded on Identity Confirmation,
-   an invalid Medicare card number recorded, or
-   Medicare has been unable to match their Centrelink/Medicare record,

the next check performed is to see if the customer lives in a remote
area. If this is the case, no letter is sent. Instead, an online
document is automatically recorded on the Centrelink computer system
that will enable an Indigenous Service Officer (ISO) to identify
customers in their region for whom the Medicare card number needs to be
collected (that is, Indigenous and non-Indigenous customers).

Customers not in remote areas

Where the customer does not live in a remote area and either an invalid
Medicare number or no Medicare number has been recorded, an
automatically generated letter requesting the customer to complete and
return their Medicare number and that of any concessionally entitled
dependants will be issued. When this number has been provided to
Centrelink, it will be manually recorded on the Centrelink computer
system.

Note: an individual's Medicare number can also be used for establishing
a link with the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Related links

Medicare card number collection for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Remote community customers Medicare card number collection for the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Recording Medicare card numbers for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Establishing a link for an individual with the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
