
Publications 101-08070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about publications distributed by
Services Australia for certain customer groups.

Publications

Services Australia has a range of publications, brochures and factsheets
available to the public to provide information on the products and
services the agency delivers. These publications are available in
several languages and may be requested:

-   in person at a service centre
-   on the agency's website, or
-   online (in some cases)

Publications are available in the following categories:

-   Customer
-   Corporate
-   Business
-   Community Group, and
-   Multilingual

Australian Pension News (APN)

APN is sent to customers receiving an income support payment who are
residing outside Australia permanently or long-term (customers in
environment I). APN provides information on new initiatives and general
information about Australian pensions, including outside Australia
payment rates and dates.

Customers can select mail, [] online or email as a distribution method
for APN. They cannot receive notification by SMS.

APN is available in these languages:

-   Arabic
-   Croatian
-   Dutch
-   English
-   German
-   Greek
-   Italian
-   Macedonian
-   Maltese
-   Polish
-   Portuguese
-   Serbian
-   Spanish
-   Turkish

There is no audio version of APN.

Electronic copies of all of the versions are available on the Services
Australia website.

A Guide to Australian Government Payments (The Guide)

The booklet 'A guide to Australian Government Payments' (The Guide)
provides payment rate information for Centrelink payments.

Individuals can access the publication online. The Resources page has a
link to the publication.

Community organisations and education and training providers are able to
order this publication from the Services Australia website. The
Resources page has a link to order products.

News for Seniors (NFS)

This magazine has been discontinued.

Customers can stay up to date through other channels, including third
party organisations, email, web updates, social media or Interactive
Voice Response (IVR).

[] Customers can go online to get the most up-to-date information about
payments and services for older Australians by:

-   going to servicesaustralia.gov.au/olderaustralians
-   liking us on facebook.com.au/SeniorsUpdateAU and asking a question,
    or
-   following us on Twitter @SeniorsUpdateAU

News for Carers (NFC)

NFC publication is no longer provided in hard copy.

Customers can now access the latest carer news and subscribe to receive
monthly email updates at 'News for carers' on the Services Australia
website. The Resources page contains a link to News for carers.

Non-customers

Non-customers should be encouraged to access the publication via
Services Australia website.

How customers receive APN

[] Online is the quickest and easiest way to receive APN. Recipients
should be encouraged to select the electronic version.

Customers living outside Australia permanently receive the APN by post
by default.

Customers registered to receive mail online will receive an online
letter advising the APN has been published and is available to view on
the Services Australia website.

Customers subscribed to APN by email will receive an email notification
advising the APN has been published and is available to view on the
Services Australia website.

Customers can:

-   change their delivery preferences at any time
-   choose not to receive the publication

Note: only one printed copy is sent per household and printed copies are
not sent at all if the customer is in a group home. Printed copies are
only automatically sent to current customers.

Managing subscription online

[] Customers who have an active self service registration can use their
publication subscriptions to:

-   update an existing subscription
-   unsubscribe to a publication
-   view current subscription

Issues with distribution

The return to sender script is not to be used for returned publications.
Sampling will be done to determine if there are any issues related to
sending publications to incorrect customers.

The Resources page contains an intranet link for ordering publications
and links to publications and forms on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
