
Review process for Third Party Organisations (TPO) 101-09030000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page contains relevant links on the Services Australia website,
BasicsCard for businesses, Register for Centrelink confirmation
eServices, ICT Security Portal and the BasicsCard Merchant Approval
Framework Procedural Guide. It also contains information on how to get
access via the ICT Security Portal (ISP). Links on this page may be
unavailable to external audiences.

On this Page:

Services Australia Website links

Services Australia Business terms and conditions

BasicsCard for businesses

Register for Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Centrepay - How to apply

ICT Security Portal

Attachments

This attachment may not be printed, broadcast or released externally.
For contact details and more information see Information Publication
Scheme.

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release
Icons\32w\icon-hidden-attachment.png]BasicsCard Merchant Approval
Framework Procedural Guide

Contact details

Deduction and Confirmation Branch - Business, Online and Assurance Team

Requesting access from ICT Security Portal (ISP)

Access to the Organisation Review workflow can be requested through the
ICT Security Portal by selecting the following: Work Dashboard>Make a
Process Request>Resources (from drop down box) then select continue.

Under 'Make a Process Request' select Request Resource. You will then
need to locate under 'Search Criteria': Mainframe Applications (select
the '+' next to Mainframe Applications for)> Income Security. Then
select 'Search'.

Under the 'Search Results' section a list of resources will be
displayed. Scroll down this list to CM3UPD - Account Managers completing
a Third Party Organisation Compliance Reviews. Once located select to
highlight then select the right arrow to move it to the 'Resources to
Request' section. Ensure the reason why you need the access is typed in
the 'Reason' section at the top of the page and then select 'Submit'.

TPOs may have multiple contracts/agreements with the agency, and when a
review is conducted the agency reviews all of the programs the TPO has
with the agency.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
