
Insulin Pumps subsidy for young people with Type 1 Diabetes 101-03040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Centrelink staff when considering
applying the Insulin Pump subsidy for young people with Type 1 Diabetes.

On this Page:

Type 1 Diabetes Insulin Pump Program

The Australian Government's Insulin Pump Program provides subsidies to
very low income families who have children with Type 1 diabetes. The
Program aims to improve access and affordability of insulin pumps for
limited income families who have children (up to 18 years of age) with
Type 1 diabetes and do not have access to other means of reimbursement,
such as private health insurance. Program recipients receive their pumps
fully subsidised by the Program. No payments are made to the applicants
or the recipients.

The Insulin Pump Program was announced in the 2008-09 Federal Budget.
The Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF) administers the Program
on behalf of the Department of Health and Aged Care, including
assessment and approval of applications for subsidies.

Centrelink’s role

Centrelink staff need to be aware of the scheme because they may receive
enquiries. Centrelink's role is to provide a Q999 letter to the insulin
pump recipient or the recipient's parent/partner/carer to confirm
relevant details. See the Resources page for details on the information
required in the letter.

If Centrelink Service Officers receive enquiries about the Insulin Pump
Program that are not covered in the information below, they should
direct the query to the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF).

Eligibility

Eligibility criteria for the Insulin Pump Program are:

-   the claimant has a combined annual family income of up to or less
    than the annual income limit
-   the claimant must be in receipt of a qualifying Centrelink payment
-   the child (recipient) on whose behalf the application is made must
    be under 18 years of age on the date of application
-   the child must hold or be listed on a current Medicare card, and
-   the child has Type 1 diabetes and an endocrinologist or a specialist
    physician has assessed the child to benefit from insulin pump
    therapy

The annual income limit is based on the amount above which Family Tax
Benefit Part A (for a family with 1 child between 16 and 19 years) will
stop.

Claimants are required to supply 1 of the following to confirm their
income eligibility:

-   statement from Centrelink confirming the claimant is in receipt of a
    full income support payment, or
-   income assessment statement from Centrelink, or
-   copy of previous financial year's tax return or notice of
    assessment, or
-   other approved evidence of income

The Centrelink customer must receive 1 of the following payments:

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Youth Allowance (YA)

ABSTUDY

Carer Payment (CP)

Special Benefit (SpB)

Parenting Payment (PP)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Maximum rate of Family Tax Benefit Part A (FTB Part A) customer,
including:

-   Partner of the FTB Part A customer
-   Child for which the customer receives FTB Part A

Non-FTB Part A child but on FTB Part A customer record

FTB Part A child in an Approved Care Organisation (ACO)

Approved Care Organisations (ACO) are also eligible to claim the subsidy
for youths in their care who meet the above criteria.

The above payment list is in hierarchical order. The letter should
provide details about the highest-ranked payment the customer receives.
Check the list before providing the letter.

The Resources page contains questions and answers (FAQ) about the
Insulin Pump Program, including the required text for the Q999 letter.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
