
Services and information for the general public 101-08000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the different services offered
by Services Australia and the different avenues that the public can
access these services.

Government Intent

Services Australia was created to provide a range of services (welfare,
public aid, health and child support) to people of Australia. It
combined three master programs - Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare.
It also includes Hearing Australia and CRS Australia.

The Government created Services Australia to make it a seamless process
for customer to deal with the three master programs and so that it would
become a 'tell us once' service. The new service delivery model was
implemented to improve services and access through myGov.

Services and information

Services Australia delivers Centrelink services, programs and payments
for 10 other government departments and has various avenues for
promoting its products and services to the public and staff.

There are many ways for the general public to access information and
Centrelink services that are on offer. These include:

-   Services Australia website - enables our customers to obtain
    information about services, assistance and payments.
-   Community outreach - relates to any activities that raise community
    awareness of the Centrelink products and services that are provided
    to its customers. It is aimed towards developing links between the
    agency and community groups and is a vital element of the agency’s
    commitment to providing a quality service to customers and potential
    customers.
-   Public Suggestion Scheme - details can be accessed via the Services
    Australia website. Services Australia is a one-stop-shop for a range
    of services delivered on behalf of partner agencies. These partner
    agencies welcome suggestions from the public and they encourage
    people to contribute ideas about improvements to the agency’s
    policies, programs and services.
-   Publicity material - Services Australia has various avenues for
    promoting its products and services to the public and staff. These
    include the Services Australia website, Internet kiosks at Service
    Centres, information brochures and packages, promotional pamphlets
    and income support payment claim forms.
-   Australian Taxation Office (ATO) information for customers - The
    agency has an agreement with the ATO to provide tax information to
    customers at service centres and Smart Centres.

Contents

Hearing Australia

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) information for customers

Services Australia website

Web and alternative accessibility assistance for customers

Publicity material

Referral to external support services

Social worker and other service referrals for child support customers

Education resources for health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
