
Centrelink enquiries for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) 101-03030000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for staff assisting customers
enquiring about the CDBS that commenced 1 January 2014 and replaced the
Medicare Teen Dental Plan.

CDBS eligibility requirements

CDBS provides eligible children and teenagers aged 0 to 17 years
inclusive, with access to up to $1,026* over a 2 consecutive calendar
year period for basic dental services.

*Amount is indexed annually, this is the CDBS cap amount for 2022.

The eligibility criteria for CDBS must be met every calendar year. The
remaining cap balance can only be used in the second calendar year if
they continue to meet the eligibility criteria for CDBS.

To be eligible for CDBS a child/teenager meet the following criteria for
at least one day in the calendar year:

aged 0 to 17 years inclusive

eligible for Medicare, and

the child/teenager’s parent or guardian receives:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
-   Parenting Payment (PP), or
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP), or

their partner receives FTB Part A or Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP),
or

a child/teenager receives:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   ABSTUDY
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Carer Payment (CP)

Where FTB A is claimed as a lump sum, eligibility for CDBS is for the
calendar year immediately following the financial year for which the FTB
Part A lump sum relates. The Resources page contains an example of
eligibility for FTB Part A lump sum claimants.

Qualifying payments also include Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
payments for the Veteran's Children Education Scheme (if the child is
over 16) and the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education
and Training Scheme (if the child is over 16). This information will be
provided from DVA to Medicare for the purposes of CDBS.

Note: customers also need to be eligible for Medicare.

For further details on CDBS eligibility, see the Resources page for a
link to CDBS information including eligible payments.

Role of Centrelink and Medicare

The Centrelink system automatically checks to see if a child/teenager
meets age and payment eligibility requirements for CDBS entitlements,
and transfers age and payment eligibility details to the Medicare
system.

Eligibility for a child/teenager is determined using client data from
Centrelink, Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) and Medicare. CDBS
notifications of eligibility are generated by Medicare in bulk, in
January each year with notifications being sent for newly eligible
children/teenagers throughout the year.

Checking eligibility

Customers do not need to take their notification to the appointment to
be able to claim for a dental service.

[] Customers can check eligibility and their remaining CDBS benefit cap
amount for the child/teenager by accessing Medicare online account using
myGov or calling CDBS.

Dentists can also check the eligibility and remaining benefit cap for
the child/teenager amount online via the Services Australia Website,
Medicare for health professionals, see the Resources page for the link.

Requesting a notification

Customers requesting a notification need to be directed to Medicare.
Notifications will be automatically issued up until 31 October each
year, and can be generated at the request of the customer from 1
November each year.

If Centrelink Service Officers receive enquiries about CDBS, they can
confirm eligibility to a CDBS qualifying payment, and direct any other
queries to CDBS.

The Resources page contains:

tables of examples of CDBS enquiries

frequently asked questions

links to contact details for:

-   CDBS
-   the myGov website, and
-   Medicare for health professionals

Related links

Patient eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
