
Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test 101-06040030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about the Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC) income test.

LIC Income test

LIC entitlement is assessed on the:

-   customer's gross income for the 8 week period ending on the date of
    claim, or calculated start date, or
-   8 week period ending 28 days before the card's expiry date for
    renewals

For partnered customers:

-   assess the combined income of both members of the couple
-   gross income for the LIC assessment period must be under 100% of the
    qualifying limit applicable to the customer

See the Resources page for a link to the Services Australia website for
LIC income limits.

For customers not on an income support payment (LIC only):

-   all employment earnings paid during the 8 week assessment period are
    to be coded using the LOP frequency with the Date of event (DOV)
    being the paid date and each pay period to have the start and the
    end of the period coded

For current income support payment customers:

-   the LIC claim will be deemed to apply from the date paid to for
    their payment, and
-   the 8 week assessment period will be the 8 weeks ending on the date
    paid to

For customers or partners where the income support payment has stopped
within the 8 week assessment period:

-   the employment income components for LIC will only need to be
    calculated from the date paid to plus one (DPT+1) of their previous
    payment. This will make sure that the employment income is not
    counted twice, as the income support payments are automatically
    included in the LIC income test

Past period or advance payments

Past period payments (arrears) or advance payments paid within the 8
week LIC income assessment period should be included, as they were paid
in the period.

Note: the exceptions to this rule for 8 week assessment are lump sum
leave or redundancy payments and lump sum compensation payments.

Proof of income for the 8 week LIC assessment period

Documents that provide proof of income include:

-   payslips
-   an employer statement
-   Taxation Notice of Assessment
-   income tax returns
-   bank statements and
-   rental income details

This evidence should be accepted. If there is reason to doubt the
validity of changes to details provided by the claimant at renewal then
verification should be formally requested.

Deemed Income

Although LIC is not subject to an assets test, the income test does
apply with income derived from financial investments. Income we assess
are:

-   deemed income from financial investments, such as bank accounts,
    managed investments and shares
-   deemed income from account-based income streams
-   income from income stream products, such as superannuation pensions
    and defined benefit income streams
-   foreign income
-   private trusts and companies
-   lump sum payments such as redundancy, leave or termination payments
-   compensation

Assessment of government payments, compensation or maintenance

For customers receiving government payments, compensation or maintenance
who are claiming or renewing a LIC, all taxable income is taken into
consideration as well as any of the following:

-   A social security pension or benefit paid to the customer or their
    partner within the meaning to the Social Security Act 1991
-   If the person is receiving a social security pension or benefit
    within the meaning of the Social Security Act 1991 - the person's
    maintenance tested amount
-   An ABSTUDY payment
-   DIRS paid to the customer or their partner
-   A pension payable under the Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986
-   Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA) and Income Support
    Supplement
    Note: Prisoner of War (POW) Recognition Supplement is exempt income
    for LIC purposes
-   A payment received by a trainee in full-time training under a Labour
    Market Program, who is receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA
-   Payment of the New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) Allowance or
    Self-Employment Allowance
-   A payment of compensation within the meaning of section 17 of the
    Social Security Act 1991 (that is a lump sum and/or periodic
    payments, though they are assessed differently - see below)

In addition, the following supplementary payments must also be included
in the LIC income test:

-   Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, Pensioner
    Education Supplement (PES)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   Pension Supplement (all 3 components)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA) (including RAA paid with ABSTUDY)
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL)
-   Training Supplement
-   Work for the Dole (WFD) Supplement
-   ABSTUDY PES
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme PES
-   Additional components of ABSTUDY, that is Boarding School Supplement
    and Additional Assistance
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

More details about the income test and income limits for LIC can be
found on the Services Australia website.

Austudy, ABSTUDY or YA customers, whose income support payment is
cancelled due to the customer's or partner's income, will generally lose
LIC eligibility for the same reason.

Scholarships

The income treatment of scholarships for LIC purposes is the same as the
treatment of scholarships for all other social security purposes -
scholarships are treated as income unless specifically exempted. For
more information, see Assessing scholarship income.

Compensation assessment

Compensation is assessed as income for LIC purposes. It is treated
differently for LIC than it is for all other Centrelink payments and
products. The ordinary income test is used to assess all compensation
payments using the gross compensation amount (settlement amount without
reduction).

Periodic compensation payments that are paid in the 8 week LIC income
assessment period are included in the income test.

Lump sum compensation payments are apportioned over a period of 12
months and affect a customer's LIC eligibility for 12 months starting on
the date of settlement. Any part of the apportioned income that
coincides with the LIC income assessment period is included in the
income test. If a customer lodges a LIC claim within 56 days of the end
date of the lump sum apportionment period, that part of the assessable
lump sum payment/s that applies to relevant days within the LIC 8 week
income assessment period will be included in the income test.

Smart Centre staff may complete simple updates. For example, a customer
has weekly compensation payments already recorded and is advising a new
amount together with a letter that verifies the amount and date of
change. For more details, see Role of staff outside Compensation Teams.

LIC renewals and reassessments, new instances, unsubstantiated or
complex changes to these types of income should be referred to the
Compensation Recovery Team (CRT).

Normal procedures apply where compensation amounts need to be assessed
for LIC purposes.

LIC and Lump Sum Leave or Redundancy Payments

LIC customers are not subject to an Income Maintenance Period (IMP).

The treatment of lump sum leave and redundancy payments for LIC is
different to the way such payments are treated for income support
payments.

If the customer:

will be returning to the same employer after the leave period has ended,
Lump sum leave payments are assessed as part of the customer's
employment income for the assessment period

-   leave and termination payments paid by an employer has more details

is not returning to the same employer after the leave period has ended,
lump sum leave payments and redundancy payments are apportioned over a
period of 12 months from the date they are paid

-   any part of the apportioned lump sum payment that is paid in the LIC
    8 week income assessment period is included in the income test

A customer who has an income support payment rejected because they are
subject to an IMP may claim LIC and may be eligible due to the 12 month
apportionment rule for LIC.

Date of event (DOV) for any financial investment and self-employment updates

For LIC only customers: the DOV will be the start of the 8 week LIC
assessment period. When there is a significant change in the account
balance, number of shares, new account, an additional assessment line
may be needed. Other ordinary income can be received from, but is not
limited to:

-   Bank accounts - including term deposits, bonds, debentures
-   Shares
-   Managed investments
-   Foreign income and foreign pensions
-   Existing self-employment and real estate (which had started before
    the start of the 8 week LIC assessment period). If a business or
    rental property income started on or after the start of the 8 week
    LIC assessment period, the DOV will be the start date of the
    business or the date property was purchased
-   If the customer and/or partner are receiving an income support
    payment and have income from self-employment or a business
-   If business/self-employment income has recently been assessed, do
    not request documents again but accept the assessment already done
-   If the customer has provided an estimate of income for income
    support payments, this estimate should also be accepted for the LIC
    claim and previous year financial documents should not be requested

Note: this does not include private trusts and private companies that
are recorded by the Complex Assessment Officers (CAO). Do not ask for
relevant documents from customers with trust and company income, as
these entities are reviewed annually, if:

-   it is an ongoing entity that has already been assessed, and
-   the customer advises that no changes have occurred

For ISP/PEN customers also receiving/claiming LIC: If coding financial
investment or self-employment details for a customer and/or partner
receiving an income support payment for the entire LIC 8 week income
assessment period, primary benefit rules apply. Coding income and assets
for Centrelink payments and services and General 14 day notification
provisions have more details.

Multiple DOVs may apply for ISP current, cancelled, rejected and/or
assessed customers. See Resources for examples.

Reissue of over recovered amounts

When a customer repays a debt to Services Australia and pays too much,
the agency reissues the over recovered payment for the period of the
debt.

Although the customer may receive the reissued amount during the 8 week
income assessment period for LIC, it should not be included as income in
that period. This is for the period of the overpayment.

Current LIC cardholders, gross income must not equal or exceed 125%

If there is a change of circumstances for a current LIC cardholder who
is not yet due for renewal, the customer's gross income must not equal
or exceed 125% of the qualifying limit on an 8 week basis to retain the
card.

Customers need to notify the agency when their total gross income
reaches or exceeds 125% of the relevant income threshold in any 8 week
period. If the customer's total gross income over any 8 week period is
equal to, or greater than the 125% income limit, then:

-   eligibility is reassessed, and
-   entitlement to the LIC is cancelled

This higher income limit is to help customers employed on a contractual,
seasonal or casual basis.

From 1 July 2021, the Single Touch Payroll process will apply to all
current LIC records. If the customer or partner are identified in the
STP process, they will need to confirm the employer. The STP process
will then monitor the Paid Employment income and automatically cancel
their card entitlement if the income exceeds the relevant LIC income
threshold.

If not included in the STP process, the customer will need to advise
when starting work that their income will go over the limit, and they
wish to surrender the LIC immediately.

Alternatively, the customer may wish to wait until their income reaches
125% of the qualifying limit.

In these cases, if an income support payment is not being paid, the
customer's new income should be recorded as ongoing income from the
start date of their employment. If they have a partner, an estimate of
the partner's average income should be recorded as income from the
beginning of the 8 week period.

In these circumstances, income does not need to be verified. The outcome
will then be that once 125% of the qualifying limit has been reached:

-   the LIC will cancel, and
-   an appropriate letter will be sent

While there is some flexibility in using an estimate for part of the
assessed income, staff should request that employment earnings details
be supplied by the customer.

Unfavourable decision

When an unfavourable decision is to be made, the Decision Maker (DM)
must provide the customer with an explanation of the decision and an
opportunity to provide further details or evidence. See Advising
verbally of an unfavourable decision for more information.

The Resources page has links to relevant forms and publications, LIC
income test details, and examples of assessing and coding various types
of income for LIC claims. It also has links to relevant intranet pages,
including current equity and merit-based scholarship details.

Related links

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) renewals

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Restoration of a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Rates and thresholds

Assessing salary sacrificing/salary packaging arrangements for
employment income

Health Care Card (HCC)

Health Care Cards (HCCs) for foster children

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Extra concession information

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Assessing scholarship income

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Compensation payments

Role of staff outside Compensation Teams

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Fraud

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
