
Energy Supplement for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) recipients 101-03090060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the Energy Supplement, which is paid
automatically as a component of a recipient's Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
Part A and Part B. It is a non-taxable payment and is not considered
income for income support or family assistance payments.

From 20 March 2017, grandfathering arrangements applied. New claimants,
and recipients who have lost their Energy Supplement grandfathering will
not receive Energy Supplement. Recipients who did not receive Energy
Supplement in relation to 19 September 2016 will no longer receive
Energy Supplement.

On this Page:

Energy Supplement changes

There are three major changes that are effective from 20 March 2017:

-   New claimants receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A or Part B will not
    receive Energy Supplement. These claimants will not be grandfathered
-   Recipients who received Energy Supplement in respect of 19 September
    2016 will continue to be paid Energy Supplement as long as they
    remain entitled to Family Tax Benefit Part A or Part B at a
    legislative rate greater than $0. These recipients will be
    grandfathered
-   Recipients who start to receive or do not have a continuous
    entitlement to Family Tax Benefit Part A or Part B between 20
    September 2016 and 19th March 2017 will receive Energy Supplement
    for every day they were eligible in that period and then they will
    stop receiving Energy Supplement from 20th March 2017. These
    recipients will not be grandfathered

Energy Supplement eligibility

For FTB recipients to be eligible for Energy Supplement Part A
recipients must:

-   be eligible for Family Tax Benefit Part A at a legislative rate
    greater than $0, and
-   be grandfathered for Energy Supplement purposes, and
-   satisfy Australian residence requirements. Temporary overseas
    absences of up to 6 weeks are acceptable

For FTB recipients to be eligible for Energy Supplement Part B
recipients must:

-   be eligible for Family Tax Benefit Part B at a legislative rate
    greater than $0, and
-   be grandfathered for Energy Supplement purposes, and
-   satisfy Australian residence requirements. Temporary overseas
    absences of up to 6 weeks are acceptable

FTB recipients who lose their grandfathered status for Energy Supplement
will not be eligible to Energy Supplement from that date onwards.

If temporarily overseas, after 6 weeks the Energy Supplement will cease
for the recipient (or for the child if only the child is overseas).

Grandfathered Approved Care Organisations (ACO) are eligible for base
rate Energy Supplement Part A for all FTB children. Organisations that
become ACOs after 19 September 2016 will not be eligible for Energy
Supplement. See Item 15 in the Energy Supplement table on the Process
page for more information about ACOs.

Grandfathering of Energy Supplement

There are two important dates to consider that impact on a recipient's
grandfathering status for Energy Supplement Part A and Energy Supplement
Part B.

-   20 March 2017 is the date grandfathering rules came in to effect
-   19 September 2016 is the test date for grandfathering for Energy
    Supplement Part A and Part B
-   Recipients must have been eligible for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part
    A and/or Part B at a legislative rate greater than $0 in respect of
    19 September 2016

This includes:

-   FTB Lump Sum claimants if they were eligible for FTB Part A or FTB
    Part B at a legislative rate greater than $0 in respect of 19
    September 2016
-   Claimants that are granted FTB with a backdated date of effect, and
    the backdated period includes FTB Part A and/or FTB Part B at a
    legislative rate greater than $0 in respect of 19 September 2016
-   Recipients who have a cancelled status as of 19 September 2016 and
    their FTB is later restored at a legislative rate greater than $0,
    and the restored period includes 19 September 2016
-   Recipients who did not receive FTB as instalments, in respect of 19
    September 2016, but, at reconciliation, the recipient is found to be
    eligible for FTB Part A and/or FTB Part B at a legislative rate
    greater than $0 in respect of 19 September 2016
-   Recipients who are subject to Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit
    Instalment Payments (PIP) or deferred PIP as of 19 September 2016
-   Current at zero rate (CZR) recipients, or
-   Cancel at next pay (CNP) recipients

Recipients who meet the above eligibility for grandfathering, and who
have their FTB paid to a third party (for example, a nominee) are still
considered to meet the grandfathering provisions.

Note: the legislative rate is before deductions are taken into account
including:

-   More Choice for Families (MCFF) options
-   Mandatory Continuous Adjustment
-   Recovery of an advance payment or debt

A recipient who is only entitled to the Rent Assistance component of
Family Tax Benefit for a 'regular care' child (i.e. less than 35% care),
in respect of 19 September 2016, will not become grandfathered.

Losing Grandfathering Status - see Item 3 in the Energy Supplement table
on the Process page.

Transferring between FTB Part A and FTB Part B - see Item 4 in the
Energy Supplement table on the Process page.

Grandfathering status and Adding a child - see Item 5 in the Energy
Supplement table on the Process page.

Payment options

FTB payment choices allow recipients to choose how to receive their
Energy Supplement payments as part of their FTB Part A and Part B
entitlement: fortnightly, quarterly or after the financial year.

For any FTB paid fortnightly, the Energy Supplement payments are paid
fortnightly by default. Grandfathered recipients may choose to be paid
quarterly instead (if FTB Part A and Part B are paid fortnightly, the
Energy Supplement for Part A and Part B must be paid the same way, that
is, both fortnightly or both quarterly).Quarterly Energy Supplement
payments are paid October, January, April and July each year.

Grandfathered recipients lodging an FTB lump sum claim will receive the
Energy Supplement as part of their annual FTB entitlement when their
claim is finalised.

Grandfathered ACOs are paid Energy Supplement Part A fortnightly.

Rate of Energy Supplement

Energy Supplement Part A and Part B are calculated as a daily rate based
on income and other circumstances used to calculate the recipient's FTB
Part A and Part B rates. The Energy Supplement payments are included in
the FTB reconciliation process.

The Resources page contains details of Families Override Contacts,
examples of Energy Supplement grandfathering provisions as well as links
to FTB Energy Supplement information.

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Apportionment of income/maintenance reduction

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 1)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 2)

Calculating the rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B

Energy Supplement

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Payment rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
