
Income statements and detailed income and asset statements 101-09020060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Important information
An Income statement is used by a business approved to use Centrelink
Confirmation eServices (CCeS). It shows the gross value (circumstances
data) of all income and asset types for a customer. It includes any that
are exempt under a Centrelink income and asset test. It allows a
business to assess the customer's financial circumstances and
eligibility for a service. Income statements do not show assessable
data.
A Centrelink statement is used if a customer needs to show the details
Services Australia use to assess eligibility, not an Income statement.
See Differences between Income statements and Centrelink statements.

This document outlines information about the Income statement and the
Detailed income and asset statement, and how to issue the statements to
customers and registered businesses. The statements have customer income
and asset information that can be provided to businesses to help with
the eligibility for a concession, rebate or service.

Income statements

Income statements are available to customers and registered business and
have a summary of the customer's income information. Income statements
can only be issued for customers that are current or suspended.

Statements include all income data that is held on the customer's record
as at a specified date ('confirmation date'). It shows point in time and
circumstance information. Customers can provide the statement to
businesses to help determine eligibility for a concession, rebate or
service.

Note: partner income details do not display on Income statements.
Customers can request their partner’s Income statement if there is a 'Y'
in the Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) indicator on the partner’s
record.

Statements can display current or historical information from the
customer’s Centrelink record:

-   current - displays customer information for the most recently
    completed period (Customer's Entitlement period)
-   historical - includes customer information from the confirmation
    date (back to the 1st July of the previous financial year)

Information displayed on Income statements

The statement shows the gross totals of income types from the customer’s
record and may include the following information:

Note: income that is exempt under a Centrelink income and asset test
display on Income statements.

Income

-   Name
-   Customer Reference Number (CRN)
-   Date of Birth
-   Payment type
-   Assessed Children
-   Previous and future regular entitlements and payments
-   Previous and future irregular payments

Deductions

Deductions for Centrepay, Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS), Income
Management, tax and child support will be listed on the Income
statement. This includes debt withholdings and advance repayments as
follows:

-   Gross deduction amount
-   Deduction type
-   Service reason
-   Date paid

Family Tax Benefit

-   The legislative Family Tax Benefit (FTB) amount will be shown. This
    is the rate the customer is actually entitled to based on their
    estimate

Youth Allowance

-   Youth Allowance (YA) Independent rate indicator will display on the
    statement if the customer is paid the independent rate of Youth
    Allowance

Shared care

-   Shared care states whether a shared care arrangement is in place for
    a child or children

Maximum rate indicator

-   Confirms whether a customer is receiving the maximum rate of a
    pension type payment

Note: customers can request:

-   A detailed Income and Asset Statement. This includes extra
    information that is not in the standard Income statement, or
-   A Centrelink statement. This includes income and asset information
    that directly affects the customer's rate of payment and their
    entitlement to that payment (or assessable amounts)

Detailed income and asset statement

The statement is available to customers and registered businesses for
income and asset information.

The information:

includes all income and asset data that is held on the customer’s record
as at a specified date (‘confirmation date’)

provides a summary of the gross values (circumstances data) of the
customer’s share of each income and asset type. It does not show partner
income and asset information

includes all income and asset information that a customer has sole or
part ownership of:

-   part ownership displays the customer’s portion of ownership as a
    percentage
-   the other part owner’s details (for example, partner details) are
    not displayed

Businesses approved for Centrelink Confirmation eServices in the finance
Business Category for financial planning purposes, have access to the
statement with the customer's consent. The detailed statement is
available to other businesses that might need this extra detail. This is
approved on a case by case basis.

Note: partner income details do not display on Income statements.
Customers can request their partner’s Detailed income and asset
statement if 'Y' is in the Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) indicator
on the partner’s record.

Information displayed on Detailed income and asset statements

The statement gives a summary of the gross totals (circumstance data) of
each income and asset type as listed on a customer's Centrelink record
and detailed information for each of the following income and asset
types.

Note: income and assets that are exempt under a Centrelink income and
asset test display on the Detailed income and asset statement.

Deposit accounts and direct investments

The deposit accounts and direct investments details available in the
Income statement include:

-   asset type
-   amount
-   currency type
-   date of effect
-   institution name
-   type of accounts and or direct investments
-   number of units
-   unit value
-   percentage owned by the customer

Note: values display in foreign currency where applicable.

Managed Investments (MIV)

The Managed Investments details available in the Income statement
include:

-   asset type
-   amount
-   currency type
-   date of effect
-   institution name
-   product name
-   number of units
-   unit value
-   percentage owned by the customer

Note: values display in foreign currency where applicable.

Real estate

The real estate details available in the Income statement can include:

-   asset type
-   income type
-   value
-   frequency
-   date of effect

Note: the gross value of all real estate details recorded on the
customer’s record are displayed. This includes the customer’s principal
home and any real estate that may be exempt under a Centrelink income
and assets test. Allowable deductions and mortgage interest are not
deducted from the gross income amount.

Securities and Investments (shares)

The securities and investments (shares) details available in the Income
statement include:

-   asset type
-   amount
-   currency type
-   date of effect
-   institution name
-   account type (type of security and/or investment)
-   number of shares
-   unit value
-   percentage owned by the customer

Note: values display in foreign currency where applicable

Superannuation and annuities

The superannuation and annuities (assets/income) details available on
the Income statement include:

-   asset/income type (pensions/income streams)
-   amount
-   currency type
-   date of effect
-   institution name
-   account type
-   number of units
-   unit value
-   percentage owned by the customer

Note: superannuation and annuities are defined as an asset. Details of
frequency and income will appear in the aggregated figures. This
displays under the income section on the statement.

Values display in foreign currency where applicable.

Foreign Income, Foreign Pensions and Foreign Assets

The foreign income, pensions and asset details available in the Income
statement include:

Foreign Income

-   Income type
-   Component (For Income, examples are Earnings, Business, Farm; For
    Pensions, examples are Old Age, Social Pension)
-   Amount
-   Currency type
-   Frequency
-   Date of Effect

Foreign Assets

-   Asset type (for example: Real estate, Business, Superannuation,
    Other)
-   Component (for example: Business, Overseas Assets)
-   Amount
-   Currency type
-   Frequency
-   Date of Effect

Note: values display in foreign currency where applicable.

Deductions

Deductions for Centrepay, Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS), Income
Management, tax and child support are listed on the Income statement.
This includes debt withholdings and advance repayments as follows:

-   Gross deduction amount
-   Deduction type
-   Service reason
-   Date paid

Family Tax Benefit

-   The legislative Family Tax Benefit (FTB) amount is shown. This is
    the rate the customer is entitled to based on their estimate

Youth Allowance

-   Youth Allowance (YA) Independent rate indicator displays on the
    statement if the customer is paid the independent rate of Youth
    Allowance

Single rate indicator

-   For customers who are partnered but are being paid at a single rate,
    the indicator is displayed

Shared Care

-   Shared care states whether a shared care arrangement is in place for
    a child or children

Maximum rate indicator

-   Confirms whether a customer is receiving the maximum rate of a
    pension type payment

Note: if the customer needs a statement with assessable amounts they
should request a Centrelink statement instead of an income statement
(which shows circumstances information).

Requests for Income statements by registered businesses using Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Income statements can only be requested by registered Income
Confirmation businesses for customers who are current or suspended and
have consented to the business obtaining the information electronically.
Businesses can get this information using Centrelink Confirmation
eServices (CCeS) via:

-   Single Enquiry Service (1 customer at a time)
-   Batch Service (multiple customers at once), or
-   System to System (a direct interface from a Business to the Agency)

The category a business operates in determines the Income Confirmation
characteristics they are able to access. Businesses can request changes
to the characteristics based on their business requirements and the
information they need to receive.

Income Confirmation provides approved businesses an Income statement
electronically without the need for the customer to visit Centrelink.
For more information about CCeS for a business, see Customer consent for
Centrelink Confirmation eService (CCeS). A business can receive an
Income statement or a Detailed income and asset statement.

Requests for Income statements by customers

Customers can request an Income statement by:

-   [A self service option is available for customers] using the Request
    a document service in the Centrelink online account to view, print
    and save the statement immediately. A copy of the statement will
    also be sent to their online account if they are subscribed to
    online letters
-   [A self service option is available for customers] using phone self
    service for customers to have a statement posted to their mailing
    address
-   [A self service option is available for customers] using the Express
    Plus Centrelink mobile app to view, print and save a copy of their
    Income statement on their smart device
-   [\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
    Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-phone.png] phoning
    the Smart Centre, or
-   [\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
    Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-face-to-face.png]
    visiting a service centre

Income statements can only be issued to customers that are current or
suspended.

The Process page has information on issuing the Income statement and the
Detailed income and asset statement.

Differences between Income statements and Centrelink statements

The type of statement required will depend on the information the
customer requires.

Income statements

-   Have circumstances data not assessable values
-   Provide gross values of each income and/or asset type the customer
    owns, or has part ownership of
-   Show gross values for income and assets that are exempt under a
    Centrelink income and asset test (for example, principal home). This
    allows a business to apply an independent assessment of the
    customer’s full financial circumstances and decide if a customer is
    eligible for a concession, rebate or service

Centrelink Statements

-   Show assessable values
-   List gross values and net (assessable) values of each income and
    asset type that directly affect the customer’s rate of Centrelink
    payment and their entitlement to that payment
-   Show net amounts for exempt income and assets

The Resources page has a link to the Centrelink Confirmation eServices
for businesses page on the Services Australia Website.

Related links

Withdrawing a business's approval to use a deduction and confirmation
service

Centrelink Statement

Faxing letters using Outlook and Customer First

Documents and Statements option online

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
