
Cost of Living Payment 101-22033004

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the Cost of Living Payment to eligible customers
to help with the cost of living, as announced in the 2022 Federal
Budget.

Cost of Living Payment

The Cost of Living Payment will provide financial support to Australian
households to help with living costs.

The Cost of Living Payment will be automatically paid to eligible
payment recipients and concession card holders who are residing in
Australia and have a payment entitlement or hold a card on 29 March
2022.

The Cost of Living Payment will be a one-off payment of $250 and paid
automatically into the customer's nominated bank account from late April
2022.

The one off amount will only be payable once for each person, regardless
of whether they qualify under more than one payment type (or concession
card).

Eligibility

To be eligible customers must be receiving one of the following
Centrelink payments or Concession Cards on 29 March 2022:

-   ABSTUDY (Living Allowance)
-   Age Pension
-   Austudy
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Carer Allowance (CA) (paid if not receiving a primary income support
    payment)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (students, apprentices and job seekers)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Pension Concession Card (PCC) not receiving a payment
-   An eligible Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment or a DVA
    Gold card

The customer must be residing in Australia on the 29 March 2022.

Customers that have made a claim for an eligible Income Support Payment
on, before or after the test date and have that claim granted will be
eligible to receive the Cost Of Living Payment only if the Income
Support Payment eligibility period covers the test date.

If customers are receiving an 'eligible payment or Concession card' from
Services Australia or a Department of Veterans' Affairs 'eligible
payment or DVA Gold card', customers will only be eligible for one
payment of the Cost of Living Payment.

Customers who are paid and who subsequently become not eligible for
payment on the test date will not have this one off payment recovered,
unless it is determined that they provided false or misleading
information.

Customers who are in a nil rate period (CZR) because of employment
income will be eligible to receive the payment, unless they are on:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   100% Home Equity Access Scheme
-   Rapid Connect Failure

Waiting periods and payment preclusion periods

Customers who are serving a waiting or preclusion period during the test
date will not receive the Cost of Living Payment. This includes:

-   Income Maintenance Period (IMP)
-   Compensation Preclusion Period
-   Ordinary Waiting Period
-   Seasonal Work Preclusion Period
-   Newly Arrived Residence Waiting Period
-   Moving to a Lower Area of Employment Opportunities
-   a Waiting Period after the application of a cancellation for a Work
    Refusal failure or
-   a third mutual obligation failure

If the waiting or preclusion period is reduced or waived and the
customer receives an eligible payment that covers the test date, they
will qualify for the Cost of Living Payment. The payment will
automatically be made.

Payment information

The Cost of Living Payment will be paid from late April 2022 to
customers if they were eligible on the 29 March 2022 (the test day).

Eligible customers do not need to do anything, payments will be made
automatically to a customer's nominated bank account.

Payments will be made in addition to an eligible customer's regular
fortnightly payment and customers will be able to easily identify their
payment from the payment transaction description presented on their bank
statement.

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) will pay eligible DVA payment or a
DVA Gold card holders directly.

The payment will:

-   be 100% income managed or directed to cashless debit card accounts
    where applicable
-   be non-taxable and not count as income for income support purposes
-   not be used to recover debts (either Child Support or debts to the
    Commonwealth)

Customers will receive:

-   a letter to advise of the payment being made to their nominated bank
    account
-   a link to the Services Australia website

Arrears payments for the Cost of Living Payment will not be possible
beyond 30 June 2023.

For more details, see the Process.

Suspended/Cancellation customers

Eligible customers who are suspended or cancelled and who are
subsequently restored and payable for the test date will be eligible for
the Cost of Living Payment.

The Resources page has a list of eligible Department of Veterans'
Affairs payments, Eligibility examples and a link to the Report
Suspected Fraud and Corruption System page.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
