
Transition to Business Hub from Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) 101-19103112

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia staff can support
businesses transitioning from CBOS to Business Hub.

Who is transitioning

Overtime the agency is migrating existing CBOS services into Business
Hub.

The agency will notify businesses about the transition from CBOS to
Business Hub when it is time to do so. All users that need ongoing
access to online services will be provided instructions on how to
transition from CBOS into Business Hub.

What is Business Hub

Business Hub is a secure online service for registered businesses. Users
can log on and connect to a range of services offered by the agency.
Overtime Business Hub will replace CBOS.

What is Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

PRODA is an online authentication system. The agency gives users a
username, password, and verification code.

Users need to register for PRODA to access services offered through the
Business Hub. To get access, users will need to provide 100 points of
valid Government issued identity. A Registration Authority (RA) number
will be sent to the user to connect to the Business Hub.

PRODA has a helpdesk to manage any issues with registration.

What is happening to CBOS

CBOS will stay active until all services have migrated to Business Hub.

Some users may get instructions to register with PRODA before their
services are available in Business Hub.

This ensures the process is completed and any issues resolved before the
start date.

Users can continue to use CBOS until the agency tells them their
services are available in Business Hub.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
Intranet. It also has contact details for Provider Digital Access
(PRODA).

Related links

Business Hub

Managing personnel and updating details in Business Hub

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Registration for Business Hub

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
