
Concession cards for eligible children temporarily in non-custodial parent's care 101-06070010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to concession cards for
eligible children temporarily in non-custodial parent's care.

On this Page:

Interim concession cards

Interim concession cards (in the form of a voucher) can be issued to a
non-custodial parent while temporarily caring for children who are
included as dependants on the Health Care Card (HCC), Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC) or Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) of the custodial
parent or guardian. These interim vouchers may be issued for up to 3
months in the future.

The Concession Card Reissue Guided Procedure or the Concession card
details page are used to issue interim vouchers. In limited
circumstances only, an interim voucher - Confirmation of Concession Card
entitlement (SS055) may be issued manually. See Confirming concession
card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers.

Non-custodial parent

A non-custodial parent is a parent whose children are not considered
dependent under shared care provisions. Only the custodial parent can
request that an additional concession card (including interim vouchers)
is issued for the non-custodial parent to use when caring for the
children. Therefore the non-custodial parent must request the card from
the custodial parent.

If the interim voucher is to be issued to a person other than the
custodial parent, full details including the express permission of the
custodial parent must be clearly documented on the custodial customer's
record.

The custodial parent is able to specify which eligible children are to
appear on the printed interim voucher. The non-custodial's interim
voucher is to exclude the following information relating to both the
custodial and non-custodial parent:

-   customer's name
-   customer's residential address
-   payment type
-   name of partner
-   Customer Reference Number (CRN) (partner's)

The name and CRN of the child/ren are to be recorded on the interim
voucher. 'For Child Use Only' will be displayed in the address field.
The default period for the interim voucher is 14 days from the issue
date however the dates of the period can be manually changed if
required.

In cases of family and domestic violence or other sensitive family
circumstances, a social worker may be required to facilitate the
provision of the interim voucher to the non-custodial parent.

As the children are considered to be dependants of the custodial parent
while in the non-custodial parent's care, concessions are to be
available for the children at any time, regardless of the non-custodial
parent's income.

Individuals who have a Regular Care Child will need to apply for a HCC
by lodging a claim for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) in the first instance so
that an assessment can be made as to whether they meet all other FTB
requirements and can be issued a HCC via the FAO system. These customers
can have their children listed on their LIC.

Related links

How to reissue concession cards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
