
Coding the Third Party Notification Summary (TPNS) screen 101-11020100

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to add a third party notification to
organisation records on the Third Party Notification Summary (TPNS)
screen. These notifications can provide information on organisational
status changes such as an Australian Business Number (ABN) change or
trading status changes.

On this Page:

Organisation records

Organisation records are used for businesses such as Centrepay
organisations, private trusts and companies, child care providers and
organisations involved in the Paid Parental Leave scheme. Organisation
records are also used for nominee organisations, including
state/territory public trustees, commercial trustee companies and
financial planning organisations.

The TPNS screen is updated when an organisation has a change to their
organisational status. The most common status updates are due to:

-   a change in trading status such as a change in ownership or a change
    to the organisation's ABN, or
-   a change in system status, such as where an organisation is
    identified as a duplicate or multiple record

Notifications provided or confirmed by authorised sources (such as a
Centrelink authorised business contact from the organisation or the
Australian Business Register) are considered to be verified
notifications.

Recording the TPNS screen

All staff can record notifications on the TPNS screen, however due to
the impact on customers and potential to corrupt records, access to
create and action changes for organisations is limited through ICT
Security Portal (ISP) access to experienced officers.

Where a notification has been recorded by a Service Officer without
appropriate ISP access, an email will automatically be generated to
refer the update to Services Australia Canberra staff to verify the
notification prior to completion.

Duplicate and multiple organisation records

Further investigation is required to determine whether an additional
record is a duplicate record that is not to be used or a multiple record
that has been created for a purpose.

A duplicate record is a record that replicates an existing record and
has generally been created in error. Where a duplicate record is
identified, the TPNS screen must be updated to prevent incorrect use.

Due to system limitations, it is often necessary for an organisation to
have more than one Centrelink record. This is referred to as a multiple
record, as it exists for a specific reason.

The Resources page a table detailing notification and status codes for
the TPNS screen.

Related links

Nominee organisations

Centrepay Business interactions

Reviews and reassessments for private trusts and private companies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
