
Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) renewals 101-06040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) renewals
are issued and how customers can complete the LIC renewals. It also
includes details on supporting documents, dates of event and how to
qualify for the LIC card.

LIC renewals

Customer can renew a LIC 28 days before the cards expiry date and up to
13 weeks after the card expiry date. See Important dates and periods for
assessing eligibility for LIC renewals.

A LIC renewal is a new claim. The customer will need to re-establish
entitlement for a further period. This will start on the day after the
current LIC card expiry date.

All general provisions (except POI requirement) with lodgement of new
claims apply for LIC renewals. The 'renewal' concept simplifies the
'claim' process for existing LIC customers.

Claiming

Online claim

An Outstanding task displays on the customers homepage when the customer
selects Centrelink services from their myGov account.

Customers are able to complete this task to submit their LIC renewal:

-   28 days prior to expiry of their current card; or
-   up to 13 weeks after the current card expiry date

Service Officers can view the renewal using Customer Online View. They
can see what the customer sees when they use their Centrelink online
account.

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Service Officers can use ACC to start and submit a claim or resume and
submit a renewal task for a customer. See Viewing and processing online
and assisted customer claims.

Paper claim

Customers without an online account will receive a letter by post with
the Renewing Your Health Care Card (SS054) form. It will have the
details about the online LIC renewal and how they can access this
service. Customers who are registered for online services should be
advised to complete their renewal online.

Customers not in Australia

The customer must be in Australia at the time the renewal is lodged. If
the customer is not in Australia when the renewal is due to be issued,
the renewal will defer for 14 days and be issued either as an
Outstanding task or via a Renewing your Health Care Card (SS054) form.

Renewal timeframes

Customers have until the date the card is due to expire to complete the
online renewal or return the Renewing your Health Care Card (SS054) form
to avoid the LIC being cancelled. If they do not complete the renewal or
return the form by the expiry date, their LIC entitlement will
automatically cancel on the expiry date.

Service Officers can accept LIC renewals up to 13 weeks after the card
expiry/cancellation date. If a customer contacts within 13 weeks of this
cancellation:

-   tell the customer to complete their Outstanding task online
-   offer assistance through Assisted Customer Claim (ACC); or
-   issue a new SS054 if the customer is deemed unable or unsuitable to
    complete an online claim, or declined the offer to complete an
    Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

If granting the LIC renewal, it will issue immediately. The start date
of the card is the previous LIC's date of expiry plus one.

If the customer contacts on or after 13 weeks and one day after the LIC
expiry date, the customer will have to lodge a new claim.

Note: automatically issued concession do not have a renewal process.

Income assessment for renewals

The system will assess the renewal on the customer's gross income in the
8 week income assessment period starting 12 weeks prior to the expiry
date of the card. The customer's income must not exceed the qualifying
limit to renew the card. See Important dates and periods for assessing
eligibility for LIC renewals.

Determination of employment income

Service Officers are to accept gross income from the most recent 8 weeks
available to the customer.

For customers with a LIC only, use gross income for the 8 weeks between
the:

-   customers most recent payslip (or other income evidence). It must
    end 28 days before the current card expiry, and
-   payslip ending 8 weeks earlier

For customers receiving payments use:

-   income already recorded; or
-   record employment income, see Recording and correcting employment
    income details

Date of effect for financial investments

The date of effect (DOE) for all financial investment updates is the
start date of the renewal assessment period-12 weeks prior to the expiry
date of the card. This may be the same or a different date to the date
of event (DOV). The DOV is the date the notifiable event occurred.

For customers receiving an income support payment, the primary benefit
rules apply when coding financial investments. See Coding income and
assets for Centrelink payments and services.

Supporting evidence for renewals

New income or financial investments

The customer must supply verification of any new income or financial
investment they report in the renewal process.

Employment Income

Customers must provide proof of employment income, except when there are
employment income details on their record that covers the full 8 week
assessment period.

Employment income verification can be either payslips or a letter from
the employer. It must state:

-   the gross amount paid
-   date paid
-   start and end dates of the period

Customers cannot use bank statements for employment income verification.

Bank accounts and financial investments

The customer does not need to supply proof of bank accounts or any
financial investments declared in the renewal claim that have previously
been recorded on the customer's record.

Other existing income items that have no change, for example income
streams, do not need re-verification.

If the processing service officer has doubts about the accuracy of any
information provided by the customer, or there is a significant change
in the value that could affect entitlement, they must determine whether
further proof/verification is required.

Automatic completion of LIC renewals

Some online renewals may not require any Service Officer intervention
and will automatically complete when the customer submits the renewal.

For LIC renewals, automatic completion may occur when the renewal meets
the following criteria:

-   the customer advises there is no change to relationship status or
    dependant status
-   the combined total of all financial accounts is not $20,000 greater
    than the existing amount on record
-   the customer does not advise any new, or changes to existing
    financial accounts, real estate or other payments
-   the customer advises Employment income for self and/or partner
    (under the relevant threshold)

In these cases, the renewal will be GRANTED and the LIC card will issue.

The renewal will be REJECTED (Income) if the customer meets all of the
criteria above and:

-   has employment income over the threshold, or
-   the combined customer and partner employment income is over the
    threshold

Customer with urgent medical needs or in financial hardship

The customer may need a LIC immediately. Process the LIC renewal claim
if a customer is in financial hardship due to:

-   a delay in processing their LIC renewal or
-   having an urgent medical need, such as a doctor's appointment or a
    prescription

If granting, offer the customer an interim voucher. See Request for
urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial hardship.

The Resources page contains:

-   renewal dates and the renewal assessment period
-   supporting evidence for renewals
-   renewal income
-   determination of income
-   date of effect for financial investments
-   an example of changed assets and LIC renewal
-   links to relevant forms
-   links to the Services Australia Website

Related links

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Restoration of a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Health Care Card not renewed/reissued for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Concession Entitlement System

Assessing salary sacrificing/salary packaging arrangements for
employment income

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Preferences for concession cards

Claims received that are incomplete or incorrect

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Customer Online View for Service Officers

Upload documents service

Fraud

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
