
Leave of absence from prison 102-12010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines processes relating to people on leave from
prison, home detention and their entitlement to income support payments.

Leave that does not qualify for payment

Customers granted leave from prison for specific purposes (for example,
for counselling, work release, attending a funeral), are still
imprisoned and generally do not qualify for:

-   social security pensions
-   social security benefits
-   parenting payments
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Carer Allowance (CA)

See Prison admission process and claims during incarceration.

Leave that does qualify for payment

If leave is granted immediately before release, and is not for any
'specific purpose' (for example, a funeral), then the person can qualify
for income support, subject to the usual qualifications.

Leave of Absence Orders are given before release to help with
reintegration. Leave of Absence Orders may start for a few days a week
and may extend for longer periods if successful.

Periodic detainment

If a person is detained periodically, they cannot be paid for any whole
day that they are imprisoned. A whole day is counted as 24 hours
(midnight to midnight).

For example: a person in detention from Friday night to Sunday afternoon
is only imprisoned for one whole day - Saturday. This is the only day
that the person is detained.

A customer's record needs to be recorded when they have a leave of
absence. This will ensure a payment is correctly granted or cancelled.

Home Detention Orders

A customer subject to a Home Detention Order may not be considered to be
in gaol. A magistrate or judge will specify the conditions of the home
detention order. These will vary according to a customer's
circumstances.

These conditions need to be reviewed carefully before determining if a
social security benefit or pension is issued.

See Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for help. The Resources page contains a
link.

Periodic and Weekend Detention Orders

Under periodic and Weekend Detention Orders, people can serve a
custodial sentence by periodic detention. The sentence is served
progressively over an extended period as a succession of short stays at
a correctional facility either on weekends or 2 consecutive week days.

See Weekend detention.

Coding a manual rate for customers detained periodically

If the customer is detained periodically, a manual rate will need to be
coded:

-   divide the fortnightly rate by 14
-   then multiply by the number of days the customer is not in detention
    for the fortnight

If in the PEN, PGA or FAO system, use reason 'OTI'.

If in the NSS system use the reason 'SYS'.

Always code a manual review to enable a return to the auto rate at end
of period of detention.

See:

-   Non NSS systems coding for manual rate of payment
-   NSS system coding for manual rate of payment
-   ABSTUDY system coding for manual rate of payment
-   Manual rates of payment

Escaped prisoners

An escaped prisoner is not eligible for payments as they are considered
to be imprisoned for the duration of their sentence. Any payment made to
the customer under their real name or alias becomes a recoverable debt.

Confirming periods in custody

For contacts and processes, refer to Confirming prison admission and
release dates.

The Resources page contains links to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk, the
Incarcerated Customer Services Team and the Confirming admission and
release intranet page.

Related links

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in
psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

Manual rates of payment

Identifying barriers to participation for Indigenous customers

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
