-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details needed from an Austudy or Youth Allowance
(YA) (student) who starts full time, part-time or casual employment and
how their payment may be affected.

Part-time or casual employment

Customers who satisfy the activity test for Austudy or study
requirements for Youth Allowance as full-time students are encouraged to
participate in part-time or casual employment. This allows them to keep
their skills up-to-date and can help them into more permanent employment
when they complete their studies. The income test provides an extra
incentive for students to get part-time and casual work.

Full-time employment

A customer may also continue to have YA (Student) or Austudy paid to
them when they are employed for temporary periods on a full-time basis.

The purpose of the legislation is to allow full-time students to access
the Student Income Bank and the higher income free area during periods
of employment (for example, during semester breaks), including full-time
employment.

The Youth Allowance or Austudy payment may cancel if the customer:

-   has employment income that precludes payments for 6 consecutive
    fortnights
-   is unable to satisfy the activity test for Austudy or study
    requirements for Youth Allowance due to their ongoing commitment to
    employment

Commencing or returning to work

If a Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy student contacts about starting
work or to report their employment income, they must be referred to
self-service to complete the update unless:

-   self-service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by
    Network News Update (NNU)/mySupport)
-   the Service Officer decides the transaction is not appropriate to be
    self-managed by the student in that instance, or
-   the student is from a remote area and cannot reasonably access
    online services

Students can report their income by:

-   [] using the online reporting option
-   using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, or
-   by calling the Centrelink reporting line to report earnings via
    speech recognition technology

Add on benefits

If a student is commencing or returning to full-time work, they may be
entitled to a Special Employment Advance (SEA).

They may also have a continuing entitlement to a Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC) or may now be eligible for a LIC if they meet the LIC income
test.

Working Credits and Student Income Bank

Full-time students receiving YA and Austudy payments are not eligible
for Working Credit because they have access to the Student Income Bank.

For more details about the transfer of Working Credit to Income Bank and
vice versa as well as the maximum amounts that can be transferred, see
Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices.

Australian Apprentices

If a student is returning to work as a full-time Australian Apprentice
they may qualify for YA as an Australian Apprentice, consider
entitlement to these payments.

Customers receiving Austudy or YA as an Australian Apprentice are
subject to the same income and assets tests that apply to full-time
students.

Australian Apprentices are not subject to the full time study
requirements or activity test if they have a current Commonwealth
registration number.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

If the customer (or their partner) receives FTB or CCS, check if the
customer needs to revise their current income estimate. Tell the
customer of the choices available to help reduce the chance of an
overpayment during the reconciliation process.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website

Related links

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Cancellation of payments

Suspension of payments

Low Income Health Care Card

Health Care Card (HCC)

Reporting requirements for students and Australian Apprentices

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Existing recipient starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
