
Suspension of Parenting Payment (PP) 102-10030120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how to suspend PP. There are links to
restoration procedures when it is appropriate.

Suspension of payments

Payments may be suspended if a customer is temporarily not qualified for
payment or the payment is not payable because of:

-   changes in circumstances or details where customer is no longer
    qualified for payment
-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment (such as attend
    interview, meet requirements for a participation plan/Job Plan or
    meet reporting requirements)
-   failure to respond to notice or request for action, provide
    information or documentation within a specified period (this may be
    after a notice has been issued requesting customer to provide
    written documentation about a change in circumstance or other
    request for information)

Auto suspensions may also be triggered if customers fail to comply with
the requirements for payment, such as statement reporting. A
notification of suspension or cancellation may also be auto triggered.

For a list of reasons for suspension for PP, see Cancellation,
suspension and rejection codes for PP.

For restoring PP after requirements have been met or the customer meets
qualification requirements, see Restoration of PP.

Customer advises change in circumstance

Customers must report changes in circumstances within 14 days of the
change.

If a customer contacts to advise a change in circumstance that affects
their qualification and payability for PP and the change means they are
no longer qualified, their payment is to be suspended or cancelled
immediately.

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) should not be suspended because a PPS
customer advises they have become partnered. Becoming partnered is a
change in the rate of Parenting Payment (PP), not a change in
qualification. For more information see Transfer from PPS to PPP.

If it is not clear they do not meet the qualification criteria and there
is not enough evidence to support this, a notice must be issued to
advise of action needed to determine qualification. The customer is
generally given 14 days from date of receipt of notification to provide
the documentation before a suspension can be applied (usually FRC).

If they provide the requested documentation within 14 days from date of
receipt of the notice (if they had originally advised of the change
within 14 days of the change), or have already provided the written
documentation within 14 days of the change, they are considered to meet
their notification requirements.

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, the Service Officer must
try to contact the nominee to request information before the payment is
suspended.

Notification of suspension

Customers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If
an automatic letter is not issued by the system, a manual Q134 or Q999
letter must be sent.

The letter must include:

-   the reason for the suspension
-   date of effect
-   the action, information or documentation needed to allow payments to
    be restored
-   reference to the relevant act, and
-   the customer's review and appeal rights

When the payment is suspended, additional appropriate actions are also
required, e.g. issue letter, code a manual review, DOC the decision.

Advising customer of unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer by phone before
finalising the decision.

Customer contacts after suspension

Explain the reason for suspension.

Provide information about the required documentation or tell the
customer what is needed so that the payment can be restored.

The Resources page contains an attachment that outlines the legislative
basis for suspending payments.

Related links

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Cancellation of Parenting Payment (PP)

Restoration of Parenting Payment (PP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Parenting Payment (PP)

Requesting information (CLK)

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Briefing Interviews when youngest child is 5 years and 9 months Service
Update for Parenting Payment

Conducting a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) Compulsory Participation
Interview

ParentsNext suspension and restoration

Commencing or returning to work Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)

Commencing or returning to work Parenting Payment Single (PPS)

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Shared care for social security payments

Creating a Q134 letter

Transfer from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
