
This document outlines Service Profiling as it relates to customers in
receipt of Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) and Parenting Payment
Single (PPS).

On this Page:

Purpose of Service Profiling

Service Profiling is a method of identifying which customers need a more
targeted level of service and assisting them in meeting program outcomes
such as correct declaration of earnings. Providing this targeted level
of service contributes to Services Australia meeting the program
outcomes.

Service Profiles are a set of characteristics that identify and link a
customer to the most appropriate Service Strategy for meeting customer
and program outcomes and ultimately to ensure correct entitlement is
received.

Information displayed on a customer’s record allows Service Officers to
better prepare for customer contacts. Service Officers will have access
to a set of recommended actions and information about issues that should
be discussed during the contact. This allows the Service Officer to get
the most out of the contact and achieve the best outcomes for the
customer and the department.

The PP Service Updates are:

-   Earnings Under Declaration
-   Income and Asset (Mail), and
-   PPS New Child

PP customers and Service Profiling updates

Parenting Payment (PP) customers are also subject to Principal carer
Service Updates.

Components of Service Strategy

Each Profile has a Service Strategy which involves conducting a Service
Update with the customer to assist them in meeting the outcome.

Service Updates are displayed as Service Components for the relevant
Profile on the customer’s record. Each Service Component is a set of
Service Actions to be completed, some automated within the system such
as appointment booking, and some manually such as conducting a face to
face contact, to finalise the process.

The details of a customer’s profiles are displayed on the Profile
Summary (PQS) screen to better prepare for customer contacts.

Contents

Briefing Interviews when youngest child is 5 years and 9 months Service
Update for Parenting Payment (PP)

Principal Carer Social Worker Exemption Service Update for review of
family and domestic violence or Relationship Breakdowns exemptions

Related links

Service Profiling

Service Profile Capability

Service Components and Service Actions

Service Components by number

Digitisation of information

Attributing Service Profiling Debts to Integrated Review System (IRS)
Service Updates

Principal Carer of dependent children Service Updates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
