
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES cancellation, suspension and rejection codes 102-10010230

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the cancellation, suspension and rejection codes
for payments for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and
AIC PES. Refer to relevant procedures for processing details.

Coding the Benefit Action (BA) screen

Payments may be rejected, cancelled or suspended due to specific
eligibility requirements not being met, and/or a variety of other
reasons.

When cancelling, suspending or rejecting PES payments, the correct code
must be entered on the BA screen, to describe the reason for the
cancellation, suspension or rejection.

A rejection code is to be used when processing a new claim and the
student is ineligible for one of the PES payments. A cancellation or
suspension code is to be used when the student's payment is current and
the student subsequently fails to satisfy the ongoing requirements for a
PES payment.

The Process page contains a table of the list of cancellation,
suspension and rejection codes for PES, ABSTUDY PES and AIC PES.

Suspending PES

Prior to suspending a customer's PES payment, care should be taken to
establish that the customer is temporarily not eligible for payment,
that there is a legislative basis to suspend the payment and that all
appropriate action has been taken.

Generally, payments should only be suspended if:

-   a determination has been made that the customer is not qualified, or
    the payment is not payable, temporarily or for a specific period, as
    a result of changes to circumstances, or
-   the customer has not complied with a request that was reasonable.
    For example, a request to provide information

Before suspending a customer's PES, take care to establish that:

an appropriate request for information/action has been issued to the
customer, which includes:

-   the information or action required
-   a timeframe for the customer to respond
-   consequence of non-compliance, and
-   reference to the relevant Act the request has been made under

the customer is temporarily not eligible for payment

there is a legislative basis to suspend the payment, and

all appropriate action has been taken

If a decision is made to suspend PES, a manual advice is to be issued.
This advice needs to clearly outline the reason the customer's payment
was suspended, and must include the date of effect of the suspension,
the payment type, the relevant section of the Act and the customers
review and appeal rights.

For more information, see Suspension of payments (CLK).

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS) and Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Customers who wish to participate in Skills for Education and Employment
(SEE), and do not qualify for PES, may be eligible for the Language,
Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS) of $20.80 per fortnight.

The supplement provides financial assistance for job seekers to improve
their English language, literacy or numeracy skills as part of their
plan to return to work. This assistance is to enable a job seeker
undertaking SEE to meet the additional costs associated with attendance
and provides incentives for them to participate in the program.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer by phone before
finalising the decision.

Related links

Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) payments

Suspension of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) payments

Restoration of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) payments

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) cancellations, suspensions and
restorations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
