
Extended suspension periods for pension payments 102-22121442

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the rules for extending suspension periods for
pension customers.

Eligibility

Age Pension customers can have their payment suspended for up to 2 years
instead of cancelled if they earn employment income that precludes them
from payment for more than 6 fortnights in a row. This is called the
‘extended employment suspension period’.

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers can have their payment
suspended, or ‘cancelled deemed suspended’, for up to 2 years for a
valid return to work reason. This applies when the customer notifies the
agency of their work and either:

-   earns employment income that precludes them from payment for more
    than 6 fortnights in a row, or
-   works 30 or more hours per week on an ongoing basis

If an Age Pension or DSP customer in an extended suspension period has a
partner, the partner may also have their payment suspended if their rate
is also reduced to nil due to the customer’s employment income. This
only applies if the partner receives one of the following payments:

-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP), or
-   Carer Payment (CAR)

It also includes the following payments from the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA):

-   Age Pension (AGC)
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)
-   Invalidity Service Pension (DVA)  
-   Veteran Payment (VEP)

Both the customer and their eligible pension partner (if applicable) can
keep their Pensioner Concession Card while in the extended suspension
period.

Eligible customers can also request a restoration of their payment at
any time within the 2 year period.

Once the 2 year suspension period ends, the customer (and partner, if
applicable) will receive a letter advising them their payment has been
cancelled. The letter will advise them to use the Payment and Service
Finder if they need to claim another payment or get further assistance.

Intent of the extended suspension period

The purpose of the extended suspension periods is to:

-   promote workforce participation, and
-   enable customers to return to payment quickly and easily if they
    stop working or reduce their hours within the 2 year period

While DSP customers have been able to access the return to work
suspension period for many years, Age Pension (AGE) customers and
eligible pension partners can access the employment income suspension
period from 1 January 2023.

Age Pension (AGE) extended suspension

Age Pension (AGE) customers can be suspended for up to 2 years if their
Australian employment income precludes them from payment for more than 6
fortnights in a row. When the customer reports their employment income
on the seventh fortnight of the employment income nil rate period, they
will automatically be placed into the extended suspension period if
their rate of payment is still nil. The suspension reason code is ESP.

If the customer has a partner who receives AGE, DSP or Carer Payment
(CAR), they will automatically be placed into the extended suspension
period if their payment has also been reduced to nil rate due to
employment income. The suspension reason code is EPP.

Disability Support Pension (DSP) extended suspension

DSP customers can be suspended, or cancelled deemed suspended, for up to
2 years if their employment income (combined with their partner’s
employment income, if applicable), precludes them from payment. This
does not have to be solely due to employment income earnt in Australia.
They can earn employment income from any location. When the customer
reports their employment income on the seventh fortnight of the
employment income nil rate period, they are automatically placed into
the extended suspension period if their payment is still nil rate. The
suspension reason will be EAN. If a customer reports their income late,
their payment may be cancelled deemed suspended for reason code EAL.

DSP customers can also have their payment suspended if they work 30 or
more hours per week in open employment on an ongoing basis. This
requires assessment by a Service Officer, who manually suspends the
customer’s DSP if appropriate. The reason code is FTW or FTY.

If the customer has a partner who receives AGE, DSP or CAR, the partner
is automatically placed into the extended suspension period if their
payment is also nil due to employment income. The suspension reason code
is EPP.

Carer Payment (CAR) extended suspension

Carer Payment (CAR) customers who earn employment income cannot access
the extended suspension period unless they also have a partner receiving
AGE or DSP who is also earning income. They may also access the extended
suspension period if they are not earning any employment income, but
have a partner on AGE or DSP who is earning employment income.

In both cases, they are automatically placed into the extended
suspension period if their rate of payment is reduced to nil due to
employment income. The suspension reason code is be EPP.

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) customers

Customers are entitled to continue receiving their HEAS loan payments
while in the extended suspension period if:

-   prior to entering the employment income nil rate period the customer
    or partner were receiving:
-   a loan payment (including HEAS Advances), under the Home Equity
    Access Scheme (HEAS), and
-   a regular pension payment (i.e. they are not considered to be a
    ‘HEAS only’ customer)

HEAS loan payments will automatically continue.

If a customer is HEAS only they are not entitled to the extended
suspension.

Note: DSP customers suspended for reason FTW or cancelled (deemed
suspended) FTY are not entitled to receive HEAS loan payments as they
are considered to have lost qualification for DSP.

Customers can claim HEAS if they meet the HEAS eligibility criteria)
while in an extended suspension period, but they must remain qualified
for their payment. For example, if a Carer Payment customer is suspended
for reason EPP, they must still be providing continuous care and meet
all other eligibility for HEAS.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs customers

If an AGE or DSP customer in an extended suspension has a partner
receiving DVA Age Pension (AGC), Income Support Supplement (ISS),
Invalidity Service Pension (DVA) or Veteran Payment (VEP), the partner
may also be entitled to the extended suspension period.

Additionally, if a customer getting one of the 4 DVA payments is in an
extended suspension period, their partner may be able to be suspended if
they receive AGE, DSP or CAR paid by Services Australia.

The suspension process for DVA customers is administered by DVA. Service
Officers do not need to take any action.

Change of circumstances while suspended

In general, customers and partners in an extended suspension period are
not required to tell us about any changes to their circumstances or
respond to reviews. However, there are some exceptions, including:

-   Where one or both members of the couple have a current Residential
    Care Assessment and there has been a change to their income or
    assets
-   Where the customer or partner receives another payment, such as
    Carer Allowance or Family Tax Benefit
-   Outstanding identity reviews
-   Child to adult transfer issued to a Carer Payment partner
-   Lower ADAT reviews
-   Risk based reviews where the customer or partner is receiving a HEAS
    loan

In many cases, customers can still update their circumstances in their
Centrelink Online account. However, this will not automatically result
in a reassessment of their payment. Customers must request a restoration
if they wish to test their eligibility for restoration.

If a customer contacts to advise they have stopped work or are working
less, the Service Officer must ask if they want to check if their
payment can be restored.

Restoration of suspended payments

A customer and their pension partner (if applicable) can request a
restoration of their payment at any time during the 2 year extended
suspension period. To do this, they can contact us on their regular
payment line, or visit a service centre, and ask for their payment to be
restored.

The restoration date of effect is the date the customer or eligible
pension partner contacts and requests a restoration. It is not the date
the customer ceased working.

Note: both the customer and partner must each request a restoration of
their respective payment (unless a nominee arrangement is in place that
allows one member of the couple to also request a restoration for the
other member of the couple).

As it may have been up to 2 years since the customer or partner (if
applicable) provided updated information, Service Officers must check
for any change in circumstances, such as a new address or changes in
assets.

For the suspension reasons ESP, EPP and EAN, the 2 suspension period
starts when the customer (and their pension partner, if applicable)
begin the employment income nil rate period.

For the FTW suspension and EAL and FTY cancellation (deemed suspension)
reasons, the 2 year suspension period starts from the suspension (or
cancellation deemed suspension) date of effect and not the start of the
employment income nil rate period (if there was one).

Once a customer’s payment has been cancelled for reason ESP, EPP or FTW,
their payment cannot be restored and they will need to submit a new
claim. Additionally, customers cancelled EAL or FTY will not be able to
have their payment restored after 2 years.

Related links

Restoration of Age Pension

Restoration of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Age Pension

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Customer ceases or reduces work in the 2 year suspension period for
Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme)

Extended entitlement to Concession Cards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
