
Restoration of Parenting Payment (PP) 102-10040190

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the restoration of Parenting
Payment (PP) following suspension or cancellation.

Re-establishing qualification or payability

Restoration of PP may be possible when a customer's qualification or
payability for payment has been re-established after PP has been
cancelled or suspended, and PP qualification and payability have
continued since the date of suspension/cancellation.

This may be the result of:

-   a change in the customer's circumstances
-   a review of a decision made by Services Australia
-   the customer providing information
-   negotiating a Job Plan after failing to do so, or
-   an event which has made the customer temporarily ineligible for
    payment

Generally, there must not be a gap in entitlement for PP to be restored.
When restoring payments it is important to establish continuing
qualification for payment. If there have been any changes in the
customer's circumstances, these must be recorded before restoring
payment to avoid incorrect arrears being generated.

Reasons for restoration

PP can only be restored if one of the following applies:

-   The payment is suspended and there is a reason that is restorable.
    PP will automatically cancel 12 weeks after the date of suspension
-   The decision to cancel PP was incorrect and the review of decision
    (13 week) rules allow for the date of effect of the restoration to
    be the date of the suspension/cancellation
-   PP was cancelled correctly, but for a reason that is restorable (for
    example, FRC - Failed to reply to correspondence, FAI - Failed to
    attend interview). The review of decision (13 week) rules apply,
    except if PP is cancelled Whereabouts unknown (WUK)
-   PP was cancelled because the customer did not report employment
    income. The customer must contact within 13 weeks of the date the
    cancellation decision was notified, provide valid reasons for the
    late reporting, and supply all relevant employment income details
    for payment to be restored
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) was cancelled or is due to cancel
    next pay (CNP) for reason C06 and the customer has a younger child
    in their principal care
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) was cancelled or is due to cancel
    next pay (CNP) for reason C08 and the customer has a younger child
    in their principal care
-   For customers who have been released from prison, before restoring a
    customer's payment the Service Officer must first confirm the date
    the customer was released from prison with the appropriate state
    authority. Contacts for confirming release are included in the
    Resources tab in Confirming prison admission and release dates

Whereabouts unknown (WUK)

If PP has been suspended or cancelled WUK, as long as the customer has
continued to be qualified and has retained payability for their payment
during the period of suspension/cancellation, PP may be restored with
full arrears. This may be the case even when the customer contacts more
than 13 weeks after the decision to suspend or cancel. For more
information see Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts
unknown'.

The date of effect of the favourable determination (restoration)
resulting from review of the decision to suspend/cancel is the date of
the original decision (date of suspension/cancellation). Each customer's
circumstances must be looked at individually to determine whether they
could be taken not to have received advice of the decision to
suspend/cancel and whether they retained qualification and payability
during the period, and therefore whether arrears are payable upon
restoration.

If the customer's address details have not changed, but mail has been
returned, proof of address details are required before payment can be
restored. This is to ensure future correspondence to the customer is not
returned.

Outstanding compliance action

Where a customer has a participation-related payment suspension or
outstanding compliance action, they may need to re-engage with their
provider and/or speak to the Participation Solutions Team (PST) about an
outstanding failure investigation before reporting can be finalised.
Service Officers must check the Participation Compliance workflow
summary and where the:

-   Completed/Provider to Action section shows outstanding compliance
    actions the provider is responsible for managing, advise the job
    seeker to contact their provider, and/or
-   Outstanding section shows a compliance investigation is outstanding,
    assist the job seeker to contact the Participation Solutions Team

Failure to attend a ParentsNext appointment with Services Australia (FDH)

If a parent fails to attend a ParentsNext appointment with Services
Australia without a reasonable excuse or cannot be contacted for a phone
appointment, their PP may be suspended. If the parent satisfactorily
complies with their requirements within 13 weeks of their suspension
date, their payment can be restored and arrears paid back to the
suspension date.

If the parent does not contact or re-engage within 13 weeks from the
date of suspension, their PP will automatically cancel from the original
suspension date and the parent will need to lodge a new claim if they
wish to continue to receive payment.

For more information, see ParentsNext suspension and restoration.

Working Credits

The customer's balance of working credits is also restored, and credits
will begin to accrue or deplete again, starting with the balance as at
the date of suspension.

Job Plan

The customer may also need an interview to renegotiate their Job Plan.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customers

Before restoring, it is important to check the:

-   FTB status. If FTB is cancelled (for example, off income support
    CAN-OIS), FTB may need to be restored
-   annual family income estimate to ensure it is still reasonable and
    request a revised annual income estimate if appropriate
-   CCS Activity Test details are correct and if needs to be updated

Reclaiming payment

Unless the review of decision (13 week) rules allow for PP to be
restored from the date of suspension/cancellation without a gap in
entitlement, or the reason for cancellation is otherwise restorable, the
customer must reclaim PP and a new claim activity must be processed.

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Parenting Payment (PP)

ParentsNext suspension and restoration

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Working Credit

Identity review period (IRP)

Recording and correcting employment income details

Services Australia’s responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre Call
staff for pension payments

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
