
This document outlines general information about the effect on mutual
obligation requirements and entitlement to payments when a job seeker
advises they are pregnant. It includes links to other procedures for
more detailed information.

On this Page:

Job seeker advises they are pregnant

In the majority of cases, pregnancy will not stop expectant job seekers
from looking for work. If a job seeker is pregnant, Service Officers
should advise expectant customers to remain on the payment they are
currently receiving, for example, Parenting Payment (PP), JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA). YA customers who are dependent will
need to be assessed as independent once they have given birth in
accordance with Assessing independence when a customer has, or has had,
a dependent child.

The customer may be eligible to transfer to Parenting Payment (PP) once
the child is born. The claim cannot be made early, but PP can be
backdated up to four weeks to the date of the child's birth.

The job seeker should be advised to claim family assistance and Medicare
for the child.

Mutual obligation requirements 13 weeks prior to birth of a child

If a job seeker is within 13 weeks (but prior to 6 weeks) from their
expected date of confinement, they will continue to have mutual
obligation requirements. However, they will not have job search
requirements.

Exemption from mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers will be exempt from their mutual obligation requirements for
six weeks before and six weeks after the child's birth. Note: further
information is available in Exempting a job seeker from mutual
obligation requirements when they are an expectant customer.

If the customer also has a medical condition, a medical certificate
should be provided to determine if an incapacity exemption is required.

Special Benefit claims

There should be very few occasions when there is a need for expectant
customers to be paid Special Benefit (SpB). As with all SpB claims,
every avenue of support should be explored and exhausted before a claim
is granted. SpB may be paid to expectant customers if they qualify and
if they are in hardship and have no alternative means of support.

Related links

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements when they are
an expectant customer

Assessing independence when a customer has, or has had, a dependent
child

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Assessing and coding medical evidence for temporary incapacity
exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
