
Cancellation, Suspension, Rejection and Restoration (CLK) 102-10000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document includes procedures for processing suspension,
cancellation and restoration of customer payments and rejection of
customer claims.

Government intent

A customer’s payment may need to be suspended or cancelled if they are
no longer eligible for that payment. This may mean they are not
qualified for payment, or the payment is not payable.

The decision to suspend or cancel a payment has potentially a great
impact on a customer. It must be made in accordance with legislation and
only after complying with the appropriate process.

A suspended or cancelled payment can be restored in circumstances where
the customer subsequently becomes eligible.

A customer’s claim for payment must be rejected if they are not eligible
for that payment.

Before making an unfavourable decision

Before suspending a customer's payment, care should be taken to
establish that:

-   the customer is temporarily not eligible for payment
-   there is a legislative basis to suspend payment, and
-   all appropriate action has been taken

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Suspending payments

Generally, payments should only be suspended where:

-   a determination has been made that the customer is not qualified, or
    the payment is not payable, temporarily or for a specific period as
    a result of changes in their circumstances, or
-   the customer has not complied with a request that was reasonable and
    relevant to determining their eligibility for payment, for example,
    to provide information held by the customer, to attend an interview,
    or to take action (for example, to obtain a foreign payment)

Before a payment is suspended or cancelled, the decision maker must be
satisfied that there is sufficient evidence that the customer is either
not qualified for the payment or the payment is not payable. If there is
not, information must be requested from the customer via a notice under
the appropriate section of the Social Security (Administration) Act;
section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1.

Notices must include details as to the information/action required, the
timeframe for response (noting that this must be reasonable), the
consequences of non-compliance, and the reference to the relevant Act
that the request has been made under.

If the customer fails to comply with the notice within the reasonable
timeframe by not providing the requested information and/or taking the
required action, the decision maker may, after considering all the
available evidence, decide to suspend or cancel the payment.

Note: When assessing a reasonable timeframe, as a general rule 8
additional days may be added to the original timeframe to allow for mail
delivery by Australia Post. For example, customer is given 14 days to
provide information, a reasonable timeframe to comply would be 22 days
from the date of the original notice.

If the customer provides the requested information, the customer's
retrospective and/or continuing entitlement should be assessed.

If a decision is made to manually suspend a customer’s payment in
conjunction with the above, a manual review must be coded by the service
officer to follow up the suspension at a later date.

Cancelling payments

If the decision to cancel is made, an advice must be sent to the
customer with the cancellation reason and rights of review and appeal.

Customer notification

If a decision is made to suspend or cancel a customer’s payment, they
must be immediately advised about the decision to avoid unnecessarily
placing them in financial hardship.

This advice must clearly outline to the customer the reason their
payment was suspended or cancelled, the date of effect and the payment
type, together with the relevant section of the legislation. The advice
must also include the customers review and appeal rights.

Restoring payments

Restoration of suspended or cancelled payments may occur when a
customer's qualification for payment has been re-established or if
payment becomes payable after a cancellation or suspension.

Authenticating customer details

The customer's address (including postal address) and telephone details
(including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every contact, and
updated if required. Note: if the customer has authenticated themselves
via IVR, address details do not need to be confirmed.

Contents

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes (CLK)

Cancellation of payments (CLK)

Cancellation of, or changes to qualifying payment for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or Assistance for Isolated
Children PES

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Related links

Rejecting a Centrelink claim

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
