
Types of Centrelink records 102-13020000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the types of Centrelink records and advises what
action is required when issues with them are found.

Types of records

Centrelink records are identified by a unique Customer Reference Number
(CRN).

-   Customer records - person (PER) and child (CHI) records are created
    with a CRN for use by individual customers
-   Unauthenticated Online Entity (UOE) - these records are created when
    a customer accesses the Centrelink website without using an
    authenticated CRN
-   Registered carers (RCP) - these records were set up for providers of
    registered child care. Where a customer has a RCP record and a
    customer record, see Centrelink customer has multiple Customer
    Reference Numbers (CRN). RCP records are no longer current due to
    the commencement of the Child Care Subsidy (CCS) on the 2 July 2018,
    however will remain visible on the system
-   Organisation (ORG) - these records are created for organisations to
    enable payments and interaction between the organisations and
    Centrelink customers

Issues with records and reference numbers

Service Officers may find the following issues with some records and
reference numbers:

Duplicate CRNs - are the same records across two environments. Duplicate
CRNs may be the:

-   Same CRN for different customers
    These cases are to be referred to the ICT Service Desk
-   Same CRN for the same customer, but in different environments
    Check the Duplicate CRN List (DCL) screen for the environments a
    record is in. Most duplicate CRNs are created during an
    Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA)
    If these CRNs do not resolve within two days, see Inter-environment
    Change of Address (ICoA) facility problem escalation process
-   Duplicate CRNs are not multiple records, do not refer to the Data
    Quality Unit (DQU)

Multiple CRNs - one customer with more than one CRN. The Multiple Match
List (MML) screen can assist in finding multiple CRNs for a customer. An
assessment of the records by the DQU will determine which record should
be used. The Multiple CRN Referral Fast Note is used to refer multiple
CRN cases to the DQU

Intertwined records - one customer's data is incorrectly recorded on
another customer's record. These records must not be used until they
have been investigated by the DQU. The Resources page contains a link to
the Intertwined Referral form

Spurious records - are defined as a record that is false, based on
information that is not true and therefore not to be trusted. These
records must be referred to the DQU. The Resources page contains a link
to the Centrelink Spurious Record Referral form

Restricted Access records - can only be viewed or updated by authorised
staff

Restricted Update Record (RUR) - these records can be viewed, but can
only be updated by authorised staff

Deleted records - can be viewed, but not updated. However, if there is a
critical business need, they can be undeleted. See Deleting or
undeleting a Centrelink Customer Reference Number (CRN)

Customer Access Number (CAN) - CAN is not the same as a CRN, for more
information on CANs see Access to Centrelink self service - set up,
checking, locking and resetting

Requesting a new Customer Reference Number (CRN)

Requests for a new CRN will only be considered in exceptional
circumstances. Customers should be encouraged to use passwords and other
security measures available.

The Resources page contains links to the Data Quality Unit homepage,
Data Quality Unit Office Locator page, Intertwined Referral form and
Centrelink Spurious Record Referral form.

Contents

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Actioning multiple Centrelink Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Deletion or end date of intertwined Centrelink child to parent (CHI/PAR)
links

Deletion of Centrelink child to parent (CHI/PAR) links

Identifying a customer's primary Centrelink Customer Reference Number
(CRN)

Same Centrelink customer assessment

Centrelink Restricted Update Record

Centrelink intertwined records processing

End date of Centrelink child to parent (CHI/PAR) links

Multiple Centrelink child Customer Reference Number (CRN) checks and
cleansing

Related links

Data Quality Unit (DQU) CLI/MLC process for multiples

Actioning a Data Quality Unit (DQU) request on a multiple Customer
Reference Number (CRN)

Intertwined Centrelink records

Centrelink spurious records

Centrelink Multiple Match List (MML) screen

Environment Y for inactive deleted and deceased customer records

Monitoring the Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility for
completed transfers

Searching for and indexing organisations

Searching for a customer on the system

Restricted Access and eligibility

Adding a customer to the system

Indexing a customer's claim on the system

Incorrect date of birth recorded

Changing sex and/or gender details on customer records

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
