
Principal carer participation and eligibility interview or notification for youngest child 15 years and 9 months Service Update 102-01130010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about interviews or notifications for
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) principal carers whose
youngest child is 15 years and 9 months of age. The interview or
notification will inform these customers of the change in mutual
obligation requirements when their youngest child turns 16 years of age.

Changes from 1 July 2021

From 1 July 2021, Service Profiling appointments were replaced by
notifications for customers who will be subject to mutual obligation
requirements due to the age of their youngest child. These notifications
are sent via the customers preferred channel and outline upcoming mutual
obligation requirements and the Compulsory Participation Appointment.
These changes do not affect Remote Customers, who are Centrelink
Managed, as they will continue to be serviced as per current
arrangements.

The Service Update is no longer applicable for all job seekers who are
Provider Managed as of the 1July 2021.

During a transition period, appointments booked on or after the 1 July
2021 by the service profiler will still need to be conducted (this
includes rescheduling if required).

Service Update interviews

All briefing interviews will be offered as a phone interview as the
preferred channel for delivering this information.

All customers should be encouraged to attend their interview as they
will receive important information about changes to their payment
eligibility and/or mutual obligation requirements.

Customers may have their payment suspended for non-attendance at the
interview.

Except for remote area customers, the system will automatically book an
appointment for the customer.

Priorities of customer groups

The priorities of customer groups are:

-   Customers who are not connected to an Employment Services Provider
    and are not currently working or participating in an activity
-   Customers who are not connected to a provider and are working or
    participating in an activity

Customers who are provider managed should have their Job Plan negotiated
by their provider.

The briefing interview is to cover the following information:

Inform customer of mutual obligation requirements when youngest child
turns 16 years old

Discuss mutual obligation requirements

Discuss the benefits of participation:

-   higher income
-   improved prospects for their children
-   self sufficiency
-   higher self esteem
-   income taper

Advise of support available for example, Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE) etc.

Discuss their reporting and contact obligations

Ensure that the customer understands the flexibility of their
participation arrangements will cease and that they will have standard
full-time mutual obligation requirements that will be negotiated at a
compulsory interview when their child turns 16 years of age

Advise when next contact with Services Australia is required

Advise of requirement to negotiate a Job Plan with their provider (if
provider managed)

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen

Accessing and using the Service Profiling screens

Service Components by number

Customer First

Participation in Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
