
Austudy customer going overseas 102-11110020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for a Service Officer to decide if
Austudy is payable to a customer, and for how long, while they are
overseas. It also explains the actions the Service Officer and the
customer are to take before the customer's departure.

Initial contact

Service Centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding for:

-   students and Australian Apprentices who are going overseas to
    undertake approved study or work
-   customers who clearly do not satisfy an approved reason
-   customers leaving to live in another country

In all other cases, where a customer has indicated their overseas travel
meets the initial criteria for an approved reason, the case must be
referred to Centrelink International Services (CIS) to assess
entitlement and code the departure, as only designated staff within CIS
have the delegation to complete the assessment.

Note: do not refer overseas full-time study (OFS) cases to CIS.

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will guide service
centre and Smart Centre staff when it is necessary to refer to CIS.

Leaving to live in another country

If a customer is leaving Australia to live in another country, Austudy
payments will be stopped from the earlier of the date of departure and

-   for students, the last day the customer satisfies the activity test
-   for Australian Apprentices, the date they cease to qualify as an
    apprentice

Temporary absence - Approved reason for travel

If an Austudy customer leaves Australia temporarily, payment may
continue:

for a temporary absence of any length (but unlikely to be more than a
few weeks) to attend a training camp with Australian Defence Force
Reserves

for a specific negotiated period (expected to be only a few weeks, but
not more than 6 weeks)

-   to attend to an acute family crisis
-   for medical treatment of a kind not available in Australia

Customers will be activity test exempt while absent for these reasons.
The allowable absence reasons are subject to very specific guidelines.

Note: Austudy may also continue outside Australia for the duration of
approved overseas study or work. Further information is below.

Approved overseas study or work

Before making a decision if Austudy can be paid for overseas study or
work, it is essential to determine that:

-   immediately before leaving Australia, the customer is undertaking
    full-time or approved concessional load study in an approved course,
    or is a continuing/intending student
-   students continue to satisfy the Austudy student qualification
    criteria
-   Australian Apprentices continue to have a current Commonwealth
    Registration Number
-   the overseas study/training will contribute to and be credited
    towards a full-time course in Australia

Note: a student required, or chooses to travel overseas to undertake a
work placement, may continue to receive payment regardless of if a
credit weighting is given. See Assessing study load requirements for
details.

Note: do not refer these cases to CIS.

The customer must:

-   advise their date of departure from Australia, return date (if
    known), and
-   provide written advice from their Australian educational institution
    or state training authority confirming proof of the reason for their
    absence

Generally, a customer who is studying externally (for example, by
correspondence or online) will not have to attend a campus overseas to
complete units of their approved course. However, external students can
access extended portability under overseas study provisions if they can
demonstrate that their primary reason for going overseas is to undertake
studies that form part of the course. This could be a residential
component at an overseas institution or an overseas work placement
provided it is part of the Australian course.

Austudy may only be paid for student exchange programs if the customer
remains enrolled and is undertaking an approved course at an approved
Australian institution. This is rarely the case for secondary students.

A student or Australian Apprentice granted portability for overseas
study or work can continue to receive Austudy for the duration of the
approved absence. The approved period may include additional travel time
to allow them to prepare for the study and/or to finalise their affairs
and return to Australia.

New claims and new students (and customer leaving Australia)

Immediately before leaving Australia, the customer must be:

-   receiving Austudy and undertaking full-time or approved concessional
    load study in an approved course, or
-   a continuing/intending student

Continuing students who lodge a claim for Austudy before leaving
Australia may start receiving payment after they have left Australia if
they are undertaking approved overseas study.

When running the Portability Script - Departures and Returns, it is
important to note that choosing to assess Austudy for portability is on
the basis the customer meets 1 of these criteria. If not, do not use the
script.

If a non-continuing student (for example, returning to study following a
gap year), has recently claimed and will not become qualified and
payable until after they leave Australia (for example, due to waiting
periods), Austudy cannot be paid until the person returns to Australia.
Reject these claims and advise affected customers as soon as possible so
they can change their travel plans if necessary.

Note: a new student, whose Australian course starts before they leave
Australia, and has claimed Austudy before they depart can access
overseas study provisions. See Resources for examples.

Supporting documentation

Customers must provide acceptable proof of the absence, preferably prior
to their departure.

In an emergency, if accepted the customer is leaving for an approved
reason, they will be required to provide supporting documentation on
their return. If the documentation is not acceptable or not provided, a
debt will be raised.

Where a customer provides supporting documentation relating to a
previous temporary absence that was not for an approved reason at the
time, do not run the Review officer script as a decision on their
portability has not been made. Refer the case:

-   for overseas study, to the Student Network Team
-   in all other cases, to the International Smart Centre in CIS

Austudy stops from the date of departure if the reason for leaving
Australia is not acceptable or the customer has not provided proof of
the reason, either before or after the absence.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Customer advises of change of departure or return dates

If a customer travelling for an approved reason advises they are
departing on a specific date, and they then depart Australia more than 3
days before or more than 3 days after the advised date, any specific
negotiated period of portability approved for the original date of
departure will cease to apply. The customer's approved reason for travel
outside Australia may no longer be valid, and payments will stop when
the immigration datalink confirms the customer's actual date of
departure.

Customers must advise of any change in their departure details prior to
travel if they want payment during the absence. Service officers can
assess if the approved reason still applies and record the new departure
date, and reason, again.

Return to Australia

The return rule for Austudy means if a customer has been granted an
approved overseas study absence, a brief return to Australia (up to 6
weeks) within the approved study period does not interrupt the
portability period for the course of study overseas. No new decision is
required in such cases.

However, if a student or Australian Apprentice working or training
overseas decides to extend the length of their overseas course or work
(for example, wants to continue studying overseas for an extra semester)
the customer must apply to have their payment continue and provide new
supporting evidence.

For approved reasons other than overseas study, customers unable to
return to Australia by the end of the specific negotiated period must
contact CIS or their payment will stop. If more time overseas is
required, this can be discussed and any approved absence possibly
extended up to the maximum portability period. However, if they are
unable to return to Australia for a reason other than an approved reason
(for example, they are hospitalised), there is discretion to extend the
period of portability under certain circumstances.

Refer any change to the length of an absence for an approved reason to
Centrelink International Services (CIS) for further assessment and
coding.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system assesses
portability of the payment, regardless of whether the customer notified
or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not
be cancelled.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers must advise of
a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned
to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
must still contact the agency.

The Services Australia Website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Activity test

There is no provision that allows for an exemption from the activity
test. Therefore, all Austudy customers must be enrolled and undertaking
an approved course.

Customer's dependent child leaving Australia

If the customer is the principal carer of a dependent child (or
children) and that child (or all dependent children) leaves Australia,
it can affect the customer's entitlement.

If the child goes overseas to live in another country, the customer will
cease to be considered the principal carer for that child immediately
the child departs as they are no longer a dependent child. Any payment
or concession paid to the customer for the care for the child will cease
on the departure date.

If a child leaves Australia temporarily or was born outside Australia,
the customer will generally still be regarded as the principal carer for
up to 6 weeks, even if the customer remains in Australia.

A person cannot be the principal carer of any child who has been outside
Australia for more than 6 weeks unless the customer is outside Australia
with that child and they are still entitled to the social security
payment they were receiving when they left Australia (that is, the
customer's maximum portability period has not ceased).

If a customer has ceased to be the principal carer of a child because
they have been outside Australia for more than 6 weeks and the child
returns to Australia for less than 6 weeks before going overseas again,
the customer will cease to be the principal carer of that child for the
entire period of the later absence.

Australian Apprentices

The customer must continue to meet qualification rules as an apprentice
while they are outside Australia for Austudy to be paid under
portability provisions.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

The Resources page contains various scenarios on how Austudy payments
can be affected when a student or Australian Apprentice goes overseas.
It also contains links to contact details for CIS, the Services
Australia Website for information about payments while outside Australia
and travelling overseas with medicine.

Related links

Coding absence using the Portability Script (departures and returns) for
customer leaving Australia

Coding for approved Overseas Full Time Study (OFS) payments

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Portability of Add-ons

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Discretion to extend portability

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Overseas absences for acute family crisis

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Coding specialist portability assessments for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff

Residence assessment for customers claiming Austudy

Activity test for Austudy

Assessing study load requirements

Recording and correcting employment income details

Returning to Australia

Approved non-high school secondary study

Pension Supplement overseas absences

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
