[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines information relating to the repayment of a
Financial Supplement loan (FSL) obtained through the Student Financial
Supplement Scheme (SFSS).

SFSS loan scheme

The SFSS was a voluntary loan scheme which gave eligible tertiary
students the option of borrowing money to help cover their expenses
while they studied.

The term 'Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)' referred to the
program name of the Scheme. 'Financial Supplement loan (FSL)' was the
product of the Scheme. In other words, students applied for the product
FSL and received this through the program SFSS.

Administration of the SFSS loan

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by Centrelink (now Services Australia) until the end of the
contract period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan
was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system.

Contents

Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) prior to transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Dealing with disputed Financial Supplement loan (FSL) repayments

Excess repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL)

Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) prior to
transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer
to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Reissuing annual Financial Supplement loan (FSL) statements

Accessing details of Financial Supplement loans (FSLs)

Effect of death of a customer on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after
transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
