
Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement students 102-07020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a change of course of study will affect a
student's payment and how to process the changes.

Activity test requirements

Students must have a full-time or concessional study load in an approved
course to meet the activity test for:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Austudy, and
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Note: YA students turning 25 before starting a new course of study may
need to transfer to Austudy. See Determining minimum and maximum age for
Youth Allowance.

Viewing and updating study details online

[] Students getting YA, Austudy, PES or ABSTUDY can view and manage
their study details online using:

-   their Centrelink online account, or
-   Express Plus applications

Study start dates for Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy

Most education institutions have an academic calendar with standard
start and finish dates for courses or study periods. Often these will be
published on their websites.

Many students' courses start or finish on a date other than the standard
date on the academic calendar. Check these dates using the National
Course Approvals sub-site.

Accept start dates advised by YA or Austudy students if the date is:

no more than 14 days before the standard course start date published on:

-   the National Course Approvals sub-site, or
-   an education provider's website

The exception to this is where the student has indicated the date they
have provided is the day they are commencing 'Orientation week' (O
week). O week is not considered part of the student's course.

Continuing and intending students

When making study updates, decide if the student is a
continuing/intending student. This decision may affect what date the
student is eligible for a student payment. The rules for
continuing/intending students vary between different student payments.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains links to the Open Universities Australia
website and the National Course Approvals sub-site.

Related links

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Coding new study details

Assessing study load requirements

Changing or correcting course of study and/or educational institution
for ABSTUDY students

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Negotiating an Activity Agreement for Youth Allowance (YA) students
returning to study after discontinuing a previous course

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Defining levels of tertiary study

Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA)

Eligibility for Austudy

Review and appeals

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
