
Suspension of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES payments 102-10030140

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a customer's PES, ABSTUDY PES or AIC PES
payment should be suspended and the processes to be followed to suspend
it.

Suspension of payments

Payments may be suspended if a customer is temporarily not qualified for
payment or the payment is not payable as a result of:

-   changes in their circumstances
-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment, or
-   information is required to ensure that payments are directed
    correctly (such as a valid address or bank account details)

Before a payment is suspended, an appropriate request for information
must be issued and the appropriate time for response has passed.

A decision to suspend a payment potentially has a great impact on a
customer and must be made in accordance with legislation and/or policy
and the relevant process. Suspensions placed on customers' records that
do not follow the correct process may cause financial hardship and
distress to customers.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification, and
full arrears may be issued if payment is subsequently restored.

Reasons for suspension

Reasons for suspension of payment include (but are not limited to):

-   a direct credit payment was returned from the financial institution
-   the customer failed to reply to correspondence
-   the customer failed to attend an interview
-   a customer has separated from their partner
-   a customer or their partner is in gaol or psychiatric confinement
-   the customer's mail has been returned to Centrelink - 'whereabouts
    unknown'
-   employment income or an increase in assets

Customer contact

Before a payment is suspended, information must be requested from the
customer under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1 or 1.5
of ABSTUDY Policy. The decision maker must be satisfied that there is
sufficient evidence that the customer is either temporarily not
qualified for the payment or the payment is not payable.

For information on requesting information, see Requesting information.

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, contact must be attempted
with the nominee before the payment is suspended.

Notification of suspension

Customers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If
an automatic letter is not issued by the system a manual letter must be
sent and include: For further details see the Process page.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Customer contacts after suspension

Explain the reason for suspension. Advise the customer what documents
are required or what is required so that the payment can be restored.

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) and LLNS

Customers who wish to participate in Skills for Education and Employment
(SEE), and do not qualify for PES, may be eligible for the Language,
Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS) of $20.80 per fortnight.

The supplement provides financial assistance for job seekers who want to
improve their English language, literacy or numeracy skills as part of
their plan to return to work. This assistance is to enable a job seeker
undertaking SEE to meet the additional costs associated with attendance
and provides incentives for them to participate in the program.

Related links

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) cancellation, suspension and
rejection codes

Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) payments

Restoration of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) payments

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

Suspension of payments (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
