
The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen 102-01020060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Service Actions and Service Components used
when conducting the Service Strategy for a customer and the functions of
the Service Strategy (PQSS) screen. Each Service Component has one or
more Service Actions which collectively describe the steps that are
involved in completing the Service Component. Each Service Action may
also have one or more Service Details which provide further information
about the application of the Service Action.

Service Profiling overview

Service Profiling is a way of selectively targeting Centrelink services
and Service Officer assistance to our customers. It identifies which
customers need a more focused/targeted level of service to assist them
in meeting program outcomes (for example, declaring their earnings).

Service Profiling records and maintains a customer's Service Strategy
based on the Profile Bracket on a customer record. A Service Strategy
contains all of the current Service Components (and associated Service
Actions and Service Details) for the customer.

Service Components and Service Actions have a status which provides the
following capability:

-   Tracking - the ability to determine which Service Components and
    Service Actions are yet to be actioned, are in progress, or are
    completed and
-   Searching - the ability to identify customers that have Service
    Components and Service Actions that require action

The maintenance of Service Component status is an automated function and
Service Officers cannot directly update the status of a Service
Component.

To maintain the correct status of Service Actions and enable Service
Officer to search for work, the status of Service Actions associated
with a Service Component must be updated. This results in the Service
Component status being updated. The only exception to this is when
another system (for example, the issuing of a form) automatically
updates the Service Action on completion of a task.

The PQSS screen displays the Service Components which make up the
Service Strategy for the customer. This screen displays Service
Components, along with the associated Service Actions and Service
Details. Historical Service Components can also be viewed on this
screen.

Note: when the Service Component is completed it cannot be restarted.

Related links

Service Profiling

Service Components and Service Actions

Service Profiling Capability

Attributing Service Profiling Debts to the Integrated Review System
(IRS) Review

Accessing and using the Service Profile screens

The Profile Summary (PQS), Profile History (PQH) and Profile Details
(PQD) screens

The Profile Search (PQSE) screen

The Predictor Details (PQPD) screen

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screen

The Service Component History (PQSH) screen

Service Components by number

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
