
Commencing or returning to study 102-07010000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information for customers commencing or
returning to study, with links to information specifically related to
the payment being received.

Student payment options

Customers returning to or commencing full-time study may be eligible for
one of the following payments:

-   An allowance under the ABSTUDY scheme if the customer is indigenous
-   Austudy if the customer is 25 years of age and over
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (student) if the customer is under 25 years of
    age
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) or ABSTUDY PES (if they are
    indigenous) if they are receiving a qualifying payment
-   From 1 January 2019, customers will automatically receive a Health
    Care Card (HCC) when they transfer to YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY Living
    allowance as a student or Australian Apprentice. If they transfer
    from a payment that attracted a Pensioner Concession Card, the
    concession card will be cancelled on the transfer date. Customers
    transferring from Youth Allowance (job seeker) will keep their
    current HCC card and will receive a new card on its expiry

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers

When a job seeker returns to or commences full time study they may
either:

-   have the course approved under the short course guidelines, or
-   test their eligibility for ABSTUDY, Austudy or YA (student) payment,
    or
-   qualify for PES if they are a single principle carer and meet all
    other PES qualifications or
-   have their income support cancelled if they do not fit into any of
    the above categories

Job seekers who are studying part-time may be eligible for JSP if they
meet the normal JSP qualification criteria and the course they are
studying is deemed to be part-time by the educational institution they
are enrolled with. These job seekers must show a commitment to seeking
suitable paid work to satisfy their mutual obligation requirements.

Continuation of payment

Customers in receipt of Partner Allowance (PA), Widow Allowance (WA) and
Age Pension (Age) are able to continue to receive payments on return to
full-time or part-time study as they are not required to satisfy an
activity test. However, if the customer chooses, they can transfer to
Austudy or YA (student) where appropriate.

Principal carer of a dependent child

Customers who are the principal carer of a dependent child with
participation requirements, such as Parenting Payment (PP) or JSP,
satisfy their participation obligations if they commence full-time
study, or have a combination of part-time study and job search or an
approved activity that equals a total of 15 hours participation each
week, or 30 hours in the fortnight.

Partial capacity to work

JSP and YA job seekers who have been assessed by a Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA) as having a partial capacity to work, and transfer from
transitional Disability Support Pension (DSP) are able to satisfy their
Activity Test requirements if they continue to study in the same course
which they commenced while on DSP, either on a full-time or part-time
basis.

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers

DSP customers who commence or continue to undertake study or training
may remain qualified for DSP if they have a continuing inability to work
(CITW).

To meet CITW criteria, a DSP customer must:

-   be prevented, because of their impairment/s, from doing any work in
    open employment within the next 2 years, and
-   be unlikely, because of their impairment/s, to be able to work for
    15 hours per week within the next 2 years as a result of undertaking
    educational, vocational or on the job training

Consider the following:

-   Would the customer benefit from study or training within 2 years?
-   Is the study or training full-time?

If the answer is no to these questions, this may indicate the customer
meets CITW criteria and may be medically eligible for DSP. For example,
the customer is not studying full-time and there will be no benefit
within 2 years.

If the customer is studying without any modifications due to their
disability, they may not have a CITW.

Grandfathered DSP customers (qualified pre 1 July 2012) may have a CITW
of 30 hours per week.

Note: an assessment of CITW is not necessary if the customer has
qualified for DSP on manifest grounds. See Granting Disability Support
Pension (DSP) (manifest).

Eligibility for Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Some customers undertaking part-time or full-time study may be eligible
to receive the Education Entry Payment (EdEP). The EdEP helps
participants with the up-front costs of education and training. See
Education Entry Payment (EdEP) for details on eligibility and coding
requirements.

Working credits

If a customer has unused working credits, they may be eligible to
restore these credits to their new Student Income Bank or working credit
balance within 12 months. Student Income Bank credits can only be
restored to a new working credit balance.

Contents

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to full-time study

Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice (apprentice or
trainee) returning to full-time study

Partner Allowance (PA) and Widow Allowance (WA) customers returning to
full-time study

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to (or continuing in)
part-time study

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers returning to part-time study

Partner Allowance (PA) and Widow Allowance (WA) customers returning to
part-time study

Assessing Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)

Related links

Working Credit

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Cancellation of, or changes to, qualifying payment for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or Assistance for Isolated
Children PES

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Eligibility for Austudy

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
