
Customer will not commence full-time study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) and AIC PES 102-07020180

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for when an ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) or AIC PES customer advises they will not commence studying
full-time in a new course, including new and continuing students. There
is also information about other payments that may be available to
customers.

On this Page:

Activity test requirements

An ABSTUDY, or ABSTUDY PES student is required to be studying a
full-time or concessional study load in an approved course to qualify
for the payment. An Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme is
required to be studying a full-time study load in an approved course to
qualify for the payment. Note: ABSTUDY students studying a part-time
study load may be eligible for assistance under the Part-time Award. For
further information, see ABSTUDY eligibility for Part-time Award.

An AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) student is required to be
undertaking approved study at primary or equivalent ungraded level.

If a customer contacts to advise they, or the AIC student, will not
commence their full-time studies, they may lose qualification for the
payment they are currently receiving.

Ceasing full-time study

If an ABSTUDY student ceases full-time study and is not eligible for a
study load concession, and wants to receive payment as a jobseeker, they
must notify Services Australia and register as a job seeker. Failure to
promptly apply for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) or JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) from the ABSTUDY cancellation date (Student End Date plus
1 day), will result in the job seeker payment only commencing from the
date the claim was lodged.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Where an AIC student with a disability or other health-related condition
has a reduced study load they may continue to be considered as a
full-time student by the education institution.

A debt may be generated for students, or AIC applicants (on the
student's behalf) who fail to notify cessation of studies. There is no
change to policy or process for ABSTUDY customers in vulnerable
circumstances advising an intention to study. If the ABSTUDY customer
has been approved for independence under the self-supporting reason
codes 'PSE' or 'PSP' on the basis that they will become a full-time
student, and the customer will not become a full-time student, the
customer cannot retain qualification for either of these independence
categories.

Updating study details online

[] ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES customers may notify the change to their
study details by updating their details online if they are registered
for online services and are authenticated. If the student provides a
change to their Participation Status or Student End Date, the record
will generate a DOC with details of the change for follow up action to
be undertaken by a Service Officer.

Activity test exemptions

ABSTUDY students may continue to be entitled to payments while
temporarily absent from studies in some circumstances.

Other students who are not qualified for an Activity Test exemption and
who are not qualified for a concessional study load, may have to change
payment types for example, to JobSeeker Payment (JSP).

Discontinuing or deferring studies

For continuing students who were intending to continue in the same
course in the upcoming study period, refer to payment specific
procedures on discontinuing or deferring studies:

-   AIC students, or
-   ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES

The Resources page contains examples of cases where the student did not
commence study.

Related links

Payment of ABSTUDY when a student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student becomes
incapacitated

Payment of ABSTUDY when a student is deferring or discontinuing study
before the end of the course

Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Changing or correcting course of study and/or educational institution
for ABSTUDY students

Coding new study details

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
