
Accessing details of Financial Supplement Loans (FSLs) 102-15010080

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines the Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS),
This was a voluntary loan scheme. It gave eligible tertiary students the
option of borrowing money to help cover their expenses while they
studied.

The SFSS

SFSS refers to the program name of the Scheme. Financial Supplement Loan
(FSL) is the product of the Scheme. In other words, students applied for
the product (FSL) and received this through the program (SFSS).

End of loan contract period

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by Centrelink (now Services Australia) until the end of the
contract period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan
was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system.

Enquiries about outstanding loans

Refer these enquiries to the ATO website.

However, in some cases, customers may dispute the balance transferred or
have general requests for information (such as details of repayments)
that are better dealt with by the agency’s Service Officers.

The final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on our
system. This does not mean the loan has been zeroed off, just that the
balance has now been transferred to the ATO for recovery through the
taxation system.

Reviews and appeals

If a customer wants to request an explanation or apply for a formal
review of their FSL decision, Service Officers should refer the case to
a Subject Matter Expert (SME) or Authorised Review Officer (ARO).

If a customer has proof that the information held by the agency about
their loan is incorrect, the customer should provide this evidence for
investigation. Service Officers who receive this information should
forward the details to the Student Payments Helpdesk.

Financial Supplement loans history

The SFSS was introduced in 1993 and continued to be paid until December
2003 for eligible students who were in receipt of:

-   Austudy
-   Youth Allowance
-   ABSTUDY
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Family and Community Services (FaHCSIA) PES, and
-   Department of Education, Skills and Employment, PES

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO, the Student Payments Helpdesk and the Archiving
and Culling Engine (ACE) Application.

Related links

Repayment of the Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) prior to transfer to
the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Repayment of the Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Dealing with disputed Financial Supplement loan (FSL) repayments

Reissuing annual Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) statements

Using the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE) application to access
archived Education Student Assistance System (ESAS) data

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
