
Partner Allowance (PA) customer going overseas 102-11220000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when, and for how long, Partner Allowance (PA)
was payable to a customer while they were outside Australia. New claims
for Partner Allowance have not been available since 20 September 2003.
This information is for manual historical assessments only.

Leaving to live in another country

Partner Allowance (PA) cannot be paid for a departure to live in another
country. The person would cease to be an Australian resident and would
therefore lose qualification. PA would be cancelled on departure.

Temporary absence

Customers receiving PA may remain eligible to receive payments for any
temporary absence up to the maximum portability period of 6 weeks. If
the customer is unable to return within this time, there is discretion
to extend the period of portability under certain circumstances.

If the customer is a student undertaking full-time study outside
Australia as part of their Australian course, their PA is payable for
the duration of the study plus short holiday periods before, during or
after the course under general portability rules.

The approved study period may include additional travel time to allow
them to prepare for the study and/or to finalise their affairs and
return to Australia.

Customers must provide proof of the reason for their absence. Customers
must advise travel dates so the period of approved portability,
including any additional travel time can be assessed, and, an overseas
contact address obtained.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Portability of add-on payments

Add-on payments may continue, if the customer remains qualified, for a
limited period. Other conditions may apply for Remote Area Allowance
(RAA) and Pension Supplement:

-   RAA is only payable for 8 weeks after the customer leaves the remote
    area
-   Pension Supplement (paid to over Age Pension age customers only) at
    the full rate is only payable for the first 6 weeks. The Pension
    Supplement will reduce to the Pension Supplement Basic Amount after
    6 weeks absence from Australia provided the customer is still
    entitled to PA

Payment cancellation and restoration

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, the payment may be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment suspending.

If the customer returns to Australia more than 13 weeks after the end of
their maximum portability period, they cannot reclaim PA as no new
grants of Partner Allowance (PA) can be made from 20 September 2003.

Portability script

Use the Portability Script - Departures and Returns to assess the
customer's entitlement to payment while overseas. A letter can be sent
to the customer confirming the decision and providing contact details
for Centrelink while overseas.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system assesses
portability of the payment, regardless of whether the customer notified
or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not
be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations when customers must advise of a departure
before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex, the
system will prompt them to contact the agency.

The website lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving
or returning to Australia. The Resources page has a link.

The Resources page contains scenarios of portability assessment for
customers on Partner Allowance, contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS) and links to the Services Australia website
for information about payments while outside Australia and travelling
overseas with medicine.

Related links

Discretion to extend portability period

Portability of Add-ons

Coding specialist portability assessments for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Pension Supplement overseas absences

Partner Allowance (PA) qualification and savings provisions

Student studying outside Australia

View/Update overseas travel online

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
