
Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 102-07020140

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for when customers advise they will
not commence studying full-time in a new course, including both new and
intending students. Information is also provided about other payment
options which may be available to customers.

Activity test requirements

The Activity Tests for Austudy, Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and
Youth Allowance (YA) (student) require the customer to be undertaking a
full-time or concessional study load in an approved course.

Customers who advise they will not commence full-time study may lose
qualification for the payment they are currently receiving.

For YA (student) customers unable to commence full-time study due to a
temporary incapacity, see Youth Allowance (YA) Student or Australian
Apprentice becomes incapacitated.

Ceasing full-time studies

YA (student) recipients ceasing full time study who wish to continue
receiving an income support payment must notify Services Australia (the
agency) within 14 days and register as looking for work.

Failure to notify cessation of study within 14 days will result in
cancellation of YA from Student End Date plus one day.

Payment of YA (job seeker) may only commence from the date the claim is
submitted if submitted outside of 14 days of ceasing studies. See
Student to job seeker transfers.

A debt may be raised for students who fail to notify cessation of
studies.

If the customer is approved for independence under the self-supporting
reason codes 'PSE' or 'PSP' on the basis that they will become a
full-time student, and the customer will not become a full-time student,
the customer cannot retain qualification for either of these
independence categories.

Updating study details online

[] Austudy, PES and YA customers registered for a Centrelink online
account may notify the agency of changes to their study details by
updating their details online.

Discontinuing or deferring studies

For continuing students who were intending to continue in the same
course in the upcoming study period, see payment specific procedures on
discontinuing or deferring studies:

-   Payment of Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy when a student is
    deferring or discontinuing study before the end of the course
-   Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
    Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children
    (AIC) Scheme

The Resources page contains examples of cases where the student did not
commence study.

Related links

Austudy student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) student becomes incapacitated

Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Payment of Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy when a student is deferring
or discontinuing study before the end of the course

Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Changing or correcting course of study or educational institution for
Youth Allowance, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement students

Coding new study details

Student to job seeker transfers

Registering customer as a job seeker

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
