-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines information for customers who made voluntary FSL
repayments before transferring the outstanding FSL balance to the ATO.

Financial Supplement Loan

FSL was a voluntary loan paid under the Student Financial Supplement
Scheme (SFSS) that gave eligible tertiary students the option of
borrowing money to help cover their expenses while they studied.

FSL was payable only to tertiary students who were in receipt of an
appropriate benefit such as ABSTUDY (Living Allowance), Austudy,
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) or Youth Allowance (YA), and for
students eligible as a Category 2 student.

The funds for FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(CBA). When the student applied for a FSL, at any branch of the CBA, the
student entered into a loan contract with the CBA. The contract period
commenced on the day the CBA accepted the FSL loan application and ended
on 1 June of the fifth year after the year the loan was taken out.

Voluntary repayments of the FSL

All repayments made during the contract period attracted an early
repayment bonus. To repay a student loan in full within the contract
period the student only had to pay 85 per cent of the total amount
outstanding. This included any annual Consumer Price Index (CPI)
adjustments. Students are liable for the full amount received from the
CBA. Interest on the loan was paid by the government, but the student is
liable for the CPI that is applied to the loan on 1 June each year.

End of loan contract period

All loans were administered by Services Australia until the end of the
contract period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan
was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system. The final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
the agencies system. This does not mean that the loan has been zeroed
off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO for
recovery through the taxation system. CPI adjustments continue to be
applied every year (on 1 July) while there is an outstanding FSL balance
with the ATO.

Bank loan balance of FSL

Each loan payment made to the student increased the loan balance at the
CBA. A record is held on Services Australia’s system of all transactions
made on the CBA loan account.

Note: in December 2005 the CBA issued statements to all customers
advising that the loans had been repaid and were closed. As Services
Australia had already bought back the loan, any repayments made to the
CBA in December 2005 were returned by the CBA to the customer.

Repayment of FSL

Provisions did not exist for customers to have deductions made from a
Services Australia entitlement to make repayments toward a FSL.

Note: any voluntary repayments made during the contract period were paid
directly to the CBA.

Provisions did not exist for customers to have their employer deduct
part of their wages and forward the deduction to the CBA, Australia Post
or Services Australia, with regard to an outstanding FSL balance.

Reviews of FSL decisions

If a customer does not agree with an FSL decision, they can request an
explanation or apply for a formal review of the decision.

If a customer provides proof that the information held by Services
Australia regarding their loan is incorrect, they should provide this
evidence to Services Australia for investigation. Service Officers who
receive this information should forward the details to the Education
Support Programs Team.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Education Support
Programs Team.

Related links

Dealing with disputed Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) repayments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
