
Increasing study load for ABSTUDY students 102-07020160

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines which payment may be the most appropriate for an
ABSTUDY student when they increase their study load to full-time or
approved to undertake a concessional study load.

On this Page:

Full time study

A student who is already undertaking at least 75% of the normal
full-time study load is considered to be full-time. Any increase from
their current study load will not affect their payments.

Notify change of study details online

[] ABSTUDY students may notify the change to their study details by
updating their details online if they are registered and are
authenticated. If the student provides a change to their study details,
the record may generate a DOC with details of the change for follow up
action to be undertaken by a Service Officer.

Other ABSTUDY entitlements

If a student receiving the ABSTUDY Part-time Award increases their study
load to full-time or is approved for a concessional study load, they may
become eligible for a number of other ABSTUDY entitlements. In order for
these other ABSTUDY entitlements, such as Living Allowance, to be
granted, they may need to supply additional information. This can be
done by using the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process or via forms specific to
their changing entitlements. The ABSTUDY Claiming Tool can be used for
recipients who are already ABSTUDY current. Using the ABSTUDY Claiming
Tool is the most efficient option because the student has already
qualified for ABSTUDY and, under the ABSTUDY scheme, they are regarded
as changing awards rather than re-claiming.

The Resources page contains a table detailing information about the
different ABSTUDY awards.

Related links

Coding new study details

Changing or correcting course of study and/or educational institutions
for ABSTUDY students

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Approval of a course as full-time or part-time for ABSTUDY

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Assessing the disability workload concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing the pensioner study load concession for ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
