
Actioning a Data Quality Unit (DQU) request on a multiple or intertwined Centrelink Customer Reference Number (CRN) 102-17091400

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Service Officers located outside the Data Quality Unit (DQU).

This document outlines steps for Service Officers to action multiple or
intertwined Centrelink CRN cases referred from the DQU. It also covers
how Service Officers can escalate cases they cannot complete, and
unlinking and relinking Centrelink online accounts.

ACTDOC activities

If DQU creates a link between a primary and multiple record and further
action is required, DQU will create an ACTDOC work item for Service
Officers with the relevant skill tag.

The ACTDOC will contain what action is required. These will be payment
specific requests to be completed by suitably skilled staff. The ACTDOC
must only be closed once the action is complete. Do not return these
activities to DQU.

Linked multiple records

When a multiple record is MLC linked to a customer's primary record, the
Multiple and Intertwined Warning (MIW) screen displays the following
message on access:

'This record has been assessed as a multiple and cannot be used for the
customer. The customer's primary record is (CRN). Do you wish to
proceed? N'

Service Officers can enter 'Y' to access the record.

An MLC linked multiple record is 'read-only' by default and cannot be
updated. If DQU has identified that remediation work is required, they
will 'unlock' the record for a short period to allow updates. If the
'unlock' period has expired and the record is found to be 'read-only'
again, Service Officers should contact DQU. The Resources page has a
link to the DQU intranet page.

Intertwined records

When an Intertwined record is identified and under action, the Multiple
and Intertwined Warning (MIW) screen will display with the following
message on access:

'This record is part of an intertwined case. Ensure you are updating the
correct record by carefully checking customer details. If necessary,
contact office code NA8. Do you wish to proceed? N'

Service Officers can enter 'Y' to access the record.

The Resources page contains contact details, claims with alternative
identity status staying Open, and user guides for desktop messages and
Multiple CRN identity remediation.

Related links

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Intertwined Centrelink records

Workload Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
