
Student studying outside Australia 102-07020170

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers decide if a customer who is
a student or Australian Apprentice can be paid under the overseas
student provisions while they are overseas and for how long. It also
explains the action the Service Officer and the customer are to take
before their departure

Leaving to live in another country

If a customer is leaving Australia to live in another country, overseas
study provisions cannot be applied. Under general portability rules,
payments will cease on departure. However, some payments may continue
under the general portability rules of that payment. See Portability of
Payments.

Payments allowing portability under approved study provisions (temporary absence)

If the customer is receiving ABSTUDY, see ABSTUDY student or Australian
Apprentice going overseas.

If a student or Australian Apprentice is leaving Australia temporarily
and receiving one of the payments allowing extended portability for
approved study, they may be paid for the duration of their absence if
they satisfy approved overseas study provisions.

If a student or Australian Apprentice is receiving:

Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA), the Service Officer in the service
centre or Smart Centre is responsible for assessing the customer's
eligibility for payment while outside Australia

-   Austudy, see Austudy customer going overseas
-   Youth Allowance, see Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP), Disability Support Pension (DSP), or Parenting
Payment (PP) the case must be referred to Centrelink International
Services (CIS) to assess if the study provisions apply to a customer and
code the departure

The parent/guardian applicant whose student already qualifies under the
normal Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) criteria may continue to
be eligible to receive AIC if the student is participating in an
international student exchange. Certain other conditions apply. Service
Officers should contact the relevant AIC Smart Centre for advice. The
AIC Smart Centre only can do assessments of eligibility.

Approved overseas study (temporary absence)

Before a making a decision as to whether payments allowing extended
portability for approved study can be paid for overseas study, it is
essential to determine that:

-   immediately before leaving Australia, the customer is payable
    (different rules apply for Austudy and Youth Allowance, ensure the
    correct file is used)
-   immediately before leaving Australia, the customer is undertaking
    full-time or approved concessional load study in an approved course
    or is a continuing/intending student
-   students continue to satisfy the payment specific student
    qualification criteria (ensuring this provision can continue to
    apply)
-   Australian Apprentices continue to have a current Commonwealth
    Registration Number
-   the overseas study/training will contribute to and be credited
    towards a full-time course in Australia
-   a student who travels overseas to undertake a work placement is
    still eligible

The customer must:

-   advise their date of departure from Australia, return date (if
    known), and
-   provide written advice confirming proof of the reason for their
    absence

Generally, a customer studying externally (for example, by
correspondence or online) will not have to attend a campus overseas to
complete units of their approved course. However, external students can
access extended portability under overseas study provisions if they can
demonstrate their primary reason for going overseas is to undertake
studies that form part of the course. This could be a residential
component at an overseas institution or an overseas work placement
provided it is part of the Australian course.

A customer may only be paid for student exchange programs if they remain
enrolled and undertaking an approved course at an approved Australian
institution. This is rarely the case for secondary students.

A student or Australian Apprentice granted portability for overseas
study or work can continue to receive payment for the duration of the
approved absence. The approved period may include additional travel time
to allow them to prepare for the study and/or to finalise their affairs
and return to Australia.

Customers in receipt of Carer Payment (CP), Disability Support Pension
(DSP) or Parenting Payment (PP), can also be paid during short holiday
periods before and after the approved period outside Australia. Payment
for such holidays is limited to their maximum portability period, which
is generally 6 weeks (for DSP customers 28 days in a rolling 12 month
period outside Australia). The approved overseas study period may start
after the customer's maximum portability period has ceased. In such
cases, it may be possible to restore payment while overseas following a
break in entitlement.

The return rule for payments allowing extended portability for approved
study means, if a customer has been granted an approved overseas period,
a brief return to Australia of up to 6 weeks does not interrupt the
approved portability period, so no new portability decision would be
required.

No longer enrolled. A number of students undertake study overseas
following a recommendation from their faculty; however, do not remain
enrolled with their Australian institution. These students will not
continue to qualify for benefits if they are studying overseas.

New claims (and customer leaving Australia) - excluding ABSTUDY

Immediately before leaving Australia, the (non-ABSTUDY) customer must be
in receipt of an eligible payment and be:

-   undertaking full-time or approved concessional load study in an
    approved course, or
-   a continuing/intending student

When running the Portability Script - Departures and Returns, choosing
to assess portability is based on the customer being paid before they
leave Australia. If not, do not use the script, record details of the
overseas absence separately on a DOC.

The payment cannot be paid until the person returns to Australia if:

-   a customer has recently claimed as a non-continuing new student and
-   will not become qualified and payable until after they leave
    Australia

Reject such claims and tell customers as soon as possible, so they can
change their travel plans if needed.

Continuing students who lodge a claim before leaving Australia may start
receiving payment after they leave Australia from the date they become
payable.

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

If a customer is also receiving PES overseas, they can continue to be
paid if they remain eligible for their main income support payment. If
they are outside Australia where their main payment ceases, entitlement
to PES will also cease.

Portability interview

Always use the Portability Script - Departures and Returns when
assessing a customer's departure. Do not use the portability script for
ABSTUDY customers.

The portability script will:

-   assess all non-ABSTUDY student customer's entitlement to payment
    while outside Australia and,
-   record details on the customer's record

The departure will be recorded if the customer advises in advance.
However, the absence will not be assessed until the customer actually
leaves Australia. If the script is available, and the customer is in
receipt of payments (see 'New claims' above), use the script to code the
absence from Australia.

A letter can be sent to the customer confirming the outcome and
providing contact details for Services Australia while outside
Australia.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system assesses
portability of the payment, regardless of whether the customer notified
or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not
be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers must advise of
a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned
to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex, the
system will prompt them to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day,
regardless of the time of return, and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Customer advises change to departure or return dates

If a customer travelling for an approved reason advises they are
departing on a specific date, and they then depart Australia more than 3
days before or more than 3 days after the advised date, any specific
negotiated period of portability approved for the original date of
departure will cease to apply. The customer's approved reason for travel
outside Australia may no longer be valid. Payments may cease when the
immigration datalink verifies the customer's actual date of departure or
when reaching the maximum general portability period.

Customers must advise of any change in their departure details prior to
travel if they wish to be paid during the absence. Service officers can
assess if the approved reason still applies and record the new departure
date and reason again.

If the customer is unable to return after the end of the maximum
portability period, Services Australia has the discretion to extend the
period of portability under specific circumstances.

Compliance checks

Compliance teams undertake enrolment checks at least twice a year with
secondary and tertiary institutions and will detect whether or not
students have maintained their enrolment with the Australian
institution. If not, overpayments will be raised for the period the
students are not enrolled. It is therefore essential for the Service
Officer to ensure the student provides details of their study and
confirmation of their enrolment before the student's departure.

The Resources page contains examples of student customers leaving
Australia, and a link to contact details for Centrelink International
Services.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Coding for approved Overseas Full Time Study (OFS) payments

ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas

Austudy customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Portability of payments

Portability of Add-ons

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) overseas absences

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Cancelling a trip outside Australia or changing the departure date

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Discretion to extend portability period

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
or over

View/Update overseas travel online

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
