
Child Relationships page 102-05050070

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Child Relationships page is used to
record details to support the Healthy Start for School (HSFS) initiative
in relation to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and the Alignment of Care
initiative for family assistance payments and the 1 July 2016 changes to
FTB Part B.

On this Page:

Child relationship details

A child's relationship to the customer (and their partner) is requested
when a customer completes an online or paper claim for family
assistance, Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
advises a change in their percentage of care, or has an eligible FTB
child or older child enter their care.

The child relationship details are recorded to support the following
measures:

-   Changes to eligibility criteria for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B
    from 1 July 2016 - a grandparent carer (either single or a member of
    a couple) who meets the general eligibility criteria for FTB and
    satisfies the relevant income test, may be entitled to payment of
    FTB Part B up to the end of the calendar year the child turns 18 (if
    the child is in full-time secondary study)
-   Alignment of care - mutual customers of Centrelink and Child Support
    can advise either program of their care arrangements for the child
    for a care assessment to be completed and details transferred
    electronically to the other program

Note: child relationship details are required when assessing whether a
customer who has received an income support payment is subject to the
Healthy Start for School requirements for a child that turned four
before 1 July 2018. See Healthy Start for School and eligibility for
Family Tax Benefit Part A supplement.

Child Relationships page details

Information on the Child Relationships page includes the relationship of
the customer/partner/ex-partner to the child and the relationship start
date. Information on the Child Relationships page is independent of
child relationship data on other screens used for family assistance
payments which still need to be updated when required.

In relation to the FTB Part B changes, if a grandparent is claiming for
a child, the Child Relationships page must be updated to reflect the
child/grandparent relationship.

E186FY - Relationship between Customer and xxxx must be recorded

This edit can occur during a range of activities including FTB, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims; Parenting Payment
Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) Benefit Transfers
(BTR), and change of care/custody coding. The edit presents when one or
more children do not have a relationship to the customer and/or
partner/step-parent recorded.

Please note that this edit can also appear as 'E186FY - Relationship
between Partner and (child name) must be recorded'.

The relationship of the parent or step-parent to the child must be
recorded on the Child Relationship page. This page is only available
using Customer First and Process Direct, it cannot be accessed in
Empower.

Related links

Healthy Start for School (HSFS) and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A Supplement

Processing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) Claims

Alignment of Care processing for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

Child enters a customer's care/custody

Child leaves a customer's care/custody

Assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
