
Briefing interviews or notification when youngest child is 5 years and 9 months Service Update for Parenting Payment 102-01090030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for conducting service update
briefing interviews or notification for Parenting Payment (PP) customers
when their youngest child is 5 years and 9 months (single customers).
These interviews are conducted as Service Profiling appointments to
discuss changes to mutual obligation requirements.

Changes from 1 July 2021

From 1 July 2021, Service Profiling appointments were replaced by
notifications for PPS customers who will be subject to mutual obligation
requirements due to the age of their youngest child. These notifications
are sent via the customers preferred channel and outline upcoming mutual
obligation requirements and the Compulsory Participation Appointment.
These changes do not affect Remote Customers who will continue to be
serviced as per current arrangements.

During a transition period, appointments booked on or after the 1 July
2021 by the service profiler will still need to be conducted (this
includes rescheduling if required).

PP child age requirements

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) and Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
customers lose entitlement to PP when their youngest child turns 6 (PPP)
or 8 (PPS) years of age.

PP customers who are about to lose qualification due to the age of their
youngest child must complete the 'Your payment is ending' task in their
Centrelink online account. This task will present the required
information to the customer and provide an option, if eligible, to claim
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) via a streamlined claim service. See Transfer to
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment.

PPS customers commence compulsory mutual obligation requirements when
their youngest child turns 6.

Briefing interviews

PPS customers are required to attend a briefing interview when their
youngest child turns 5 years and 9 months (SC199 (SC243 remote)) to
advise of impending compulsory mutual obligation requirements when the
youngest child turns 6.

Except for remote area customers, the system will automatically book the
briefing interviews for those with telephone contact details. These
appointments are conducted via phone. PP customers without telephone
contact details are manually booked an appointment for their local
Service Centre. For remote customers, an activity is generated and sent
to an appropriate service centre to book the briefing interview. Remote
customers do not require a face to face appointment for these
interviews.

If a customer does not attend the appointment and no exceptional
circumstances exist (for example recent experience of family and
domestic violence, bereavement or significant mental health issues), PPS
should be suspended.

The process and actions involved are outlined in the relevant Service
Profiling Update workflow. Finalising the workflow will complete the
Service Component on the customer's Service Strategy (PQSS) screen.

Related links

Conducting a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) Compulsory Participation
Interview

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Principal carer of dependent children Service Updates

Service Component and Service Actions

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

Eligibility and Registration as a No Stream Services Required (NSSRR)/No
RJCP Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
