
Changing address for customers in care of a state guardianship authority 102-03010080

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information which must be taken into account
prior to changing the address of a customer who is the responsibility of
the Protective Office or Guardianship Authority (which may also be known
as the Protective Commissioner, or Guardianship Board).

Change of address

As a change of address can affect a customer's qualification for, and
rate of, payment, Centrelink must have a record of the current address
details for all customers. When a customer changes their address, either
temporarily or permanently, Centrelink must be notified of this change
in circumstances within 14 days of the customer moving.

Note: Centrelink can accept information from any source about a
customer's circumstances without confirming or disclosing that the
person is a customer of Centrelink. However, before action is taken on
the information provided, staff must be confident that the person
providing the information is competent to provide accurate information.

Protective Office/Guardianship Authority

In some cases, the Protective Office/Guardianship Authority is
responsible for overseeing the affairs of a person who is deemed to be
legally unable to competently handle their own affairs. The level of
involvement by this authority can vary from simply watching over the
person, to total control of the person's activities. In most cases the
authority handles the financial affairs of a person, and in some
instances, the customer's record may show the Protective
Office/Guardianship Board (or other state based name for this authority)
as the customer's address. In this case, the Protective
Office/Guardianship Board is the customer's Correspondence nominee.

If a customer who is under the responsibility of this authority contacts
Centrelink to change their address (or any other circumstances), the
information should be taken and confirmed with the State authority
before the record is updated.

Related links

Accepting information from nominees

Changing address (CLK)

Obligations of nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
