
Commencing or returning to self-employment for JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance and Austudy 102-08030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on what happens when a customer in
receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy
advises they have commenced or returned to self-employment.

Unemployed determination

A customer or partner may be involved as the owner or part owner in a
business when they initially claim an income support payment. A customer
may decide to become self employed as a means of getting back into the
full-time workforce.

For self-employed customers to remain entitled to JSP or YA as a job
seeker, it must be determined that they are unemployed. Self-employed
customers are considered to be unemployed if they are able to fulfil
their mutual obligation requirements and willing to undertake any
suitable work. Self-employment will fully satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements if the person is working at least their required
number of hours and the net income of the business provides the
equivalent of the national minimum wage for the minimum required hours.

Working credits

Income from self-employment cannot be offset against working credits
because it is not regarded as employment income. If the customer's (or
their partner's) income reduces their rate to nil and the income is from
self-employment only, then payments should be cancelled immediately. If
some of the income is employment income the customer may be entitled to
use their working credits to offset their employment income. If payment
is reduced to nil rate a customer can remain current at nil rate for up
to six fortnights and retain certain benefits.

Youth Allowance (YA)

YA customers who are not full-time students will not qualify for payment
if they are substantially involved as the owner or part-owner in a
business. Full-time students claiming or receiving YA or Austudy may
qualify for payment if they continue to meet the Activity Test as a
full-time student. These customers will be required to regularly report
their income from self-employment so that the effect on their rate of
payment may be determined.

Partial capacity to work

JSP and YA (job seeker) customers who have a partial capacity to work
and are self-employed may meet their mutual obligation requirements if
they are working a minimum of, and declaring at least, minimum wages for
more than 15 hours per week (or more than 30 hours per fortnight).

Principal carers

If the principal carer of a dependent child commences self-employment,
they may satisfy their mutual obligation requirements if they are
working a minimum of 15 hours per week (or more than 30 hours per
fortnight) and declaring at least minimum wages for this period.

The Resources page provides an example of a customer seeking approval to
commence self-employment. It also contains links to relevant forms.

Related links

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships Mod F

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Assessing and coding the Private Trust details from the MOD PT

Income for an independent contractor and commission income

Online estimator options

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
