-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for staff to follow when a customer
indicates that they have become partnered and it may affect their Youth
Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY entitlement.

Effect of becoming partnered

When a YA or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered, this can affect a
number of payment specific entitlement issues such as the:

-   assessment of the customer's independence, and
-   application of the Parental Means Tests

This is in addition to general entitlement considerations, such as:

-   the partner income and assets tests
-   Rent Assistance, and
-   rate of payment

Forms required

Income support payment recipients who become partnered, or have a change
in relationship status (e.g. de facto couple get married) must tell
Services Australia within 14 days. The customer and partner may be
required to complete a Partner Details (MOD P) form to advise they have
become partnered.

There are circumstances when an assessment of the partner's details can
occur without receipt of a MOD P, see Change in relationship status from
single to partnered.

Independent status

A YA or ABSTUDY customer may be considered independent and not subject
to The Parental Means Test if they satisfy the criteria to be assessed
as either a:

-   member of a YA couple, or
-   member of an ABSTUDY couple

A YA or ABSTUDY customer will be considered independent on the grounds
of being a member of a couple if they are, or have ever been married.

A YA customer will be considered independent if they lived as a member
of a couple continually for 12 months, except in special circumstances
where a duration of 6 months is accepted. For example:

-   family and domestic violence
-   left an abusive relationship
-   death of a partner

An ABSTUDY customer is considered independent when they have been living
as a member of a couple continually for 6 months. In determining the
duration, the following factors will be considered:

-   the continuity of the relationship, and
-   the general factors considered when determining whether a person is
    a member of a couple, see Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated
    under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Note: any periods where the young person or their partner were under the
age of consent in the state where they were living, cannot be included
when assessing a customer's independence.

When customers should not be linked

A dependent YA or ABSTUDY customer cannot be considered to be a member
of a couple with an independent customer for the purposes of means tests
and rate of payment. Dependent YA/ABSTUDY customers should not be linked
with independent customers until they both meet one of the YA/ABSTUDY
independence criteria. When customers are still dependent, a review
activity should be created for the day the couple will have been
together for 12 months (for YA or 6 months for ABSTUDY), or the day the
dependent customer will likely be considered independent for another
reason (whichever is earlier). The customers should then be linked at
the point when both members of the couple are independent for YA/ABSTUDY
purposes.

Note: when a customer and/or their partner are dependent, the partner's
circumstances (that is, income etc.) will not be taken into account for
either member of the couple.

Verifying partnered relationship status

Customers claiming or receiving YA or ABSTUDY are required to verify
their relationship status as it impacts whether they are considered
independent (if other independent criteria are not met) or assessed
under their parents' income if under 22 years of age.

Verification may be in the form of an official marriage or registered
relationship certificate for persons legally married or in registered
relationships. Verification of a de facto relationship will vary on a
case by case basis. Examples include lease agreement or joint bank
statements, insurance policy, dependent spouse rebate or a statutory
declaration from a third party.

Note: an official Marriage Certificate or Extract will be issued by the
State or Territory Government (Department of Births, Deaths and
Marriages). See Identity documents A to Z for document examples. A
registered relationship certificate will be issued when the relationship
is registered under the relevant Australian state or Territory law.

Personal, partner and parental income test

A dependent YA or ABSTUDY customer who is living as a member of a couple
is still subject to the personal income test and parental means test.
Once the customer becomes independent for any reason, including marriage
or the duration of living as a member of a couple, they instead become
subject to the personal and partner income tests.

Reviews when assessed as not a member of a couple

If a YA or ABSTUDY customer is living with their partner, but is not
considered to be living as a member of a YA couple, a review will be set
up to assess their relationship at a later stage. The relationship will
be assessed at 12 months after the couple started living together for YA
customers, and 6 months after they started living together for ABSTUDY
customers unless other circumstances exist which may result in either
partner becoming independent earlier.

ABSTUDY customers who are in State Care are treated in the same way as
dependent YA customers when they become partnered.

Section 24 of the Social Security Act 1991

For Youth Allowance, if it appears a customer may be placed in unfair
hardship by being assessed as partnered, it may be possible, due to the
specific circumstances of the case, to treat the customer as a single
person under Section 24 of the Social Security Act 1991. A Section 24
does not apply to ABSTUDY students.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Related links

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

ABSTUDY customer currently or previously married or in a registered
relationship

ABSTUDY customer in de facto relationship

Assessing the Separation details MOD S and online updates

Assessing the Partner details (MOD P)

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer separates

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Partner Income Test for ABSTUDY customers under 22 years old, Austudy
and Youth Allowance students and Australian Apprentices

Partner Income Test for ABSTUDY customers 22 years and over

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
