
Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated 102-07020130

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the process for students or Australian
Apprentices claiming or receiving Youth Allowance (YA) who are
incapacitated.

Incapacity criteria

If a YA student or apprentice becomes incapacitated, they may claim or
remain on YA as a student or apprentice for the period of their
incapacity if they meet all the following criteria:

have a temporary incapacity

provide sufficient medical evidence, and

for students:

-   remain enrolled in a qualifying course, or
-   remain registered for the relevant award (regardless of whether they
    are undertaking any study during the period of incapacity), or

for Australian Apprentices, maintain a current Commonwealth Registration
Number

The student or apprentice may also be entitled to Pharmaceutical
Allowance (PhA) if medical evidence is provided.

The definition of temporary incapacity for a YA student is different to
the definition for a job seeker. A YA student can be considered
temporarily incapacitated if they present a valid medical certificate
indicating they are temporarily unable to undertake a full-time study
load in their course as the result of an incapacity.

This means the customer may be considered to be meeting the activity
test as a full-time student for the period of their temporary incapacity
even if, because of their medical condition, they are only able to
undertake part-time study or are required to take a leave of absence
from their course.

Medical evidence

A YA student or apprentice who provides a medical certificate that
satisfies the temporary incapacity exemption criteria can continue to be
treated as a full-time student or apprentice for the duration of the
temporary incapacity period.

The medical certificate must state all the following:

-   the medical practitioner's diagnosis
-   the medical practitioner's prognosis
-   that the person is incapacitated for study, and
-   the period for which the person is incapacitated for study

While the preferred medical evidence is a Centrelink Medical Certificate
(SU415 or SU684), alternative medical evidence containing all of the
above information can also be accepted.

Exemption period

A YA student or apprentice can have an initial exemption coded for a
period up to but not exceeding 13 weeks.

Subsequent exemptions (not exceeding 13 weeks) may be granted where the
original medical evidence covered a period of more than 13 weeks, or
where a customer provides additional medical evidence.

Staff may grant subsequent 13 week exemptions without the need for more
medical evidence until the exemption period reaches:

-   the duration stated on the customer's medical evidence, or
-   a maximum of 52 weeks from the date the first exemption was granted

While the exemption can be extended a number of times, consider whether
the incapacity is temporary or permanent. If their condition is
permanent, the customer must test their eligibility for another payment.

Returning to study after temporary incapacity period

The student needs to provide written confirmation from the education
institution if:

-   their temporary incapacity ends during a current study period, and
-   they cannot return to full-time studies until the following study
    period due to institutional requirement

It must state that they cannot recommence any extra subjects until the
following study period.

The student will continue to qualify for YA as a full-time student
provided they resume full-time study in the next study period.

Relocation Scholarship (RS)

A student who has been granted a temporary incapacity exemption from
having to undertake at least 75 per cent of a full-time study load, and
is undertaking an approved scholarship course, may be eligible for the
RS.

A student who, due to incapacity, withdraws from study (but remains
enrolled in the course) or reduces their study load to part-time may
have a scholarship debt if:

they do not start, or resume full-time study, in an approved scholarship
course within 35 days of qualifying for the scholarship in that period,
and/or

they are not studying full-time in an approved scholarship course on
whichever is the later of:

-   the 35th day after they qualified for the scholarship in that
    period, or
-   the 35th day after the course start date in that period

However, a student in this situation will not have a scholarship debt if
the reason for not undertaking full-time in an approved scholarship
course is due to 'exceptional circumstances beyond the person's
control'.

Each case must be considered on its merits, but in most cases, a student
who qualifies for an incapacity exemption will also meet the
'exceptional circumstances' requirement in relation to RS and is
unlikely to have a scholarship debt if they reduce their study load or
withdraw from study because of their incapacity.

If a scholarship debt does have to be raised it must be done manually.

Satisfactory progress in a course

A student can still qualify for YA as a full-time student during the
temporary incapacity as long as they remain enrolled and continue to
make satisfactory progress in their course.

If there is any doubt as to whether the student is still enrolled or is
making satisfactory progress, the student must be asked to provide proof
of their enrolment and/or a letter from their education institution. In
some cases, evidence of prior study will be required to undertake a
satisfactory progress assessment.

Note: a student can remain enrolled and be making satisfactory progress
while temporarily incapacitated. Students who study on a part-time basis
while temporarily incapacitated will have their satisfactory progress
and allowable time reassessed on a pro rata basis.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

YA students and apprentices who are under 22 years old may also be
eligible for YDS if they are assessed as having a partial capacity to
work (PCW). Where the prognosis on the medical certificate indicates the
medical condition will affect the person's capacity to work for more
than 24 months, an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) must be
arranged (if there is not already a current and valid ESAt) to assess
their work capacity.

In some cases, they may previously have been assessed as having a PCW
while they were a job seeker and YDS will continue to be paid to them as
a student or apprentice.

It is possible for a person to have a temporary incapacity for study or
work and a permanent partial capacity to work. They may have a temporary
exacerbation of a permanent condition or they may have a temporary
incapacity because of a different medical condition.

Australian Apprentices

A YA Australian Apprentice who is temporarily incapacitated for work may
be able to claim YA or continue to receive YA as long as their
Commonwealth Registration Number remains current. If this number is
suspended or cancelled, there is no entitlement to YA as an Australian
Apprentice and they must test their eligibility for an alternative
payment.

Away from home rate

When a student or apprentice has a temporary incapacity and their
address details change because of the incapacity (for example, they move
back home to live with their parents), the away from home rate of YA
must be reviewed. See The away from home rate for Youth Allowance (YA)
customers for more information.

Suitability for another payment

Customers who cease to be a full-time student or Australian Apprentice
because they have a temporary incapacity affecting their ability to work
or study may test their eligibility for another payment type. If the
customer is:

-   under 22 years old and temporarily incapacitated, they may be
    eligible for YA (Job seeker/Incapacitated)
-   22 years and over and does not intend to return to their full-time
    studies at the end of their temporary incapacity period, they may be
    eligible for JobSeeker Payment (JSP). See Customers claiming
    JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA) (Incapacitated)
-   unable to work or are unable to be retrained for work for 2 years or
    more, they may be eligible for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Centrelink Medical Certificate

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)

Scholarships paid under Social Security Law

Online estimator options

Payment of ABSTUDY when a student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student becomes
incapacitated

Austudy student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) student becomes incapacitated

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
