
Reissuing annual Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) statements 102-15010070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines the Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)
which was a voluntary loan scheme that gave eligible tertiary students
the option of borrowing money to help cover their expenses while they
studied. It also explains when annual Financial Supplement Loan (FSL)
statements were reissued.

On this Page:

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

The term 'Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)' referred to the
program name of the Scheme. 'Financial Supplement Loan (FSL)' was the
product of the Scheme. In other words, students applied for the product
FSL and received this through the program SFSS.

Contract period

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for an FSL, the student
entered into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All
loans were administered by Services Australia until the end of the
contract period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan
was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

Debt to the Commonwealth

At the end of the contract period, the loan became a debt to the
Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation system. The final
balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on the Centrelink
system. This does not mean that the loan has been zeroed off, just that
the balance has now been transferred to the ATO for recovery through the
taxation system.

FSL statements

FSL statements were sent in June of each year during the contract
period. They advised the student of the amount that was outstanding on
their FSL, plus any Consumer Price Index (CPI) adjustments. The
statement also indicated the amount that was to be repaid, if the
student repaid their loan in full, by 31 May of the following year. A
separate FSL statement was issued for each year for which a customer had
accepted an FSL.

Note: no FSL statements have been reissued by Services Australia since
the end of the contract period in December 2005.

Statements issued by the CBA

The CBA also issued annual statements in January of each year that
reflected the transactions that occurred in the student’s loan account,
but did not include any early repayment bonus that the student received
for making a repayment or any other changes to the loan balance made by
Services Australia. Therefore, this should not be relied on if the
student wished to have an accurate loan balance. The final CBA statement
was issued with a zero balance after the buyback of all loans by the
Commonwealth Government on 1st December 2005. No further statements were
received by students from the CBA.

Supplement statements were issued during the contract period only.

Customer enquiries

Customers requesting information about a loan that has been transferred
to the ATO should be referred to the ATO website for information on
requesting the latest information on their outstanding FSL balance.

If the customer requests further information about the details of their
FSL loan, the Service Officer should contact the Student Payments
Helpdesk. The Student Payments Helpdesk can arrange to have copies of
the original loan contract and transaction history sent to the customer.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) and the Student Payments Helpdesk.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
