
Payment pending review (PPR) of decision to cancel Disability Support Pension (DSP) due to loss of medical qualification 102-01080060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for continuing payments to a customer
while a decision to cancel DSP due to medical qualification is being
reviewed. This is called payment pending review (PPR).

Adverse decisions - when PPR can apply

An adverse decision under social security law is one to suspend, cancel
or reduce the rate of payment.

PPR can only apply:

-   during a review of an adverse decision by
-   an Authorised Review Officer (ARO), or
-   the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) (first review only), and
-   if the decision under review requires the decision maker to use
    discretion or form an opinion

PPR cannot be applied if the customer has requested an explanation of
the decision.

PPR may apply if the decision causes the customer financial hardship, or
significantly affects the customer or their family in other ways. For
example, the customer has a medical condition and cannot afford
treatment if payment stops.

PPR may still apply if the customer has been granted another payment
after a cancellation decision.

If a customer is eligible for PPR, an application for a formal review
should not be recorded as a priority review on the basis of total
combined income and assets less than the relevant maximum fortnightly
payment rate. A priority review may be recorded on other grounds.

For more information about DSP reviews and appeals see Reviews and
appeals for Disability Support Pension (DSP) rejection or cancellation
decisions.

Eligibility for PPR

For PPR to apply:

-   an application for a formal review must be made within 13 weeks of
    the customer being notified of the cancellation decision, or
-   an application for a review by the AAT (first review) must be made
    within 13 weeks of the customer being notified of the outcome of the
    internal review.

The decision to apply PPR is discretionary. Relevant considerations
include, but are not limited to, whether the customer:

-   will be placed in financial hardship
-   has dependent children or caring responsibilities that may be
    significantly affected
-   has a medical condition that may be significantly adversely affected
    (for example because the customer cannot afford treatment),
-   is likely to be evicted or will be unable to pay rent or board

If PPR is applied, DSP will be restored and back payment issued from the
date of cancellation. It is important to take into account relevant
information before paying arrears. This includes income from employment
and changes in relationship circumstances.

During the PPR period, the customer must comply with all payment
requirements, such as reporting changes in circumstances. The rate of
payment must also take into account the customer's (and their partner's)
current income and assets.

PPR starts after 42 day period of grace

If DSP is cancelled because the customer is no longer medically
qualified, a 42 day period of grace (POG) allows the customer time to
claim an alternative income support payment.

If a decision is made to apply PPR within the 42 day POG, the system
will start PPR from the future cancellation date, ensuring continuation
of payment without interruption.

Requesting PPR

A customer can make a verbal or written request for PPR.

Services Australia can decide to apply PPR without a request from the
customer.

Time limits

PPR can be considered at any time while a review is in progress.

However, PPR cannot be considered if the customer applied for a review
more than 13 weeks after being notified of the adverse decision.

Delegation

Staff at the APS4 level and above can apply PPR. Staff under APS4 level
should seek guidance from a Technical Peer Support (TPS) or equivalent.

PPR decisions are generally made by decision making teams. AROs do not
make decisions to apply PPR.

Review of PPR decisions

An ARO can review PPR decisions.

The AAT cannot review PPR decisions.

Ending PPR

PPR is to be ended:

When the ARO review or AAT review is completed, withdrawn or dismissed.
If PPR is not ended

-   within 13 weeks of the date of the review decision, a debt will be
    calculated from the first day after the end of the 13-week period
-   from the date the review was withdrawn or dismissed, a debt will be
    calculated from the day the review is withdrawn or dismissed

If the customer’s circumstances change and they are no longer in
financial hardship, or a new decision will result in less entitlement
For example: DSP is cancelled, not medically qualified. PPR is applied
while the decision is reviewed. Before the review is completed, the
value of the customer’s investment property increases and they are no
longer payable under the assets test. PPR is ended and DSP cancelled

Note: there is no debt during the period PPR is authorised, unless there
is another issue affecting the customer’s entitlement. For example, the
customer does not declare their income from employment.

AAT second review

PPR cannot be applied during these reviews. However, the AAT can make a
stay order to continue payment while an AAT (second review) is in
progress.

The customer must make a written request to the AAT for a stay order.

Once an AAT (second review) is completed, they will instruct on
terminating the AAT stay order. See Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT).

Related links

Reviews and appeals for Disability Support Pension (DSP) rejection or
cancellation decisions

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Reviews and appeals

Continuing payments pending review (PPR)

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Priority explanation of formal review of a decision

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Debt raising

Debts arising from Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) stay orders

Medical Risk Based reviews of current Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
