
Cancellation of payments 102-10020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Customers contacting Services Australia may be subject to a security
notice. These records are managed by Business Integrity Division, see
Cancellation of payments when security notice issued.

This document outlines the circumstances under which a customer's
payment should be cancelled. It also provides links to further
information for each specific payment type.

Cancellation of payment

Cancellation of payment should occur when a customer:

-   no longer meets the qualification and/or payability provisions for
    their current income support payment
-   fails to comply with the notification requirement and/or recipient
    obligations
-   claims a more suitable payment for which they are eligible
-   requests that the payment is cancelled

Before cancelling a customer's payment, care should be taken to
establish that the customer is no longer eligible for that payment.

Payments that can no longer be granted (for example, Partner Allowance
and Widow Allowance) should not be cancelled where a customer notifies
multiple events within 14 days, when the first notifiable event results
in an adverse decision and second notifiable event results in a
favourable decision which nullifies the earlier adverse decision. An
example of when a payment that can no longer be granted, should not be
cancelled, see Partner Allowance (PA) qualification and savings
provisions.

Payment that has been suspended and not restored must be cancelled after
a period in accordance with relevant policy guidelines.

If a decision is made to cancel a customer's payment, they must be
immediately advised about the decision and their right to request an
explanation or apply for a formal review. Note: this includes customers
who request to have their payment cancelled.

Cancellation of payments when security notice issued

From 1 December 2014, new provisions require Services Australia to
cancel a person's welfare benefit or concession card when the
Attorney-General provides a security notice to the Minister for Social
Services.

The Attorney-General can issue a security notice in relation to a
person, when he/she considers the individual should not be eligible to
receive welfare benefits for national security reasons.

It is expected that many individuals subject to a security notice will
not be in receipt of welfare payments or Family Tax Benefit, however
future entitlements will be effected for as long as the security notice
remains in effect.

Loss of eligibility

Customers who are the subject of a security notice are not entitled to
receive any payments or concession cards until the security notice has
been revoked by the Attorney-General. If they lodge a claim for a
payment or concession card it will be rejected. The security notice
stays in force until the Attorney-General revokes the notice. The
Attorney-General must review the decision to issue a security notice
every 12 months whilst the security notice is in force. Note: affected
customers may have an FTB child in their care. The Attorney-General may
recommend, via a Security Notice that family assistance payments can
continue to be paid to a payment nominee, who must act in the best
interest of the dependents.

Customers will be advised of the cancellation of payment or rejection of
their claim by letter. The letter will also tell the customer that the
action taken by the agency is as result of a security notice issued by
the Attorney-General and not a decision that is made or changeable by
the agency.

Customer management

Records subject to a security notice are made 'Restricted Access' to
minimise application or re-application for payment. A new cancellation
and rejection reason SNI -Security Notice Issued has also been
introduced. These records are managed by Business Integrity Division.
Customers must not be provided with contact details of the responsible
Restricted Access Officer.

Given the sensitivities of these cases, a central processing team has
been established to make sure security notices are actioned immediately.
Service Zone Leaders are advised of any security notices received for
customers within their Zone by the Business Integrity Division.

Customers or their nominees contacting the agency to discuss the
cancellation of payment as a result of a security notice should be
advised of the following:

'The decision to issue a security notice is made by the
Attorney-General. The cancellation of the payment and/or concession card
is because the security notice has been issued and is not a decision
made by an officer from this agency. If you do not agree with the
decision made by the Attorney-General to issue a security notice, you
may wish to seek legal advice'.

Other individuals not cancelled or rejected due to a security notice

Individuals whose payments have not been cancelled as a result of a
security notice being issued, may be eligible for payment in their own
right. For example, other family members can test their eligibility for
payment in line with the usual claiming processes.

Customer has employment income

When the customer has employment income:

-   If over Age Pension age and in receipt of a pension (excluding
    Parenting Payment Single (PPS)) they may be entitled to the Work
    Bonus. Note: the Work Bonus is not used in the customer's
    transitional rules calculation, however partners may still benefit
    by the reduction in total income
-   If under Age Pension age, Working Credit may enable the customer to
    keep some of their income support payment while they are working.
    Note: if the customer's payment is later restored or they are
    granted another income support payment that has access to Working
    Credit, they may be eligible to transfer or restore their previous
    working credits or Income Bank balance
-   If the customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and
    some of that income is employment income, the customer's payment may
    remain current at nil rate for up to 6 fortnights and they may
    retain certain benefits

If the customer is not qualified for payment and the decision to cancel
payment is made, ensure an advice is sent to the customer with the
cancellation reason and their review and appeal rights.

Before making any changes to a customer record, it is important that
staff are confident of the 'bona fides' of the caller and the caller's
competence to provide accurate information.

Legislation used in decision

When cancelling a payment, Centrelink staff should state under which
section of Social Security Law the decision is based. As an example,
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999, Section 80 Cancellation or
suspension determination.

Tax and Centrepay deductions

Where the customer had a tax deduction prior to the cancellation of
their payment, the tax deduction will be automatically terminated after
a 2 week grace period. The 'grace' period allows an instruction to be
kept current. If the customer returns to payment within that period the
instruction will be activated automatically. If the customer reclaims
after the grace period a new request for tax deductions will be
required.

Centrepay deduction instructions will be terminated after a 2 week grace
period, after the cancellation occurs. The 'grace' period allows an
instruction to be kept current. If the customer returns to payment
within that period the instruction will be activated automatically. If
they reclaim after the grace period a new application for Centrepay
deductions will be required.

Contents

Coding a cancellation

Cancellation of ABSTUDY payments

Cancellation of Age Pension

Cancellation of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments

Cancellation of Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) student and Australian
Apprentices

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Cancellation of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Cancellation of Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Cancellation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Suspending, cancelling and restoring Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Cancellation of a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Cancellation and Period of Grace for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Cancellation of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker) at customer's request

Cancellation of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Cancellation of Parenting Payment (PP)

Cancellation of Partner Allowance (PA)

Cancellation of membership for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES payments

Cancellation of Widow Allowance (WA)

Related links

Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection reason codes (CLK)

Cancelling a Centrepay deduction on behalf of a customer

Commencing or returning to work

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Home Equity Access Scheme cancellation and rejections

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
