
Suspension of payments of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 102-10030040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether AIC Scheme payments should be suspended,
and the processes for manually coding a suspension.

Suspension of payments

Payments may be suspended if:

a customer is temporarily not qualified for payment or

the payment is not payable as a result of:

-   changes in their circumstances
-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment, or
-   details are required to ensure that payments are directed correctly
    (such as a valid address or bank account details)

Suspension of AIC Scheme payments can only be actioned by the AIC Smart
Centre staff.

The decision to suspend a customer’s payment is an action which has
potentially a great impact on a customer.

Before a payment is suspended, an appropriate request for information
must be issued and the appropriate time for response has passed. For
further information, see the Process page.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification, and
full arrears may be issued if payment is subsequently restored.

Reasons for suspension

AIC payments may be suspended if:

-   the applicant's or student's circumstances have changed
-   they have failed to comply with the requirements for payment or
-   more details are required to ensure that payments are directed
    correctly

If a payment is suspended tell the applicant:

-   the suspension reason and
-   their review and appeal rights, to avoid placing them in financial
    hardship

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, contact must be attempted
with the nominee before the payment is suspended.

Notification of suspension

Customers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If
an automatic letter is not issued by the system, a manual letter must be
issued. For further information see the Process page.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Customer contacts after suspension

Explain the reason for suspension. Advise the customer what documents
are required or what is required for the payment to be restored.

Related links

Codes for Assistance for Isolated Children Students (AIC) Scheme
Cancellation, suspension and rejection reasons

Restoration of payments for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Suspension of payments (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
