
Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement students 102-07020010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Policy

Austudy

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.10, Approved Courses of Study for Austudy

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.20, Austudy & Full-time Tertiary Students

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.50, Austudy & Secondary Students

Social Security Guide, 3.3.4.80, Austudy & Impact of Previous Study

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Social Security Guide, 3.8.3.20, PES qualifying study for tertiary
students

Social Security Guide, 3.8.3.30, PES & Secondary Students

Social Security Guide, 3.8.3.70, PES & Impact of Previous Study

Youth Allowance (YA)

Social Security Guide, 3.2.7.10, Satisfying the YA Activity Test

Social Security Guide, 3.2.7.30, YA Full-time Students

Students who are enrolled in a full-time course of study, which is not yet approved

Read the following Policy Advice from the Department of Social Services
(DSS).

Youth and Student Branch - Policy Decision effective from 01/2001

Issue

Attendance of Youth Allowees as full-time students at institutions
awaiting accreditation.

Background

Private education and training providers are sometimes delayed in
receiving approval from State authorities as accredited training
providers. In some cases course approval, or approval of the
institutions themselves, may not be given until after courses have
started. Students who claim YA before accreditation of a course has been
granted or before the institution has been approved are unable to be
paid under current legislation regarding students. Previously, the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment would backdate payment of
AUSTUDY to the allowable start date, as long as the customer was still
undertaking the course when approval was given and it was still the
current calendar year.

Policy Decision

Where it can be demonstrated that an institution is seeking
accreditation for a course, or for the institution itself, from State
authorities, YA job seeker customers may be permitted to sign an
Activity Agreement, which outlines their studies in the course or
institution as the sole term of their agreement where it is a full time
course. This agreement may be negotiated for a maximum of 6 months, with
no extensions permitted. If accreditation for the course or institution
has not been granted within this period, the customer must negotiate a
new agreement as a job seeker. Customers will not be able to access
student benefits such as the increased income free area as their record
will still show them as 'not a student'.

Legislation

Links to the Federal Register of Legislation site point to a 'Series'
page. Select the 'Latest' version.

Social Security Act 1991

Austudy

-   section 569(1), Activity test - General
-   section 569 C, Full-time students

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

-   section 1061PB(1), Undertaking qualifying study
-   section 1061PD, Full-time students

Youth Allowance (YA)

-   section 541(1), Activity test - General
-   section 541B (1), Undertaking full-time study

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
