-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the participation requirements information that
is provided to Parenting Payment (PP) customers when transferring from a
different income support payment.

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)

Partnered parents who are principal carers who apply for income support
will receive Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) while their youngest
child is less than 6 years. After the child is age 6 years, PPP parents
will be required to test their eligibility for another appropriate
income support payment, such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) job seeker.

Partnered parents with a youngest child aged 6-16 years a who claim
income support will be subject to mutual obligation requirements.

Parenting Payment Single (PPS)

Single parents can apply for Parenting Payment Single (PPS) until their
youngest PP child turns 14 years. They will have part-time mutual
obligation requirements when their youngest child turns 6 years. When
their child is 14 years, the customer must test their eligibility for
another appropriate income support payment.

Single parents with a youngest child aged 6-16 years who claim income
support will be subject to mutual obligation requirements.

Explaining mutual obligation requirements

When a customer transfers to PP single from another income support
payment, the Service Officer needs to explain the mutual obligation
requirements for the principal carer of a dependent child aged 6 years
or more to the customer. This includes:

-   the objectives of PP single
-   the benefits of gaining and maximising employment
-   Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers
-   the importance of actively planning and preparing for future
    participation, if the customer does not yet have mutual obligation
    requirements
-   a demonstration of Job search facilities
-   information about incentives for work force participation, including
    Working Credit and the employment income nil rate period

Working Credit

Working Credit incentives include the ability to:

-   use working credits to reduce the effect of employment income on the
    customer's income support payments
-   maintain certain benefits during the employment income nil rate
    period for up to six consecutive fortnights
-   resume payments within employment income nil rate period without the
    need to reclaim if income decreases

Student Income Bank (SIB)

If the customer has unused working credits or a Student Income Bank
(SIB), they may be eligible to restore these credits within 12 months.

Current participation

Customers may already be participating in an approved activity, either
voluntarily or as a requirement of the payment they have been receiving.
Customers may be eligible for additional services/payments once they are
receiving PP.

Job readiness and capability to look for work

As part of the Online Participation Workflow, a customer's job readiness
and capability to look for and accept work will be determined. This will
result in appropriate registration and referral to Workforce Australia,
such as Workforce Australia Online for Individuals or a Workforce
Australia Provider, who will offer services according to the customer's
job readiness or barriers to employment.

Related links

Helping parents return to work

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child

Reviewing mutual obligation requirements for the principal carer of a
dependent child

First Contact Service Offer workflow

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
