
Child enters customer's care/custody 102-05050010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines help available for customers who have a child
enter their care or custody. The customer may be eligible for payment as
a principal carer or primary carer. This may include income support
payments, family assistance, ancillary benefits, Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Principal carers

A principal carer of a child may be eligible for Parenting Payment (PP)
if they are:

-   single and have a child under 8, or
-   partnered and have a child under 6

There are benefits under social security law for single principal
carers, including:

-   a 'with child' rate
-   a more generous income test
-   part-time mutual obligation requirements, and
-   exemptions from those requirements in certain circumstances

A 'with child' rate may also be paid to:

-   partnered Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy customers
-   single customers who are not principal carers of a dependent child
    in certain situations (they are caring for a young person aged
    16-17, or share the care of a child under 16)

Change in principal carer status

An allowance customer may wish to be assessed as a principal carer due
to a change in circumstances other than a change of care. For example,
income or mutual obligation requirements.

The customer and their partner may agree to swap so that the customer is
assessed as the principal carer of children already in their care,
rather than their partner. For partnered customers where the child is a
dependent child of both customers, it is not necessary to confirm that a
change of care has happened, unless an additional child has entered
care.

Single income support customers may also become eligible as a principal
carer due to an increase in their level of shared care of a child. The
care arrangement must be confirmed with the other person caring for the
child.

A partnered customer with dependent children cannot avoid the
application of a non-payment or rate reduction period for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), YA or Austudy by claiming PP Partnered as an alternative
payment.

Family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Customers can register a newborn child for Medicare, and make a combined
claim for:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   PPL, and
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

A customer who has had a child enter their care may also be eligible for
Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Current FTB customers who wish to add an older child for FTB can
verbally give details of the child entering care.

Customers with a Regular Care Child are also able to claim and test
their eligibility for ancillary benefits.

An additional child can increase the rate of FTB, and Rent Assistance
(RA) payable to the family.

Confirmation of change of care

Staff must try to confirm the change of care with the previous carer to
make sure:

-   payments are made to the right person
-   each customer receives their correct entitlement, and
-   reviews are reduced

Note: there are exceptions to the requirement to confirm a change of
care.

If the previous carer has not notified the change of care, or if there
is a disagreement over care arrangements, the customer must provide
evidence to support the actual care arrangements.

It is important that claims are processed quickly to reduce the chance
of an overpayment for the previous carer and to ensure that the customer
claiming is not disadvantaged.

If a change of care is:

-   temporary, the current customer may remain entitled to both income
    support and FTB payments for the child and may remain the principal
    carer of the child during the absence
-   part of a pattern of care (care of the child is shared between two
    or more people over a certain period), a shared care assessment may
    be needed. The customer may wish to claim a shared care income
    support payment. FTB can also be claimed or reassessed at a shared
    care rate
-   disputed, a customer may continue to receive FTB for the child for a
    period of between 4 and 52 weeks, and may remain the principal carer
    for up to 8 weeks for income support payments if the child has left
    their care without their consent or if it is disputed care. In
    certain cases these periods may be extended. For FTB, discretion may
    be applied to disputed care and left care without consent cases to
    determine that the percentage of care be immediately based on the
    actual level of care if there are special circumstances which
    support that outcome. This decision would result in the losing
    carer's eligibility for FTB ceasing for the child. The person who
    has actual care of the child may be eligible for FTB for the child
    if they meet the normal eligibility criteria

A mutual customer of Centrelink and Child Support can notify either
program of changes to their care arrangements. The program receiving the
information will make the care determination and the care information
will be transferred to the other program for the assessment of family
assistance and child support entitlements. When this occurs a
reassessment of the customer's entitlement to income support payments
may be required.

Delegation of care

If care of a child is delegated to another person, this is not
considered a change of care.

A child may be in the care of another person but the customer retains
the overall responsibility for the child, for example the child attends
boarding school or stays with grandparents.

Customer in crisis or experiencing financial hardship and verbal claims

It is reasonable to provide additional assistance when:

-   a family is deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim
-   helping eligible remote Indigenous customers
-   helping customers in crisis or financial hardship

Service Officers and the Smart Centres Families and Child Care (FCC)
Processing team, work in partnership to provide a suitable outcome. If a
claim is needed, consider a verbal one if appropriate.

For verbal claims:

The customer must agree to the privacy agreement before starting the
claim

The Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) can only be submitted if the customer
meets the claim signature requirements by either:

-   accepting the Verbal Signature Declaration, or
-   returning a signed Families Declaration Form (FDF)

If the Verbal Signature Declaration has not been accepted, the workflow
will generate a Families Declaration Form (FDF) for the customer to sign
and return

The activity can be referred to Families Processing for priority
processing. See Progress of claim - Families claims

Action for income support payment, LIC, CSHC and FST claims

-   Before they can submit their claim, customers advising of a child
    entering care, or a change to an existing care arrangement need to
    provide a completed 'Details of your child’s care arrangement
    (FA012)'
-   Customers can also advise of a change of care in a claim for an
    income support payment
-   Where the claim is allocated for processing in Customer First, there
    is no change to the existing protocols for referral and assessment
-   Where the claim is allocated for processing in Process Direct, an
    Assessment of Care Arrangements Referral work item
    (ZCRF_AOCA_REFERRAL) will be generated and the assessment must be
    completed before the claim can be finalised
-   The Assessment of Care Arrangements work item will be allocated to a
    suitably skilled Families Service Officer to complete the care
    assessment in Customer First
-   After the care assessment has been completed, income support
    payment, Low Income Card (LIC), Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
    (CSHC) and Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) processing staff will
    assess and finalise the claim

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Principal carer of a dependent child

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reassessment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current customer where an
additional child enters care in the current or previous financial year

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Customer advises a change to their level of care of a child

Child out of care without consent

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Shared care for social security payments

Foster care

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Traditional child rearing practices of Torres Strait Islander people

Inter-environment change of address (ICoA) transfer of a child record

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation Requirements due to
special circumstances

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
