
Temporary vacation of principal home 102-03010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about what happens when a customer in
receipt of an asset and income tested payment temporarily vacates their
principal home. It also contains information to help determine the home
ownership status of a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer during a
temporary vacation of their principal home.

Temporary vacation of principal home

When a customer temporarily vacates their principal home, the home
continues to be considered their principal home for an initial 12
months. Therefore the home is exempt from the asset test and the
customer is assessed under the homeowner allowable asset limit. This
exemption applies even if the customer indicates their absence may be
longer than the 12 month period.

Sale of principal home

If a customer sells their principal home during an exemption period and
intends to purchase another home within 12 months, the amount the
customer intends to use from the proceeds of the sale of the principal
home to purchase a new home is an exempt asset for 12 months from the
date of sale.

Extended exemptions

Home is lost or damaged

When the customer's principal home is lost or damaged the temporary
absence can be extended up to a further 12 months if certain criteria
are met.

To gain an extended exemption beyond 12 months and up to 24 months, the
customer must have a continuing intention to purchase, build, rebuild,
repair or renovate their principal home and have:

-   made reasonable attempts to obtain a new principal home. This could
    be to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or renovate their principal
    home, and
-   been making these attempts within 6 months of the loss, damage or
    sale of the principal home, and
-   experienced delays beyond their control in obtaining a new principal
    home

If one of the above criteria is not met the customer cannot gain an
extended exemption past 12 months up to 24 months.

Where the customer moves into another property that they own, this
property will still be assessed as an asset while their principal home
is exempt from the asset test.

Unable to return from overseas travel

When a customer has vacated their home temporarily to travel overseas
and is unable to return due to reasons beyond their control, for example
due to Coronavirus (COVID-19), they may be eligible for an extended
exemption. The period of the exemption will depend on the customer’s
individual circumstances.

Vacation of home extended for a new reason

A customer can have two consecutive exemptions from the assets test if
their circumstances warrant. For example, a customer may have
temporarily vacated their principal home with the intention of
travelling for 12 months however, only 6 months into this exemption they
ceased travelling and moved into their parent's home to provide care for
one or both of them. The 2 year exemption starts from when the customer
commences to provide care.

A new 2 year exemption period does not apply if the customer moves from
one care situation to another care situation.

However, a person cannot ‘stack’ a 12 month absence for any reason on to
one of the other statutory periods for the same purpose, e.g. 2 year
absence when they enter aged care followed by another year for the same
reason

Moved to a care situation or due to ill health

When the customer leaves their home to enter a care situation due to an
illness or to provide care, the home continues to be considered their
principal home, however:

-   the intention to return home is irrelevant
-   they may be eligible for a two year exemption

See Vacation of home due to illness and Vacation of principal home to
provide care.

Customers in receipt of FTB and/or CCS

Customers only in receipt of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) are not asset tested, therefore this procedure only
applies in determining their home ownership status.

Vacation of home review

When a customer temporarily vacates their principal home, a vacation of
home review is set prior to the end date of the exemption period. For a
temporary vacation of home, once the exemption period has expired, if
the customer has not returned to their principal home:

-   they are assessed as a non-homeowner, and
-   the principal home is an assessable asset

Escalations for vacation of home review processing

An escalation for a vacation of home review may be required for:

-   customer request for more time to provide requested information
-   customer seeking an extended exemption
-   restoration from suspension due to non-compliance with a home
    vacation review (including where customer passed away)

Note: if the customer has passed away when the payment is suspended, HVR
processing are to restore payment from the date payment was suspended
and finalise the review activity. Service Officer(s) in service centre
or Smart Centres can then proceed with DEA action.

Related links

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance for travellers

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Vacation of home reviews

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for Respite Care

Changing address (CLK)

Permanent vacation of principal home

Income from boarders and lodgers

Purchasing another residence

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Selling a home

Change of address for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
