[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the assessment of a customer's
income from a business, when they advise of a reduction in business
activity, either as a result of a seasonal downturn or an event which is
not part of the normal cycle of activity for the enterprise, as well as
how to assess income and assets when the business has ceased to operate
or closed.

Decrease in business income

Where a business undertakes different levels of activity throughout a
period as part of its normal operations, the previous profit result will
reflect the pattern of activity. Accordingly, unless there has been a
change in circumstances of the business operations, the net profit
earned from the previous 12 months provides an accurate indication of
the likely rate of income earned by the customer from the business.

The principle is always to determine the current rate of income earned
by a customer from a business. Where, due to a change in circumstances,
the previous financial statements no longer provide an accurate
indication of the likely current rate of income earned by the customer
from any business enterprise, a reassessment may be made on available
evidence. This should generally take the form of a revised profit and
loss statement which incorporates the effect of the change to the
business identified by the customer and reflects the current financial
position of the business. Where a customer has difficulty in providing
this information, it can be suggested that they may wish to seek
assistance from their accountant.

If the business is undertaken through the structure of a private trust
or company, Service Officers must refer the case to a Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO).

Cessation of business activity

If the business has not been sold, but has ceased to operate, the income
previously assessable in respect of the activity undertaken by the
business is no longer relevant. However the assets of the business must
continue to be maintained. For example, if some of the assets of the
business have been sold, then proceeds from the sale may have been
reinvested through the business structure. These investments may produce
a different income and reflect asset values different to the previous
financial statements provided. If the customer indicates that the
previous balance sheet is no longer an accurate indication of the
current net asset position of the business, a revised balance sheet of
the sole trader or partnership business and a statement outlining what
has happened to the assets of the business is required.

Income from a customer's interest in a business is not employment
income. Business income is assessed as other ordinary income. It is used
when calculating the accrual of Working Credits. The customer is unable
to deplete their Working Credit balance to offset business income.

When a customer who is involved in a business (as a sole trader,
partnership, or is involved in a private trust or private company)
advises of a complete cessation of current business activity, the rate
of other ordinary income from the operation of the business may be
reassessed. It is important that the income and assets being maintained
from the business are not zeroed, as more information is required to
determine the reason for the change, whether the situation is temporary
or permanent, and what effect the change in circumstances has had on the
structure itself, as the business structure doesn't necessarily cease to
exist merely because the business activity undertaken through it has
stopped.

Related links

Obtaining an estimate of business income

Steps to assess an interim profit and loss statement

Steps to assess an interim balance sheet

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Income and expenses of a business

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
when self-employed

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officers (CAOs)

The balance sheet

The profit and loss statement

Irregular or intermittent business activity

Sole traders

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

Seasonal business activity has ceased completely

Seasonal downturn in business

Unexpected downturn in business

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships MOD F

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Assessing and coding the Private Trust details from the Mod PT

Business has ceased or has been sold

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
