
Centrelink Multiple Match List (MML) screen 102-13030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to use the Multiple Match List (MML) screen.
The MML screen is a tool to assist staff with locating multiple
Centrelink Customer Reference Numbers (CRN) in Customer First.

The MML screen

The MML search screen identifies records with same/similar details that
may be multiple records for the same customer. To use the MML screen,
Service Officers must be in a customer record in Customer First.

MML searches match to name, date of birth, sex and address. A list of
potential matches are presented with a Match level from CL1 to CL4, with
CL1 more likely than CL4. The MML screen will also provide ‘Link Status’
and ‘Record Type’. The records identified may display:

-   CRNs that belong to the same customer, but have been created with
    slightly different details. For example, the date of birth may have
    been entered as 3/2/08 not 2/3/08
-   CRNs that are unrelated to the customer details in the header

Service Officers need to investigate records presented by the MML
screen. Not all records returned are necessarily multiples. Service
Officers should look for similarities and check other aspects of the
records, such as links, addresses and other details, to determine
whether the records belong to the same customer. This is not ‘browsing’,
it is ensuring all multiple records for a customer are identified.

Check if the Data Quality Unit (DQU) has assessed the case by checking
the Document List (DL) screen for a Display on Access (DOA) DOC by
region code NA8. If the records have not been assessed, refer to DQU
using the Multiple CRN Referral Fast Note.

The Resources page contains links to Locator and the Data Quality Unit
intranet page.

 

Related links

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Intertwined Centrelink records

Searching for a customer on the system

Adding a customer to the system

Indexing a customer's claim on the system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
