
Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 102-07020060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme students who
have deferred, or withdrawn from full-time studies prior to the end of
their course.

On this Page:

Change of circumstances

This is a change in the student's circumstances affecting their
qualification for payment, and is therefore a notifiable event. In
addition to the common notifiable events, students who are undertaking
study or training must notify the Services Australia as follows:

for notification reporters, within the 14 day notification period if any
of the following events occur, or are likely to occur:

for stimulus (and variable reporter) customers:

-   by the Report Due Date or;
-   by the Entitlement Period End Day (EPED)

If any of the following events occur, or are likely to occur:

-   starting or discontinuing a full-time course of study
-   not enrolling in a course as a continuing student by the end of the
    enrolment period
-   not beginning in the course on the first day it is offered, or
-   changing enrolment in the course

Online accounts

[] PES students may notify the change to their course end date or other
study details by updating their details online if they are registered
online and authenticated. If there is a change to the student's
Participation Status or Student End Date, the record will either
generate a DOC, or create a Change of Circumstances interaction with
details of the change for follow up action to be undertaken by a Service
Officer.

AIC Students generally do not have an online account/myGov account. The
AIC Applicant is obliged to notify the agency of a change in
circumstances. Check student is in their care.

Express Plus application

[] Customers with a Centrelink online account can view their personal
information including study details through the 'My Profile' menu option
in the Express Plus applications.

Identification Confirmation

If Identity documentation is applicable, all of a customer's addresses
(including postal address) and telephone details (including mobile phone
numbers) must be checked at every phone or personal contact, and updated
if required. Note: if the customer has authenticated themselves via
Interactive Voice Response (IVR), address details do not need to be
confirmed.

Reduced study load

Generally if a student ceases full-time study they cease to qualify for
one of the Centrelink administered payments for students. However, if
the customer has reduced their study load, they may qualify for a study
load concession. Where an AIC student with a disability or other
health-related condition has a reduced study load they may continue to
be considered as a full-time student by the education institution.

The Resources page contains a link to the Students Homepage online.

Related links

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) ABSTUDY PES and
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES payments

Changing study details for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Raising debts for students

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) student becomes incapacitated

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Student to job seeker transfers

Coding new study details

Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the family pool for the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for Youth Allowance (YA)

Working Credit

Existing recipient starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Student to job seeker transfers

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
