
Change of address for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme applicants or students 102-03010070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens when applicants in receipt of
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme notify that they have
changed, or intend to change their home address or that of the AIC
student.

Service Officers' role

Where a student changes their address, Service Officers must record the
details and refer them to the relevant AIC Smart Centre for their
action.

If there are basic address changes for the applicant, new bank account
arrangements, and/or changes of school, the Service Officer should also
refer these changes to the relevant AIC Smart Centre for their action.
This is necessary due to the relative complexity of AIC eligibility and
coding requirements. There may be a flow-on effect to AIC eligibility
and entitlement such as geographic isolation eligibility and/or a change
in the AIC allowance payable.

Where to find the AIC Smart Centres

As a general protocol, changes of circumstances and actions to suspend,
cancel or restore payments should only be undertaking by AIC Smart
Centre staff. Where there is any doubt, the Service Officer should call
the relevant Smart Centre about what action they can or cannot take.
Look up local Processing Service details for: Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC).

To transfer an AIC applicant to an AIC Smart Centre, select national
Transfer Numbers in Office Locator.

Customers calling other Smart Centre Call queues with AIC queries should
be transferred to the dedicated AIC lines on 132 318 and should be
advised to use that number for further calls.

The Resources page contains links to Office Locator and the AIC Claim
(SY040) form.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme - Distance
Education Allowance (DED)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme - Boarding
Allowance (BA/ABA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme - Second
Home Allowance (SHA)

Isolation conditions for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Cancellation of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
