
Existing customer starts an Australian Apprenticeship 102-07030200

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when an existing customer
commences an Australian Apprenticeship.

On this Page:

Current YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY customer

If the customer is currently receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or
ABSTUDY and will continue to be eligible to receive the same payment as
an Australian Apprentice, no claim is required.

The following customers will continue to qualify for payment if they
change their activity from job search, student or other activities to
full-time Australian Apprentice:

-   YA job seekers under 22
-   YA students under 25
-   Austudy students
-   ABSTUDY students

Claim requirements

There is no requirement for current YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY customers to
lodge a claim to ensure continuation of their income support payment.
When a customer indicates they will be undertaking a full-time
Australian Apprenticeship, Services Australia will obtain the Australian
Apprenticeship details from the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment.

Customers may be selected for a reduced question set, if they are:

-   claiming online, and
-   received 1 of the following payments in the previous 52 weeks, and
-   are claiming YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY

Existing known data that has been used for their previous payment will
be re-used:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Newstart Allowance (NSA)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered or Single (PPP/PPS)
-   Widow Allowance (WDA)

If the customer has indicated they have had a significant change in
circumstance, they will be presented with the full claim. The
significant change in circumstance question will be asked if the
customer's previous payment cancelled between 14 and 52 weeks ago.

If the customer is, or was, receiving a different income support
payment, they will be presented with a full claim for Youth Allowance,
Austudy or ABSTUDY as an Australian Apprentice.

If there is a gap between ceasing study and commencing the Australian
Apprenticeship, and the YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY customer wishes to access
income support for this gap, they must change activity or claim another
payment, depending on their circumstances (for example, Youth Allowance
(YA) or JobSeeker Payment (JSP) as a job seeker, or Parenting Payment).
However, existing ABSTUDY customers do not need to apply for income
support if the gap is 28 days or less, as they remain entitled during
this gap.

Indigenous customers

It may be more beneficial for Indigenous Australian Apprentices to claim
ABSTUDY rather than remain on YA or JobSeeker Payment (JSP), as ABSTUDY
Australian Apprentices may be eligible for other supplementary ABSTUDY
payments in addition to their Living Allowance such as Incidentals
Allowance.

Effect on payment

When a customer advises they will commence (or have commenced) an
Australian Apprenticeship, payments are normally suspended from the date
full-time employment commences. The change of activity type or benefit
transfer cannot be finalised until the details of the Australian
Apprenticeship are confirmed by the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment.

Part-time Australian Apprentices

Australian Apprentices must be undertaking their Australian
Apprenticeship full-time to qualify for payments as an apprentice.

A customer undertaking a part-time apprenticeship may still be eligible
for assistance as a student if they are studying an approved course and
undertaking an approved study load for the relevant payment.

Working Credits

The Australian Apprentice Income Bank only allows a customer to accrue
up to 1000 Working Credits, whereas a YA job seeker can accrue up to
3500 Working Credits.

If the customer has unused Working Credits, these credits can be
transferred to their Australian Apprentice Income Bank where there is a
gap in entitlement of up to 12 months.

Unused Student Income Bank

If the customer has unused Student Income Bank credits, those unused
credits can only be transferred to their Australian Apprentice Income
Bank where there is no gap in entitlement. A customer has access to the
Income Bank for any fortnight where the customer is an Australian
Apprentice (even if for only 1 day in the fortnight).

Activity test requirements

There is no activity test for Australian Apprentices, as they continue
to be eligible as long as they have a current Commonwealth Registration
Number.

Effect on other Income Support payments

When a customer commences a full time Australian Apprenticeship, some
income support payments may no longer be payable. See Commencing or
returning to work.

The Resources page contains links to the students and trainees
information on the Services Australia website and example text for the
Q134 suspension/cancellation letter.

Related links

Claiming ABSTUDY

Personal Income test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Working Credit

Identifying the most beneficial payment for trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Creating a Q134 letter

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
