
Actioning Approved Care Organisation (ACO) advice of transfer, discharge or absence of a young person 102-05050030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the transfers, discharges
and absences of young persons to or from Approved Care Organisations
(ACO).

Lodgement of spreadsheet

ACOs must advise Services Australia immediately of any changes in care
arrangements such as a transfer, discharge or absence of young persons
who were in their care.

ACOs must email the ACO admission, transfer or discharge spreadsheet
(only accessible by ACO teams) to advise of changes in care
arrangements.

ACOs are also eligible to apply for past period claims for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB).

For details on admissions or information on the speadsheet, see
Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims from Approved Care
Organisations (ACO). The Resources page contains information about the
'ACO-admission, transfer or discharge spreadsheet'

No longer a client of an ACO

If a young person is no longer a client of an ACO, whether this is with
or without consent of the ACO, Family Tax Benefit (FTB) payments to the
ACO for that young person should cease from the date the young person
left care.

FTB cannot be shared for a young person in the care of an ACO as shared
care legislation only applies to individuals.

Note: debts are sometimes incurred by the custodial parent after care of
a child has been transferred to an ACO. Recovery of these debts is the
responsibility of the Service Centre responsible for payment of FTB to
the custodial parent even though the State based processing centre may
have generated the debt when actioning the transfer.

The Resources page contains information about the 'ACO admission,
transfer or discharge spreadsheet' and a table with further information
on discharges from ACO, transfers between organisations, verification,
temporary absences, absconders and leave from the ACO.

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations
(ACO)

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims from Approved Care
Organisations (ACO)

Approval, rejection, withdrawal and monitoring of Approved Care
Organisations (ACO)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
