
Compulsory Participation Interview Service Update for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) principal carers when youngest child turns 16 years 102-01130060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Service Update process for job seekers
receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) as principal
carers, when their youngest child turns 16 years old. These customers
are required to attend a compulsory participation interview.

Purpose of Service Component 226

Centrelink managed job seekers will be expected to negotiate a Job Plan
which reflects their new full-time mutual obligation requirements. This
interview is not an annual event as it only occurs at the time the
relevant child turns 16.

Identification for Service Update

Customers can be identified for this Service Update when their youngest
child has turned 15 years and 11 months. Once identified, the relevant
Service Component 226 will be automatically started and the system will
automatically book a phone appointment for these customers for a date
after the youngest child has turned 16.

Remote customers

For this Service Update remote customers undertake a phone appointment.
The phone conversation with the customer should be clearly documented
and any documents requiring the customer's signature as a result of the
phone interview, including the Job Plan, should be posted to the
customer for their return within 14 days. See, Altered processes and
mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to coronavirus
(COVID-19) response.

[] The Job Plan can be negotiated over the phone. If the customer has an
online account, the customer can agree to their Job Plan in their online
account therefore removing the need to post the document to the
customer.

The participation interview

The participation interview will cover issues including:

-   advising single customers of potential change to their rate of
    payment
-   advising principal carers of changes to their mutual obligation
    requirements
-   informing customers of their reporting and contact obligations
-   connecting customers to an Employment Services Provider (if not
    already connected to one) and referring for an Employment Services
    Assessment (ESAt) if required, and
-   negotiating a new Job Plan with Centrelink managed job seekers to
    reflect full-time mutual obligation requirements

This Service Update is required to be completed as soon as possible once
the customer falls into the target group, because the customer needs a
relevant Job Plan which reflects their new mutual obligation
requirements. Customers cannot unreasonably delay entering into a Job
Plan by rescheduling such appointments. If customers do not attend this
interview their payment should be suspended with the reason 'Failed to
Attend Interview' (FAI) to prompt contact with the agency.

Exemptions

There are certain special family circumstances exemptions only available
to principal carers. As the customer will no longer be a principal carer
due to their child turning 16, any exemption they may currently have is
likely to cease from the child's 16th birthday, and they will be
required to undertake full-time mutual obligation requirements. However,
exemptions for customers facilitating home schooling or distance
education of their child(ren), large family or providing emergency and
respite foster care, can extend past the child's 16th birthday in some
cases.

Related links

Principal carer of dependent children Service Updates

Principal carer participation and eligibility interview for youngest
child 15 years and 9 months Service Update

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
