
Intertwined Centrelink records 102-13050000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about intertwined records, which
occur when updates or data for one person are coded on the record of
another person. All intertwined, or suspected intertwined records, must
be referred to the Data Quality Unit (DQU) for assessment.

On this Page:

Intertwined records

Intertwining happens when information and/or data is updated on the
wrong person's record. This can result in incorrect assessments, privacy
breaches and incorrect data exchange with other departments and
agencies.

To prevent intertwining it is important to conduct a thorough search for
the person's correct record, authenticate the person and establish Proof
of Record Ownership (PORO) before making any updates. There are many
instances where a person's details are the same or similar, for example,
twins.

Once any updates have been made on the wrong record, the details must be
referred to the DQU using the Intertwined Referral form.

Do not make further updates or finalise any assessments. To ensure
privacy, details of the intertwined data should not be released to a
customer.

DQU action

Intertwined records referred to the DQU will be assessed to determine
which data is intertwined. DQU will then liaise with appropriate staff
for corrective action and apply the necessary warnings or Display on
Access (DOA) DOC.

Intertwined records can be identified when accessing the record by the
following:

-   Multiple and Intertwined Warning (MIW) screen may display with
    warnings that require action
-   Display on Access (DOA) DOC recording the Case Number and other
    relevant details

The Resources page contains a link with contact details for the DQU and
a link to the Intertwined Referral form.

Related links

Searching for a customer on the system

Centrelink Multiple Match List (MML) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
