
Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning to full-time study 102-07010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the payment options for job seekers under 22
years of age and Australian Apprentices under 25, who are receiving
Youth Allowance (YA) and begin full-time study.

Qualification for payment

YA job seekers under 22 years of age and Australian Apprentices aged
under 25 years, continue to qualify for payment if they change their
activity from job search, Australian Apprenticeship or other activity to
being a student. There is no requirement for these customers to lodge a
claim. However, the customer must still qualify for YA as a full-time or
concessional study load student.

Note: YA job seekers who transfer to YA (student) will continue to be
entitled to a Health Care Card (HCC) and can use their existing card
until a new HCC is issued.

Approved activity

Young people who are under 22 years of age may in some cases undertake a
full-time vocational short course of 12 months or less as an approved
activity while receiving YA (job seeker). Service Officers must
determine that the course would improve their short-term employment
prospects. A customer may also continue to be paid YA (job seeker) when
they have reached their satisfactory progress limit (allowable time) but
still have less than 12 months of study remaining to complete their
course. If the customer cannot be paid YA as a full-time student, it may
be possible for the customer to continue to receive YA as a job seeker
if the course meets short course guidelines.

Note: if a job seeker is provider managed, Services Australia should not
be approving and coding a short course (in accordance with the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment Short Course Guidelines).
The job seeker should be referred back to their provider to discuss and
approve the short course. This is important because it may affect the
level of servicing the provider can offer. If the provider approves the
short course, they will code the course details in the Department of
Education, Skills and Employment, Employment Services System (ESS) and
study will be approved and viewed on the Activity and Exemption Summary
(AEX) screen. However, if the customer is enrolled in a course of study
that would make them eligible for a student payment, then this should be
discussed with the customer and where necessary a transfer to a more
appropriate income support payment done.

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Customers who were previously entitled to PES as a result of a transfer
from Disability Support Pension (DSP) (granted between 11 May 2005 and
30 June 2006), or Parenting Payment Single (PPS) (received on or after 1
July 2006) to YA (Job seeker) after 1 July 2006, will not retain their
entitlement to PES if they recommence their original course after a
break or recommence another course.

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Some isolated secondary students will be eligible to apply for AIC
instead. Students who are eligible for AIC may be better off on this
payment rather than YA (student) as only the Additional Boarding
Allowance component of AIC is subject to the Parental Income Test.

Indigenous job seekers

It may be more beneficial for Indigenous YA job seekers to transfer to
ABSTUDY rather than remaining on YA as ABSTUDY students may be eligible
for other supplementary ABSTUDY payments in addition to their Living
Allowance. ABSTUDY also offers greater flexibility in its study
requirements.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

YDS is paid to full-time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt
of YA and ABSTUDY if the customer is under 22 years of age and has been
assessed by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) as having a partial
capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week.

Working Credit

If a customer has Working Credits available, they may be eligible to
restore these credits to their new Student Income Bank (SIB) or Working
Credit balance within 12 months. SIB credits can only be restored to a
new Working Credit balance.

Determining study start dates for YA and Austudy

Most education providers will have an academic calendar with the
standard date many students will start or end their courses or study
periods. Service Officers can access these dates on the National Course
Approvals sub-site. Education providers often publish their academic
calendars on their websites. It is important to note that many students
will be enrolled in a course that starts or finishes on a different date
to the standard date on the education institution's academic calendar.

From 13 January 2019, Service Officers can accept a student start date
advised by a YA or Austudy customer, providing that date is not greater
than 14 days prior to the standard course start date published on the
National Course Approvals sub-site, or an education provider's website.

Continuing and intending students

When Service Officers are making study updates, consideration should be
given to whether the customer can be considered a continuing/intending
student. This determination may influence what date the customer is
eligible to receive a student payment. The rules for
continuing/intending students vary between different student payments.

The Resources page contains links to Students and Trainees information;
Payment and Service Finder; Office Locator; the ICT Security Portal and
the National Course Approvals sub-site.

Related links

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) tertiary
students

The away from home rate for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Coding new study details

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Requesting information (CLK)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers returning to part-time study

Existing customer starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Working Credit

Annual Activity Requirements for Workforce Australia

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
