
Transfers from Parenting Payment (PP) and effect on participation 102-17010070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect on mutual obligation requirements when
a customer transfers from Parenting Payment (PP) to a different payment.

When a customer transfers from PP partnered or single to another
payment, they may have different mutual obligation requirements.

Assessing a customer's employment capabilities

As part of the Online Participation Workflow, a customer's job readiness
and capability to look for and accept work will be determined. This will
result in an appropriate job readiness pathway being identified for the
job seeker. This may include an appointment with a Service Officer or
specialist officer (for example, Social Worker).

Transferring to a payment with mutual obligation requirements

Customers transferring to a payment with mutual obligation requirements
(for example, JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (job seeker))
are advised of their new obligations during the new claim interview. If
a customer is assessed as having a partial capacity to work, they may
have reduced mutual obligation requirements.

If the customer already has a current compulsory Job Plan and they are
Centrelink managed, consideration must be given to whether the
activities in the plan are still relevant, given their change in
circumstances. If one or more of the compulsory activities are no longer
appropriate, the customer must be asked to negotiate a new Job Plan.

Relationship status changes

A change in relationship status may affect eligibility for PP. In some
cases, the customer will still be eligible for PP as a new claimant, or
may be required to test their eligibility for another income support
payment. Depending upon the age of the customer's youngest child, the
customer may need to transfer to another suitable payment such as JSP.

Transfers between PP partnered and PP single may affect mutual
obligation requirements depending upon the age of the customer's
youngest child. Due to the change in the customer's circumstances, if
they are Centrelink managed, they may require a new Job Plan to be
negotiated. The level of financial assistance available to the customer
may change, for example, only PP single customers are entitled to a
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
and there are different income tests and rates of PP.

JSP (single principal carers) qualifies as a PES attracting income
support payment. This means those PPS customers who transfer to JSP
(single principal carer) will continue to be able to qualify for PES at
any point in time (where all other qualifications are met) and are not
required to be continuing in the same course of study to retain access
to PES.

Customers may lose entitlement to certain add-on payments or services if
they are not transferring to another eligible payment, and the Service
Officer may need to consider if the customer must be referred to an
Employment Services Provider or whether they are entitled to:

-   Volunteer to participate with Workforce Australia
-   volunteer to participate with Community Development Program (CDP)
-   an Education Entry Payment (EdEP)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) for customers transferring from
    PP single

Customers eligible for Working Credit must be advised of the incentives
to work force participation such as working credits and the employment
income nil rate provisions.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Identifying the most beneficial payment for trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

First Contact Service Offer workflow

Community Development Program (CDP)

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and ABSTUDY PES

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
