
Cancellation of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments 102-10020040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes to be followed when coding a
cancellation of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments.

Cancelling AIC payments

An AIC applicant may no longer be entitled to the Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payment(s) as a result of a change in
their or the student's circumstances. This may be a discontinuation of
the student's full-time study or their term living arrangements, their
or the applicant's failure to comply with other requirements for payment
or because they transfer to another payment, such as the student
claiming Youth Allowance.

In some cases the change of circumstances may mean that the student no
longer meets one of the AIC isolation conditions (e.g. family has moved
to a non-isolated area during the year). The applicant would still be
eligible for payment for the student under the AIC Continuity of
Schooling concession where the student continues to attend the same
school or be enrolled at the same distance education institution.

If the decision to cancel payment is made by Services Australia, an
advice must be sent to the applicant with the cancellation reasons and
rights of review and appeal.

Cancellation of AIC payments can only be performed by AIC Smart Centre
staff.

Students impacted by COVID-19

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic some students may have been unable to:

-   return to board for Term 2, 3 or 4 of 2020 and Terms 3 or 4 of 2021
-   reside in their approved second home

Some applicants may have been unable to reside in their principal home.

Where the student/applicant is no longer eligible for AIC, BA or ABA
Boarding or Second Home Allowance, update the AIC record to reflect the
change in circumstance.

If the applicant notified:

-   within their notification requirements: a decision to waive the
    overpayment should be considered under 7.3.3.7 - Waiver of the right
    to recover a debt - of the AIC Policy Scheme Guidelines
-   outside their notification requirements: any overpayment should be
    assessed as per standard debt process

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Assistance for Isolated
Children Students (AIC) Scheme

Suspension of payments for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Restoration of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
