-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines the process when a customer disputes the
repayments made for their Financial Supplement Loan (FSL).

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) was a voluntary loan
scheme which gave eligible tertiary students the option of borrowing
money to help cover their expenses while they studied. Students were
able to obtain a FSL through this scheme.

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by the Services Australia until the end of the contract
period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan was
transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system.

Note: the final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
the agency's system. This does not mean that the loan has been zeroed
off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO for
recovery through the taxation system.

Disputes

Disputes can arise if a customer does not agree with the remaining
balance of the loan or they do not recall taking out a loan. The
customer's loan record must be checked first to see which repayments the
customer is disputing. If the customer believes they have made a
repayment that is not recorded, they will need to give details of when
and where (at which branch of the CBA or Australia Post or which
Centrelink Service Centre) they made the repayment, and how much it was
for.

Note: if a customer wishes to appeal their FSL decision, Service
Officers should refer the case to a Subject Matter Expert (SME) and
Authorised Review Officer (ARO) following local procedures.

Repayments after FSL was transferred to the ATO

If the enquiry is regarding a repayment that was made after the FSL was
transferred to the ATO, the customer should be referred to the ATO
website.

If a customer requests further information about their FSL, the Service
Officer should contact the Education Support Programs Team. The
Education Support Programs Team can arrange to have copies of the
original loan contract and transaction history sent to the customer.

Waiver of FSL debt

If a customer seeks a waiver of their FSL debt, this must be done under
the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA
Act). Their request should be referred to the Department of Finance for
a decision.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO), and a link to Waiver of Debt information on the Department
of Finance website.

Related links

Excess repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
