
Coding a cancellation 102-10020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines reasons for cancellation of income support
payments.

On this Page:

Automatic cancellation

Automatic cancellation will occur following reassessments if the
customer is no longer eligible for the payment.

For example, if a reassessment of investments and assets takes a
customer over the applicable income or assets threshold, when the income
and assets are recorded the system may automatically cancel the payment
due to income or assets.

Customers eligible for Working Credits and whose fortnightly rate is
reduced to nil due to employment income may remain current at nil rate
for up to 6 fortnights and retain certain benefits before their payment
is cancelled, as long as they remain otherwise qualified for their
payment.

Payments may also be automatically cancelled when a customer is no
longer entitled without a reassessment being done. For example, when a
customer who reports two weekly fails to report their income or lodge a
Reporting Statement (SU19), the system will cancel the payment 14 days
after the due to lodge date.

Manual cancellation

Manual cancellation occurs when a Service Officer makes a decision to
cancel a customer's payment based on the applicable social security law.

The procedure applies to the following payments:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) where the customer
    has not requested cancellation of their payment. If a customer does
    request cancellation of their payment, a different process applies
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Partner Allowance (PA)
-   Austudy

There is payment specific information which applies to cancellation of
payments other than those listed above.

Online cancellation

Some customers in receipt of Austudy, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) may request cancellation
of their payments via their Centrelink online account, see Cancel my
current payment online.

Outstanding compliance action

When a participation payment is cancelled or suspended, background
processing will generally finalise any outstanding compliance action
that is no longer required.

If the compliance action is preventing cancellation or reporting, the
job seeker must contact the Participation Solutions Team (PST) as the
outcome of the investigation may affect the job seeker's payment up to
the date of cancellation.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Participation
Solutions Team (PST).

Related links

Cancel my current payment online

Cancellation of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker) at customer's request

Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection reason codes (CLK)

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Cancellation of payments

Commencing or returning to work for Austudy and Youth Allowance
(Students)

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
