
Aliases and other names (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse customers, cultural considerations etc) 102-04010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before making updates, verify the correct record is selected using Proof
of Record Ownership. This will reduce the risk of fraud and creating
multiple and intertwined records.

This document outlines types of customer names and how these may be used
when dealing with Services Australia.

Legal name change

If a customer asks to change a legal name for themselves or their
children, see Changing the legal name of customers or their children.

Preferred name

Use the customer's name on the preferred name field in all verbal
contact.

A preferred name must not intend to deceive. If there is doubt about
coding a preferred name, ask for evidence of its use in the community.
Evidence may include documents in the preferred name sent from a:

-   financial institution
-   medical fund
-   employer, or
-   motor registry

Important Note: Sex and gender diverse customers

The 'preferred name' can cause distress for some people.

For example, when a customer is undertaking a gender transition, or
identity affirmation process, they may find the term 'preferred name'
offensive. As part of their gender identity affirmation, a person may
use their affirmed name due to costs associated with changing a legal
name. Customers may use their affirmed name before progressing to
updating it legally.

A customer can provide their affirmed name and title. Staff can update
the affirmed name and title without a supporting document using the
preferred name field.

A customer can request that we do not use a courtesy title such as Miss,
Mr or Mrs.

Services Australia is committed to applying the Australian Government
Guidelines on the Recognition of Sex and Gender. See the Resources page
for a link. Consult with your team leader if you need further guidance
in supporting sex and gender diverse customers.

Report Suspected Fraud, where suspected.

To help establish proof of record ownership, code all names used by the
customer on the record. Locate the correct record to reduce fraud,
intertwined and multiple records.

Parents, carers and foster carers may call children by different names.
Record these names, if known, as an alias/also known as (AKA) on the
child's record. This reduces the risk of creating multiple child
records.

If the child is known as Junior (Jnr) and this is not their registered
legal name, the name can be recorded as an alias/also known as (AKA) on
the child's record; example John Person Jnr.

Single names

When a customer uses only 1 name, ask for evidence of its use in the
community. For example, documents issued by other institutions and
agencies that use the single name.

Record the single name in the Family name: field on the CPDS screen.
Leave other name fields blank.

Note: for Identity Confirmation purposes, only record the name displayed
in the Family Name: field in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard.

When a customer's child is legally known by only 1 name, a system
workaround is currently in place for the coding the single name. Record
the single name in both the Family name: and First name: fields the on
the Change Child (CCH) screen. This will ensure the child's name
displays correctly on written correspondence.

Unnamed newborn children

If a newborn child is not yet named, code the first name as 'Newborn'
until a name is chosen. This will remain on the Change Child (CCH)
screen as an AKA name.

Note: do not record an unnamed child's first name as boy or baby. These
are legal first names in some ethnic groups. If in doubt, contact the
customer to confirm the child's legal first name.

Previous names

Names previously used by a customer should remain on their record as
historical names. If the customer asks to remove a name from their
record due to security concerns, consider if Restricted Access or
customer password processes are appropriate.

Accurate recording of names

Recording accurate name variations and aliases on a customer's record
helps:

-   Reduce fraud - a customer can change names an unlimited number of
    time
    Note: numerous name changes may indicate an intention to defraud.
    Report Suspected Fraud, where suspected
-   Improve data match results - e.g. obtain correct visa and travel
    details between the Department of Home Affairs and the agency
-   Effective operation of the Department of Home Affairs datalink. The
    datalink locates travel records for children travelling on a
    parent's passport. It is only effective if agency records contain
    exact spelling of customer and child names
-   Reduce the risk of multiple and intertwined records

Names that contain hyphens or apostrophes must not contain spaces. For
example, coding 'Anne-Maree' as ‘Anne – Maree' means it will not be
found when searching for a record.

Straightforward corrections to names can be actioned at the first point
of contact. These updates include spelling corrections or name recorded
in incorrect order. See Customer's name incorrectly recorded.

The Resources page contains intranet links to the Data Quality Unit,
External Fraud and Fraud Prevention pages, and links to the Document
Verification Service (DVS) website and the Australian Government
Guidelines on the Recognition of Sex and Gender.

Related links

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Changing the Legal name of customers or their children

Customer's name incorrectly recorded

Multicultural Guide

Identity Confirmation

Indigenous naming conventions

Intertwined Centrelink records

Restricted Access and eligibility

Changing sex and/or gender on customer records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
