
The Profile Search (PQSE) screen 102-01020070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Service Profiling and the
screens used when it is necessary to search for a customer's Profile
information. The Service Profile screens record and maintain a
customer's Service Strategy based on the information on a customer
record. A Service Strategy contains all of the current data which will
aid in providing the best possible assistance for the customer.

Customer search facility

As part of this customer management, a search facility is available to
locate customer records with certain Service Profiles. This can include
searching for customers by surname beginning with certain letters and
the number of days a customer's Service Profile has been in a Service
Bracket.

The results of a search will be a list of customer records that fit the
search criteria. The customer's name, Service Profile type, Service
Bracket, and number of days in the Profile will be displayed for each
Profile found.

Note: as the search is for Service Profiles and customers may have more
than one Profile active, a customer's name may appear several times on
the search results if the Service Profile is not specified. Searches are
done on the Profile Search (PQSE) screen. Searches can be done for
Service Profiles and/or Service Brackets for a service centre.

Customer records can be selected from the result list. When selected,
the Profile Summary (PQS) screen in the customer's record will display.
All screens can be accessed from this point. The next selected record
can then be accessed by keying 'NX' in the Nxt: field (to go back a
record, code 'PV') or it is possible to return back to the list on the
PQSE screen.

The Resources page contains scenarios showing the use of the PQSE
screen.

Related links

Service Profiling

Service Components and Service Actions

Service Profiling Capability

The Profile Summary (PQS), Profile History (PQH) and Profile Details
(PQD) screens

The Predictor Details (PQPD) screen

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen

Accessing and using the Service Profiling screens

Attributing Service Profiling Debts to the Integrated Review System
(IRS) Review

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screens

The Service Component History (PQSH) screen

Service Components by number

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
