-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to follow when a student or
Australian Apprentice is unable to study or continue their Australian
Apprenticeship due to an illness or injury.

Temporary incapacity

An ABSTUDY secondary school student who is temporarily incapacitated and
not attending classes may continue to receive payment for as long as
their absence is approved by the school.

An ABSTUDY tertiary or secondary non-school student who is temporarily
incapacitated and not undertaking full-time or concessional study load
can continue to receive payment for up to 8 weeks (or longer in some
circumstances) if the absence is approved. To be approved, the absence
must be supported by medical evidence. The student must also remain
enrolled at their educational institution for the period of the absence.

An ABSTUDY Australian Apprentice who is temporarily incapacitated and
unable to continue their Australian Apprenticeship is eligible to
receive ABSTUDY as long as their Commonwealth Registration Number
remains current. If this number is suspended or cancelled, there is no
entitlement to ABSTUDY.

If the student continues to study but at a reduced workload due to an
incapacity, they may qualify for ABSTUDY Living Allowance or ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) under a workload concession, or the
ABSTUDY Part-time Award.

Living Allowance can continue to be paid until the day before study
commences in the following year if:

-   an incapacity results in an approved absence that extends into an
    end of year vacation period, and
-   the student intends to continue with full-time or concessional study
    load education in the following year

Subsequent year entitlement will be assessed on the student's
circumstances in that year.

Change of circumstances

If none of the above apply, the student or Australian Apprentice should
claim an appropriate Services Australia administered payment such as
Disability Support Pension (DSP), JobSeeker Payment (JSP) -
Incapacitated or Youth Allowance (YA) - Incapacitated.

Related links

Exemptions from study for ABSTUDY

Assessing the disability study load concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student becomes
incapacitated

Austudy student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) student becomes incapacitated

Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
