
Vacation of principal home to provide care 102-03010060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of the principal home when the
customer has vacated their principal home to become a carer in a care
situation and the care is being provided to a person other than their
partner.

On this Page:

Vacating the principal home

If the customer has vacated their principal home to provide a
substantial level of care to a person in a private home for at least 14
consecutive days, a 2 year exemption from the Assets Test for the
principal home applies to them. Once the 2 year period is up the
customer will be assessed as a non-homeowner and the house will be
assessed as an asset unless their partner is still residing in the
principal home.

This procedure does not cover vacation of home due to illness when the
customer and/or their partner is the one being cared for.

Exemptions from the assets test

A customer can have two consecutive exemptions from the assets test if
their circumstances warrant. (for example, a customer may have
temporarily vacated their principal home with the intention of
travelling for 12 months however, only 6 months into this exemption they
ceased travelling and moved into their parent's home to provide care for
one or both of them). The 2 year exemption starts from when the customer
commences to provide care.

A new 2 year exemption period does not apply if the customer moves from
one care situation to another care situation.

However, a person cannot ‘stack’ a 12 month absence for any reason on to
one of the other statutory periods for the same purpose, e.g. 2 year
absence when they enter aged care followed by another year for the same
reason

Principal home is sold during exemption period

-   Single customers - if the principal home is sold during the
    exemption period the exemption is lost and the proceeds from the
    sale are assessable immediately. The exemption is lost even if the
    proceeds are intended to buy a new home as the new home does not
    satisfy the exemption criteria as being the customer's former
    principal home
-   Partnered customers when partner still resides in principal home -
    if the former principal home is sold and the partner was still
    residing in the former principal home and intends to purchase,
    rebuild, repair or renovate a new home within 12 months, the
    proceeds from the sale are exempt from the Assets Test but subject
    to deeming for up to 12 months. If certain criteria is met this
    exemption may be extended to up to 24 months. If there is no
    intention to obtain a new home with the sale proceeds the proceeds
    are assessable immediately and the customer is considered a
    non-homeowner

The Resources page contains a link to the aged care lists, and
frequently asked questions relating to when a customer's home may be
exempt from the Assets Test and a table of information on assessments
when the partner still resides in the principal home. There is also a
link to the Home Vacation Reviews Smart Centre Processing home page and
a link to the National Retirement Service desk.

Related links

Vacation of home due to illness

Permanent vacation of principal home

Temporary vacation of principal home

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Exempt Assets

Appointing nominees

Aged Care

Vacation of home to enter care situation (INH) reviews

Granny flat provisions

Assessing deprivation / gifting

Change of care for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
