
Centrelink intertwined records processing 102-13030100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about the data transfer process for
intertwined records. Intertwined records occur when updates or data of
one person are coded on the record of another person. All intertwined,
or suspected intertwined records, must be referred to the DQU for
assessment. It is for Data Quality Unit (DQU) staff only

The Data Quality Unit (DQU)

Intertwined records are referred to DQU for analysis and correction of
errors.

DQU staff have access to transfer intertwined data using the Physically
Delete Data (PHYDEL) screen. Information that has been transferred is
viewable on the View Physically Deleted Data (VPHYDEL) screen.

Note: this process is known as 'data transfer' and should not be
confused with 'deletion' of data completed by Information, Communication
and Technology (ICT) teams.

Data transfer can be applied to name, date of birth, gender, address,
telephone details, Tax File Number (TFN), marital status and email
address fields on a customer record. Internal links for multiple records
(MLC), parental income (PIT), partner (PTR) and child to parent
(CHI/PAR) links can also be transferred. Intertwined data must be
logically deleted first before data transfer can occur.

A Display on Access (DOA) DOC is added to each intertwined record. This
displays the DQU intertwined case number, Case Officer and details of
the screens that have had information transferred. The Multiple and
Intertwined Control (!MIC) screen is also coded by DQU staff. This
enables the Multiple and Intertwined Warning (MIW) screen display.

To ensure privacy, details of the intertwined data should not be
released to the customer.

Service Officers who identify a new intertwined record must refer the
case to DQU using the 'Intertwined Referral Form'. A link is available
in the Resources tab.

Resources contains a link to the Intertwined Referral Form.

Related links

Intertwined Centrelink records

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Actioning multiple Centrelink Customer Reference Numbers (CRNs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
