
Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA) 102-03030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process involved in determining whether a
customer in receipt of a qualifying payment, who lives in temporary
accommodation and who pays rent, is entitled to Rent Assistance (RA).

On this Page:

Customer has left their home because of a crisis situation

Other help may be needed if the customer has left their principal home
because of an extreme circumstance. This could be domestic violence or a
natural disaster.

See Identifying and offering services to customers in crisis or needing
special help

Temporary accommodation

Accommodation is temporary if the customer:

-   intends to return to their current principal home, or
-   has sold their principal home and will be using the proceeds to
    build, renovate or buy another
-   is living temporarily in 'refuge type' accommodation; that is, a
    refuge, crisis or emergency accommodation which is short term and
    generally not more than 3 months

If the customer has moved permanently, see Permanent vacation of
principal home

Customers who can be assessed for RA for a temporary home

RA is generally only payable when the accommodation being rented is
regarded as the customer's principal home.

All customers may qualify for RA for a temporary address. This includes:

-   homeowners, and
-   non-homeowners

Paying Government Rent

A customer paying government rent for their principal home can receive
RA for a temporary address.

Members of a couple

Rent Assistance can be assessed and paid individually to each eligible
member of a temporarily separated couple who have been assessed and
coded with certain Relationship qualifier codes on the Marital Status
(MS) Screen.

Search temporarily separated in the A-Z of Rent Assistance terms and
codes for a list of relationship qualifier codes and more information.

If one member of a couple is an ineligible homeowner, both members of
the couple are treated as ineligible homeowners and neither can be paid
RA, except where a person has temporarily left their principal home:

and they receive ABSTUDY, or

for at least 14 consecutive days or more to:

-   provide a substantial level of care, or
-   receive a substantial level of care

In these cases RA may be payable to a person for a temporary address
(including term address) even if their partner remains an ineligible
homeowner.

Temporary accommodation which qualifies for RA

The reason for the move must be because they:

need to temporarily live away from the principal home for 14 days or
longer to:

-   access specific medical treatment
-   receive a substantial level of care (excluding respite care), or

are temporarily living away from their principal home to personally
provide a substantial level of care to another person. It must be for 14
days or longer

will attend training or education to improve their employment prospects

live temporarily in another location so that a student child can attend
school. They must not receive any other Commonwealth Assistance for the
same purpose

have moved to 'refuge type' accommodation (crisis situation)

must live elsewhere temporarily because their home is uninhabitable (for
example, due to damage or a natural disaster)

In these situations, the customer is likely to incur increased
accommodation costs, and the temporary accommodation can reasonably be
regarded as their principal home while they are living there.

RA payable for one home

Rent Assistance can only be paid for one residence. If the customer
qualifies for RA for the temporary accommodation and they continue to
pay rent for the principal home, they can decide which one to receive RA
for. The rents for separate residences cannot be added together for RA
purposes.

If RA is not payable on their temporary accommodation it will continue
to be paid on their principal home if they continue to pay rent.

Travelling customers

If the customer is travelling around Australia, see Rent Assistance for
travellers.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Permanent vacation of principal home

Selling a home

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Rent Assistance for care receivers

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Changing address (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
