
Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer separates 102-05020060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the correct processes to follow when a Youth
Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer advises they have separated from
their partner.

On this Page:

Customers at risk of family and domestic violence

There are specific procedures for a customer who separates and is
affected by family and domestic violence.

If a customer indicates they and/or their children are at risk of family
and domestic violence and are concerned for their safety, their
relationship status can be updated immediately, and a request made to
supply the Mod S and/or verification within 14 days.

The Process page contains further information on the specific actions
required when customers advise they have separated from their partner
and are risk of family and domestic violence.

Change in circumstances

When a YA or ABSTUDY customer advises that they are no longer living
with a partner as a member of a couple (separated or divorced), their
record must be updated to reflect this change in their circumstances.

Living separately and apart

If a customer claims to be separated they must establish that:

-   they are living apart either permanently or indefinitely, and
-   there has been an estrangement or breakdown in their relationship

Generally, a physical separation as well as an emotional separation
between the couple is required.

Note: living separately and apart should not generally be accepted if
the couple are living apart solely because of ill health, employment
and/or economic reasons

Determining other forms of income support

If there is a change to the customer's qualification for YA or ABSTUDY
as a result of the separation or there is now qualification for a more
appropriate payment type (for example, they are now a single parent),
the Service Officer will need to ascertain whether the customer is
eligible for another income support payment and other products and
services.

Separation details (MOD S) form

The Separation Details (MOD S) form is used by customers to notify of a
change of relationship status (separation), in all cases except where:

-   the YA customer has lodged a new claim (the YA new claim form and
    on-line claim include all required separation details)
-   the YA customer has submitted an online Update relationship details
    activity
-   either the customer or their partner is in receipt of Parenting
    Payment Partnered (PPP) and may be entitled to Parenting Payment
    Single (PPS) or
-   PPS is being claimed by the customer

Not issuing a MOD S and using the appropriate PPS procedure listed above
avoids duplication of information, as the PPS claim and transfer forms
cover the same information as the MOD S. It also prevents premature
cancellation of PPP before the necessary forms and verification for
transfer to PPS have been obtained. (PPP will cancel if action is taken
to unlink customer and partner records. Unlinking customer records is
usually the first action taken upon receipt of a MOD S.)

In these cases, there must be no action taken to unlink the records
prior to the transfer activity. The unlinking must occur within the
benefit transfer activity.

Ensuring correct bank account details

When a customer separates from their partner, ensure the customer's bank
account details are correct and whether they wish to have payments made
to the same account.

If a customer has payments made to a joint account, advise the customer
that if money is paid into the joint account, the former partner will
have access to their payment. Ask customer if they have an account just
in their own name. See changing payment destination.

Cancellation of nominee arrangement when separated

When a customer whose partner is appointed as their nominee advises they
have separated, they must be asked at first point of contact if they
wish to cancel the nominee arrangement. A request for cancellation of
the arrangement must be actioned immediately. The request does not have
to be in writing. Where the customer has an appointed nominee and who
completes the online update relationship details activity, the customer
will be given the option to cease this arrangement. The nominee
relationship will be ended through the separation activity.

The Resources page contains links to the online version of the
Separation Details form (Mod S).

Related links

Permanent vacation of principal home

Changing payment destination

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
