-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how, when gathering culturally sensitive
information, particularly in regards to Indigenous naming conventions,
it is especially important to see if there are ways of achieving the
desired outcome other than to collect that information directly from an
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander customer.

On this Page:

Sensitive information

The name of an Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander person who has
passed away is generally extremely sensitive information, and must only
be asked for when it is essential for an agency's purposes. Even when
this is the case, in many communities it is important that close
relatives are not asked to discuss, write down, or see written down, the
name of a person who has passed away. If such information becomes
relevant when a close relative is being interviewed or asked to complete
a form, consent should be requested to obtain the information from
another source (for example, community council and/or hospital/clinic
records).

Requesting sensitive information

It is important that this information is only requested if it is
specifically required to complete the current interview/form. It should
not be solicited simply for possible future reference. Questions about
family members, on forms or in interviews, should be structured to
ensure that the name of a person who has passed away is not being
requested. One way to do this is to ask first whether a person's family
members are living, before asking for their names. As a general rule, if
the close relative has passed away their name should not be requested. A
common reason for a change of name is that a person with the same name
has passed away, and that name can no longer be used, often the term
Kumunjayi or Kumanara is used until that person is allowed to use their
own name again or they have taken another name.

There are sometimes legitimate reasons for requesting this information,
for instance to help with confirming identity. Often it is not
considered particularly sensitive, but to avoid any possible problems it
should only be collected on a voluntary basis. If a person cannot or
does not want to, provide their skin name, this should be allowed, and
other means of sorting out identity pursued.

The Resources page contains additional information about death and sorry
business, name changes after death and, skin names, family names,
Aboriginal names and Moieties.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
