
Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study load for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 102-07020190

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a customer changes their study
load from full-time to a part-time or concessional study load and they
are receiving ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY PES.

Study requirements

ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES students are required to be undertaking a
full-time or concessional study load in an approved course. A student
who is undertaking at least 75% of the normal full-time study load is
considered to be full-time. If a customer reduces their study load from
full time to a part-time or concessional study load, they may no longer
be eligible for payment as a student. ABSTUDY PES students may still be
eligible; however, there may be a change to their rate of payment,
depending on their study load.

Study load assessment

If the customer is unsure whether they are full-time or part-time after
their reduction in study load, details of the course subjects need to be
obtained so the study load can be assessed by Services Australia.

Reduction of study load to less than 75%

When a student reduces their study load to less than 75% of the normal
amount of full-time study, a Service Officer has to assess whether or
not they are still eligible for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY PES and whether their
activity will change from a student to a job seeker.

ABSTUDY student ceases full time study

If an ABSTUDY student ceases full time study and is not eligible for a
study load concession, and wants to receive payment as a jobseeker, they
must notify Services Australia and register as a job seeker. Failure to
promptly claim for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) or JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) from their ABSTUDY cancellation date (Student end date
plus one day), will result in the job seeker payment only commencing
from the date their claim is lodged.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

ABSTUDY students impacted by Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the 2020/2021/2022 academic years

Due to COVID-19, some students were temporarily unable to study or
reduced their study load below full-time. Impacts for students include:

-   a sudden transition away from face-to-face learning to online
    learning
-   closure of student accommodation
-   cancellation of some units of study
-   delays in commencing practical placements

Some students will contact to advise a delay in their practical
placement. These students may not know when their placement will begin
or end. Service Officers:

-   can use estimated dates provided by the customer in these
    circumstances
-   do not have to request documentation from an education provider to
    confirm placement dates. See below for other evidence requirements
-   should tell customers to update their course details when they know
    more specific details

Activity Test and Study Requirements

Students unable to study, or with a reduced study load, meet their study
requirements or activity test if they:

had an approved reason, and

remained enrolled in their course (this includes taking an approved
leave of absence), and

returned, or intended to return to full-time studies or an approved
concessional study load in the:

-   next available study period, or
-   earliest possibility of full-time study

cannot return to full time study as they are in the final study period
of their course

Approved reasons for reduction in study load

Approved reasons include:

-   the student moved from face-to-face to online study, and had a lack
    of available resources. For example internet access, PC/laptop or
    specialist equipment
-   the student dropped units of study because they failed or would have
    failed because of transitioning away from face-to-face learning
-   education provider cancelled subjects or units, or
-   rescheduling of compulsory practical placement

Do not update the Education Course Details (EDC) screen unless the
student needs to extend their course and study end dates.

For a student with study circumstances impacted by COVID-19, record
details in a DOC. Include:

why the customer is temporarily unable to study or reduced their study
load

if the student has the intention to return to full time study or
approved concessional study load:

-   in the next available study period, or
-   the earliest possible instance full time study becomes available to
    them again

if the student cannot return to full time study, as they are in the
final study period of their course

A student does not have an approved reason if they decided to:

-   end their study, or
-   reduce their study load because their education provider waived a
    financial or academic penalty

Evidence requirements

Student's with a reduced study load due to COVID-19, need to provide
evidence from their education provider. This evidence must state they
have a reduced study load as a direct result of COVID-19.

Do not request evidence from an education provider if practical
placement is delayed due to COVID-19 and the start or end date for
placement is unknown.

Update the EDC screen with estimated dates provided by the student.

Unfavourable decisions

The decision maker must make genuine attempts to contact the customer to
advise of an unfavourable decision.

For more information, see Initial contact about a decision and the
review of decision process.

Related links

Study requirements - ABSTUDY

Study requirements for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Assessing the disability study load concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding new study details

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
