
Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker) 102-07030080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document is about JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job
seeker) customers starting or returning to part-time, casual or
full-time employment.

Notifying of return to work

Job seekers who report every 2 weeks and start work, whether full-time,
part-time, casual, on-call etc., must tell Centrelink on their
Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) they have been paid employment income.
They may advise in advance they are starting work but must report their
paid gross employment income on their reporting day.

When a customer is on variable reporting (that is, 4WE, 12WE) and starts
work, whether full-time, part-time, casual, on-call etc., they must tell
Centrelink on or before the EPED in the reporting period, they commenced
work.

Income test and Working Credit

Income a customer earns from employment may affect their payment under
the appropriate income test. The income test and Working Credit provides
extra incentive to customers to obtain work. Employment income will only
affect the customer's payment when their Working Credit is depleted and
the income free area has been exceeded.

Australian Apprentice

If a customer is returning to work as a full-time Australian Apprentice,
consider entitlement to payments as an Australian Apprentice, such as:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Austudy, or
-   YA

If a JSP customer's Australian Apprenticeship is full-time their current
income support payment must be suspended. If they are a part-time
Australian Apprentice, they may be eligible for assistance as a student.
The customer must be studying an approved course and undertaking an
approved study load for the relevant payment. Customers receiving these
payments as an Australian Apprentice are subject to the same income and
assets tests as students.

Employment income nil rate period

Where a customer would receive nil payment due to the income test and
some of that income is from their (or their partner's) employment, the
customer is entitled to remain current at a nil rate for a period of up
to 6 consecutive fortnights if they would otherwise have remained
eligible for their income support payment. This process does not apply
if the customer has commenced or returned to full-time ongoing
employment.

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 week suspension period

Customers under 25 and in receipt of YA (job seeker) or JSP may be
eligible for the YBWS initiative when placed in employment by their
Workforce Australia provider. These customers are eligible for a 26 week
suspension period. This commences on either:

-   the completion of the employment income nil rate period, or
-   the date they cease to be eligible for YA (job seeker) or
-   JSP for an employment related reason

For more information, see Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week
Suspension Period.

Reporting requirements

-   If the customer or their partner is on variable reporting and
    commences work, they will be placed on 2 weekly reporting
-   For customers and/or their partners who are working, employment
    income details will need to be reported every 2 weeks
-   If a customer contacts to advise they have commenced employment and
    it is not their reporting day, employment details must be recorded
    on a DOC. Advise the customer to report hours worked and employment
    income paid within their reporting period on their reporting day and
    explain how to do this. If the customer is a variable reporter,
    ensure the customer's reporting frequency is changed to 2 weekly and
    tell the customer their next reporting date
-   When advising commencement of (or returning to) work, the customer
    must provide information about their employment circumstances

Employment record keeping

Customers should keep their own record of the hours worked and
employment income paid so their payment is not delayed while waiting for
this information from the employer. Customers can use the Earnings
Worksheet (SU505) to keep track of any pay events and hours worked they
need to report on their next reporting due date.

Note: family assistance and income support reporting obligations are
different. Income support customers must report actual income paid, not
just an estimate. Service Officers must discuss income reporting
requirements at every opportunity and ensure actual income and income
estimates are both updated when required. If either member of a couple
is receiving family assistance, their estimate must include income
support payments received, Paid Parental Leave, employment income and
any other components of Adjusted Taxable Income (received or expected)
for the financial year for both members of the couple.

Commencing full-time work and sufficient work requirements

Most customers receiving JSP or YA (job seeker), no longer qualify for
payment if they commence full-time ongoing work. These job seekers will
be able to deplete their Working Credits before their payment is
cancelled. The customer will not be entitled to an employment income nil
rate period.

However, certain job seekers in receipt of JSP or YA (job seeker) who
meet sufficient work requirements, where their income is not above the
allowance income test cut off limit for the relevant payment, may
continue on payment.

The most common examples of full-time workers who might still qualify
for JSP without further mutual obligation requirements are:

a JSP customer with a pensioner partner:

-   the income test for these couples results in a cut-out point for JSP
    which is considerably higher than applies to individuals in couples
    where both receive a social security benefit such as JSP

long-term single JSP customers aged 60 or more who receive Rent
Assistance (RA):

-   the cut-out point for these customers can also exceed full-time
    minimum wages

JSP single principal carers in full-time work:

-   the income test for these customers means they are entitled to part
    rate of JSP after Working Credits are depleted

Meeting mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers who can satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by
undertaking sufficient work of 15 hours per week include:

-   principal carers
-   customer's assessed as having a partial capacity to work, or
-   mature age customers 55+

Job seekers assessed as having a partial capacity to work will have
their work capacity reviewed by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
if they work more than 60 hours per fortnight over a period of 3
consecutive fortnights.

Job seekers who have reached 55 to 59 years (inclusive) and are in the
first 12 months of receipt of their current income support payment
(including suspension periods of up to 3 months); meet their mutual
obligation requirements if they satisfy one of the following:

undertaking sufficient work for at least 30 hours per fortnight where
income is equal to or more than the national minimum wage

undertaking self-employment for at least 30 hours per fortnight with net
business income equal to or more than the national minimum wage

engaged for at least 30 hours per fortnight in:

-   paid work, including self-employment
-   a combination of paid work and approved voluntary work, at least 15
    hours of which must be paid work

After receiving their current income support payment for a 12 month
period or upon turning 60 years old, these job seekers may satisfy their
requirements by undertaking 30 hours or more per fortnight of any
combination of approved unpaid voluntary work and paid
work/self-employment, including solely through approved unpaid voluntary
work.

Note: job seekers aged 55 years or over must remain connected with a
Workforce Australia provider and must attend any notified appointments.

A person who has reached 60+ years meets their mutual obligation
requirements if they satisfy one of the following:

engaged in approved unpaid voluntary work with an approved organisation
for at least 30 hours per fortnight

undertaking sufficient work for at least 30 hours per fortnight where
income is equal to or more than the national minimum wage

undertaking self-employment for at least 30 hours per fortnight with net
business income equal to or more than the national minimum wage

engaged for at least 30 hours per fortnight in a combination of:

-   approved unpaid voluntary work for an approved organisation, and
-   paid work, including self-employment

Family assistance

If the customer or partner receives Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child
Care Subsidy (CCS), check if the customer needs to revise their estimate
of annual income and advise the customer of the available payment
choices. This will help reduce the risk of overpayment due to changes in
their income during the financial year. If either member of a couple is
receiving family assistance, their estimate must include income support
payments received, or expecting to receive, employment income and any
other components of Adjusted Taxable Income (received or expected) for
the financial year for both members of the couple.

Manually rejecting an income support payment

If a customer has been granted an income support payment or allowance
and is yet to receive a payment, then the customer advises they have
returned to work or employment income precludes their payment before
their start day, the claim will have to be manually rejected.

Recording employment income

Customers who are registered for self-service can report their
employment income via self-service on their reporting due date.

Service Officers are to record employment information via the Earnings
and reporting workflow tool.

See Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments and
Recording and correcting employment income details.

The Resources page contains a link to a matrix with information to
assist with determining the appropriate action in various situations.

Related links

Working Credit

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Reporting overview

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Employment income nil rate period

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Allowance income and assets tests

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Coding a cancellation

Cancellation of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker) at customer's request

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker (JSP) or Youth Allowance (job seeker)

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Workforce Australia/Community Development Program (CDP) registration
inactivated and cancellation of income support in error

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Recording and correcting employment income details

Nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
