
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the parenting exceptional circumstances exemption
review Service Update. This is the process to assess if the principal
carer still needs the exemption or is now able to meet their mutual
obligation requirements.

Exemption review Service Update

When a principal carer is granted an exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements because of exceptional circumstances, a period
for the exemption to apply will be determined.

The parenting exceptional circumstances exemption review Service Update
will happen before the exemption period stops. It prompts the Service
Officer to reassess the customer's circumstances and if the customer is
now able to participate or if the exemption needs to reapply.

This Service Update will auto-book the customer a phone appointment,
within 21 days of the exemption expiring. The Service Officer will need
to discuss the customer's current circumstances and ascertain if the
exemption still applies. The circumstances leading to the exemption may
be one of the following:

-   major personal disruption to the Parenting Payment (PP) customer's
    home
-   major personal crisis
-   jury duty
-   being a refugee
-   volunteering during a state or national emergency
-   a temporary absence from Australia

Family and domestic violence is covered under Social Worker Exemption
Reviews.

The process and the actions involved are outlined in the relevant
Service Profiling Update Workflow. Finalising the Workflow will complete
the Service Component on the customer's Service Strategy (PQSS) screen.

Customers selected for a parenting exceptional circumstances exemption
review Service Update may be identified by searching for started (STA)
Service Components (ID No. 212 or 255) using the Service Component
Search (PQCS) screen, or by Service Update activities showing on the
Worklist in WorkOptimiser.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Approved activities for principal carers

Suitable/unsuitable work

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screens

Service Components by number

Shared care for social security payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
