
Child out of care without consent 102-05050040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess eligibility for entitlement for a
child (including a regular care child) who has left a customer's care
without their consent. It also outlines Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reviews
to assess the current care status when a customer has been receiving FTB
for a child who has left their care without consent.

Out of care without consent

If a child is taken away from the person who has legal responsibility
for them by someone who is not their parent, the child may be considered
to be abducted or out of care without consent. If the other parent has
taken the child in contradiction of the current care arrangements,
payment for the child will be considered under the disputed care
provisions. Payment of FTB may continue for up to 14 weeks in some of
these circumstances and income support payments for up to 8 weeks.

If a child ceases to be in a person's care without their consent on or
after 1 July 2012, discretion can be applied so that the percentage of
care can immediately be based on the actual level of care if there are
special circumstances which support that outcome. The decision would
result in the losing carer's eligibility for FTB for the child ceasing.
The person who has actual care of the child may be eligible for FTB
payments for the child if they meet the normal eligibility criteria.

Social worker assessment

In some cases, (for example, where the child is at risk of harm), an
assessment by a social worker may be needed. This also applies to
ongoing entitlements for a regular care child. A separate procedure
applies for determining the principal carer of a child when the child is
temporarily absent from a person's care . A decision about a customer's
principal carer status for income support payments must be made
separately to the decision about the customer's entitlement.

If a child has been abducted or is at risk of being harmed, then an
assessment must be made by a social worker.

Family assistance payments

It is possible for the customer to remain eligible for family assistance
for the child for up to 14 weeks if the customer asks to continue to
receive payment for the child and is taking reasonable steps to have the
child returned to their care in the following cases:

-   the child is missing for any reason (for example, child has run away
    from the family home, has been abducted or is at risk of harm)
-   the child is living with a person who does not have legal
    responsibility for the child

Reasonable steps to have the child returned to their care may include:

-   notifying the police that the child is missing, or
-   taking legal action for the return of the child

If both the losing and the gaining carer have legal responsibility for
the child, then the change of care is regarded as legal. If there is a
disagreement over care arrangements, it is treated as a disputed care
situation rather than 'leaving care without consent'.

If a child has been abducted or is at risk of being harmed, then an
assessment must be made by a social worker.

Legal responsibility

A parent always has legal responsibility for their child unless the
legal responsibility has been removed by order of the Family Court.
Therefore, where the child has gone into the care of the other parent
and there is no family care arrangement, the losing parent is no longer
eligible for FTB from the date the child left their care. The gaining
parent should be invited to claim.

Where the terms of the care arrangement have not been complied with,
either due to action taken by another carer or by the child, and they
are taking reasonable steps to regain care of the child, the disputed
care provisions can apply and eligibility may be extended for up to 14
weeks (qualifying period). For example, prevention of contact, not
returning a child after a contact visit, or the child chooses to live
with the other person.

From 1 July 2012 and special circumstances

From 1 July 2012, if a child ceases to be in a person's care without
their consent, discretion can be used to determine that the child
immediately ceases to be an FTB child or regular care child of the
person if there are special circumstances which support that outcome.

The term 'special circumstances' refers to circumstances that are out of
the ordinary and not something that could be considered to be common
place. In the context of deciding whether to base care immediately on
actual care, rather than continue to base care on a written agreement
for an interim period, the circumstances that led to the change in care
in each case are important. These circumstances should be a significant
cause of the change in care. They may include unusual or unreasonable
actions and behaviour of the parent with reduced care, however they can
also arise due to factors beyond the parent's direct control.

For more details regarding 'special circumstances', refer to the Actual
Care in Special Circumstances information package located on the
Resources tab.

If the customer is in receipt of Parental Leave Pay at the time, assess
the eligibility.

Child abducted

A child can only be considered abducted if the person who has lost care
of the child has legal responsibility for the child and the person who
has taken the child does not have legal responsibility for the child.

FTB can continue for up to 4 weeks before a review is undertaken to see
if payment can continue for a further 10 weeks under the 'out of care
without consent' rules.

If a child has been abducted or is at risk of being harmed, then an
assessment must be made by a social worker.

Claim by abductor

An abductor who does not have legal responsibility for the child would
not normally be entitled to FTB for a child.

Release of information about the abductor

Under no circumstances can information about the new claimant be
released to the losing carer. Normal privacy and confidentiality
requirements apply for both the previous and new claimant, except for
the release of information in the public interest.

Requests for information about the abductor must be referred to a social
worker who can make a determination under public interest provisions if
the child is at risk of harm, for the purpose of notifying relevant
details to an appropriate authority.

Examples of an appropriate authority are the police, a State Welfare
authority, a Guardianship board, a State Trustee or a mental health
team. This list is not exclusive as each case needs to be assessed
individually.

Service Officers must respect the privacy of both the losing carer and
the abductor.

Any information disclosed must be recorded on the Release of Information
online form. The Resources page contains a link to the form.

Child removed by state or territory welfare authority

This is not considered 'out of care without consent'. See Child leaves
customer's care/custody.

Reviews

Manual Follow-up (MFU) reviews

These reviews are undertaken to confirm that reasonable steps are being
taken by a customer to regain care of the child. The reviews are
automatically created with a maturity date of 4 weeks from the date of
receipt of the 'Left Customer Care Without Consent' update to the
customer's record. Upon maturity, the MFU will be present on their
record for manual action.

A review will continue to generate every 4 weeks during the left care
period where the customer's record continues to reflect the child as
having left care without consent.

System reviews

A further system review is set for 14 weeks after the child left care
and, if the child is still recorded as left care without consent, FTB
for the child is automatically cancelled.

Manual reviews for Parenting Payment (PP) customers

An automatic MFU review is not created for PP customers whose child has
left care without consent. A manual review must be created.

The Resources page contains examples of action taken when an FTB child
has left care without consent and the free text option for Q777 to
confirm customer is still taking reasonable steps to regain care. It
also contains links to the Actual care in special circumstances (ACSC)
information package, the ACSC Referral and Decision template and the
online form to record details of release of information in the public
interest.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Child enters customer's care/custody

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Conducting an assessment of care on an informal basis where a child may
be at risk of harm

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
