
Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child 102-17010010

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines customer options for voluntary participation
while a principal carer of a dependent child. Generally, customers who
are the principal carer of a dependent child under 6 do not have mutual
obligation requirements, but may choose to participate in activities
which may assist their return to the paid workforce.

Part-time mutual obligation requirements

Some customers who are the principal carer of a dependent child will
have part-time mutual obligation requirements once their youngest child
reaches a certain age. This age depends on the type of payment received
by the customer:

-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) principal carers whose youngest child
    is aged 6 and younger than 8
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker principal
    carers have part time mutual obligation requirements from the start
    date of their payment, and their youngest child must be under the
    age of 16
-   Special Benefit (SpB) under JSP conditions principal carers whose
    youngest child is aged 6 or older

Note: for PP and SpB customers, the customer can participate voluntarily
if they wish while their youngest child is below this age.

Loss of PP qualification due to age of child

Partnered job seekers whose youngest child is aged 6 or more and single
job seekers whose youngest child is aged 8 or more are no longer
eligible to receive PP and must claim either JSP or YA (job seeker) as a
principal carer of a dependent child.

Voluntary participation

Customers who do not have mutual obligation requirements may choose to
include one or more voluntary activities in a Job Plan.

There is no requirement for the customer to do a minimum number of
hours. The chosen activities included in a Job Plan can be re-negotiated
at any time.

For some activities, the customer may also be eligible for Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work).

See Eligibility to access employment assistance through Workforce
Australia for information on referrals to Workforce Australia.

ParentsNext

Parenting Payment (single or partnered) customers can choose to commence
in ParentsNext as a voluntary participant if they:

-   do not meet the criteria for compulsory participation
-   do not live in a Community Development Program (CDP) region or
    Norfolk Island, and
-   have a child aged under 6 years

Once commenced, voluntary participants can continue in ParentsNext for
an unlimited period of time whilst they remain eligible.

Compliance action cannot be undertaken for voluntary participants.
Rather, if they are not satisfactorily engaging with their ParentsNext
providers, they will be exited from the program by the provider.

If a voluntary participant's circumstances change such that their
participation in ParentsNext is now compulsory, they will be notified
that they are required to attend a ParentsNext appointment with Services
Australia to discuss compulsory participation.

Related links

Helping parents return to work

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

ParentsNext appointments and processing

Participation pathways and program options

First Contact Service Offer workflow

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Shared care for social security payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
