
Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card enh1ment 102-05040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the procedures required when Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC), Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) or ex-Carer
Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC) customers advise of changes in
their circumstances.

Changes in a customer's circumstances

A change in a customer's circumstances may include but is not limited to
their relationship status, income, address or telephone number.

This procedure does not apply to holders of the following automatic
issue cards as entitlement depends on their entitlement to Family Tax
Benefit (FTB), income support payment, ABSTUDY Living Allowance or
Mobility Allowance (MOB):

-   Health Care Card (HCC) or
-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

The following details will need to be reviewed and updated on the
customer's record for CSHC, LIC and EHC if required:

-   income changes, if appropriate
-   change of address and/or telephone number
-   change of relationship status
-   details of partner, and other dependants, when appropriate
-   check if customer is still entitled to CSHC, LIC or EHC

Customers can give partner's details over the phone or in person. Before
linking the customer to the partner, the partner must confirm the
relationship. Therefore, the partner must be present when the customer
calls or attends in person.

When starting a 'new relationship' the following may be needed for CSHC
and LIC claim or continuation:

-   the partners proof of income,
-   tax file number and,
-   identity documents

Online Updates

[] When CSHC or LIC holders notify changes to their income and assets,
promote the online service. The Manage Income and Assets service can be
accessed via Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile
app. This service also advises if they need to provide supporting
documents.

Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI)

If a CSHC customer's ATI is over the income limit, as indicated by
lodgement of their Notice of Assessment (NOA) plus other supporting
documents such as payment summaries/ATO income statements and income tax
returns, but is likely to be lower in this current financial year, then
an estimate of their income may be provided. An estimate can only be
accepted when a change in circumstances:

-   has already occurred, and
-   can be satisfactorily demonstrated, and
-   is an acceptable condition for using an estimate of income for the
    CSHC income test

All new CSHC claimants and their partners are required to provide a Tax
File Number (TFN) or be granted a TFN exemption. If no TFN or exemption
is provided then the CSHC claim will be rejected. Current CSHC customers
and partner (if applicable) are required to provide a TFN or exemption
when their entitlement is reviewed. If the TFN is not provided within 28
days the CSHC will cancel.

Customer who are imprisoned

Customers who are imprisoned:

-   will lose their entitlement to the CSHC, EHC and LIC
-   will not be able to claim CSHC, EHC and LIC whilst in prison

Where a LIC customer's partner is imprisoned, the LIC entitlement will
continue to be assessed under the couple's income test.

Where a CSHC customer's partner is imprisoned, the couple's higher
income limit is allowed.

Note: if the imprisoned customer's partner advises that they are now
permanently separated, the single income test will apply for LIC and
CSHC.

Circumstances that will cancel a customer's eligibility to EHC

Eligibility to the EHC ceases when a customer:

-   reaches the age of 26 years
-   leaves Australia permanently
-   ceases to be a full-time student
-   moves residence but does not advise Services Australia
-   is imprisoned

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Further action required

Every customer's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the customer has
authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not need to be
confirmed.

Related links

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Cancellation of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Cancellation of a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Portability of concession cards

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Searching for a customer on the system

Indexing a customer on the system

Adding a customer to the system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
