
Incorrect date of birth recorded 102-06010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to correct an official date of birth for a
customer or their child If Centrelink has the incorrect date of birth
recorded for a customer or child, it needs to be corrected urgently.

On this Page:

Determining official date of birth (DOB)

A customer's official DOB for Centrelink purposes is the date advised
by:

-   State or Territory Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM)
    (if born in Australia), or
-   Department of Home Affairs (if born outside of Australia)

Only the dates identified on documents issued by these agencies should,
in the first instance, be accepted as the DOB.

Note: this is the case except where it has been established that the
birth is not registered. Services Australia has no legal authority to
change a customer's birth date to any date, other than what appears on
the legal documents issued by these two agencies.

If a customer's birthday falls on 29 February, it must be coded as this
date. The customer is deemed to have the date of birth of 01 March in
non-leap years when determining payment eligibility.

Dispute about date of birth

If a customer disagrees with the DOB recorded by BDM or Department of
Home Affairs, and wishes to change their recorded birth date, they
should deal directly with BDM or Department of Home Affairs.

If the customer was born:

-   in Australia, they contact BDM in the state or territory of their
    birth
-   outside Australia, they contact the Department of Home Affairs. A
    Request for amendment or annotation to personal records 424C form
    can be downloaded from their website

The Resources page contains links to the BDM in each state and
Department of Home Affairs website.

If Department of Home Affairs has rejected a change in personal details
application, the customer may seek a review through the Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) to review a decision made
under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 (FOI Act).

Exceptional circumstances

In exceptional circumstances where a customer disputes the official DOB
issued by BDM or Department of Home Affairs (if born outside Australia),
Service Officers may temporarily enter a DOB as advised by a customer to
assess qualification for payment. If this occurs, the customer must make
an application to BDM or Department of Home Affairs to amend their
official DOB within 14 days. Service Officers can help customers in
making this application by providing BDM or Department of Home Affairs'
contact details.

Service Officers need to use their judgement, on a case by case basis,
to determine whether the circumstances surrounding a customer's request
are 'exceptional'.

Examples of when 'exceptional circumstances' may be established in DOB
situations include, but are not limited to:

-   a customer's physical characteristics and appearance are
    inconsistent with DOB details provided by Department of Home Affairs
-   a customer provides independent third party official documentation
    to verify their DOB which is inconsistent with Department of Home
    Affairs

The phrase 'exceptional circumstances' is not intended to cover
situations where a customer asks to record an alternative DOB without
any justifiable reason or independent basis. All exceptional
circumstance cases must be referred to Identity Program - Customer
Details by email for approval prior to any change.

Outcome of Department of Home Affairs or OAIC review

Where Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM) or Department of Home Affairs
does not amend a customer's official DOB following application, any
temporary DOB details must be removed from the customer's record, and
the DOB originally issued by BDM or Department of Home Affairs should be
used in order to assess qualification for payment. If any incorrect
payments have been made based on a temporary DOB, these should be
investigated as debts due to the Commonwealth.

Where BDM or Department of Home Affairs does amend a customer's official
DOB following application, this date should either be amended or
confirmed on the customer record.

Where a customer fails to make an application to BDM, Department of Home
Affairs or Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC)
within 14 days, Centrelink must remove any temporary DOB and use the DOB
originally issued by BDM or Department of Home Affairs to assess
qualification for payment. If any incorrect payments have been made on
the basis of a temporary DOB, these should be investigated as debts due
to the Commonwealth.

Date of birth changed by Department of Home Affairs

Department of Home Affairs is the only agency authorised to change the
official DOB for customers whose birth is not registered in Australia.
This situation is most common among refugee migrants whose original DOB
may have been assumed due to the unavailability of official records.

Care must be taken when updating customer details to avoid breach of
privacy and to prevent:

-   intertwined Centrelink records
-   creation of multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN), see
    Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Service Officers must locate the correct customer record and establish
proof of record ownership.

myGov

Customers who create or have a myGov Profile when linking member
services to their myGov account, will be advised if their date of birth
details do not match between their myGov Profile and the Profile member
service they are linking to. They will not be able to create the link
and will be advised to contact the relevant member service to update
their details. Once the updates have been made the customer will be able
to create the link in their myGov account.

If a customer with a myGov Profile updates their legal name or date of
birth with a linked Profile member service, myGov will automatically
update their myGov Profile however they do not share the update with any
other linked Profile member services. The customer is required to update
their legal name or date of birth directly with member services.

Related links

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Intertwined Centrelink record

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

myGov Profile

Date of receipt

Payment of arrears after reassessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
