
Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) prior to transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) 102-15010050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines the repayment of Financial Supplement Loan (FSL),
prior to transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), if the
customer has declared bankruptcy.

FSL was a voluntary loan paid under the Student Financial Supplement
Scheme (SFSS). It gave eligible tertiary students the option of
borrowing money to help cover their expenses while they studied.

On this Page:

End of loan contract period and transfer to the ATO

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by Centrelink (now Services Australia) until the end of the
contract period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan
was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system.

Bankruptcy

A customer who declared bankruptcy prior to the transfer of FSL to the
ATO must still repay the debt.

FSL is not a 'provable' debt for the purposes of bankruptcy because it
is not immediately repayable. This means that the debt cannot be
included as a liability for the purposes of declaring bankruptcy. There
is no provision for FSL to be reduced or discharged because a person has
been declared bankrupt. This is because FSL need only be repaid once the
person's earnings are equal to or more than the threshold applied by the
ATO. Therefore, the loan cannot be considered an immediate debt or
financial commitment for the period of bankruptcy. In view of this, for
the purpose of FSL, the customer is not required to advise Services
Australia that they have been declared bankrupt.

Note: the final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
Services Australia's system. This does not mean that the loan has been
zeroed off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO
for recovery through the taxation system.

Related links

Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer
to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
