
Permanent vacation of principal home 102-03010040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens when a customer receiving an income
and assets tested payment permanently vacates their principal home. This
procedure is also used in determining the home ownership status of a
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer following a permanent vacation of
their principal home.

Leaving the principal home

When a customer leaves their principal home, the assessment procedures
vary depending on the reason for vacation of the home, whether the
customer owned the home or not, and what is to happen to the home.

Exemptions from assets testing

Specific exemptions from the assets test for the former home apply for
customers who vacate their home due to their own ill health and enter a
care situation and for carers who vacate their home to be closer or to
live with the care receiver.

When a customer has had to leave their home due to domestic violence,
but is uncertain about their long-term living arrangements, this can be
considered a temporary vacation of the principal home.

Selling the principal home

When an income support or ABSTUDY customer sells their principal home,
any portion of the proceeds likely to be used to purchase or renovate a
new home is disregarded for assets test purposes for up to an initial 12
months after the sale. There are provisions to have this exemption
extended to 24 months if the customer meets certain criteria.

Although these proceeds are exempt for assets test purposes, deemed
income is assessed. If the customer uses part of the proceeds of the
sale for any purpose, for example, to purchase a block of land or other
assets to build a new home, these assets are also exempted under the
assets test provided the combined value of exempt assets is no more than
the proceeds from the sale of the principal home.

Temporary move to another property

If a customer sells their principal home and temporarily moves into
another property they already own, the proceeds of sale likely to be
used to purchase a new home may still be disregarded for assets test
purposes for up to 24 months after the sale of the original principal
home.

In this case, the property they are occupying temporarily will still be
assessed under the assets test during that time if the Service Officer
is satisfied it is only being occupied temporarily.

If the Service Officer is satisfied that the move is permanent, the
exemption of the proceeds of the sale of the former principal home does
not apply, but the property they are occupying would be become an exempt
asset.

Property settlement pending

If the customer has a property settlement pending, the percentage of
ownership the person has before they are separated remains after the
separation until any property settlement is finalised.

If the customer asserts a beneficial or trust ownership different to the
legal ownership of an asset, the trust and companies provisions are
applied to determine existence of a trust and attribution of income and
assets.

If the assets are held in trust, for example, with a solicitor or
accountant, the trust and companies provisions apply. The source of the
funds and prior legal ownership are used when determining attribution.
If a customer is unable to realise assets due to a pending property
settlement, the assets test hardship provisions may apply.

Where there is beneficial ownership asserted or there is a claim for
assets hardship the case must be referred to a Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO).

Customers in receipt of FTB and/or CCS

Customers only in receipt of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) are not assets tested therefore this procedure only
applies in determining their home ownership status.

The Resources page contains a link to forms on the Services Australia
website.

Related links

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Changing address or rent details

Purchasing another residence

Selling a home

Manually issued Income and Assets Updates (SA220)

Change of address for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Temporary vacation of principal home

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
