-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about a customer's temporary change
of address for respite care in an aged care home.

Customers requiring respite care

Customers who need a break from their current accommodation or carer may
enter an aged care home for respite care. To access respite care the
customer must be assessed by an Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT).

A person may have up to 63 days approved respite care in a calendar
year. Additional periods of up to 21 days may be possible if the ACAT
considers additional time is needed.

Respite residents in an aged care home are exempt from paying
accommodation payments (that is, accommodation charge and accommodation
bond) and will only have to pay the basic daily care fees. They will not
be charged income tested fees and therefore do not require an income
assessment.

If the care receiver transfers from approved respite care to permanent
accommodation, the day the transfer takes place is the day the
individual is deemed to have entered the aged care home. The requirement
to pay an accommodation payment is assessed at this point.

Centrelink payments while the customer is in respite care

Customers who are unable to live together due to ill health may be
entitled to the single rate of Centrelink payment while they are living
separately, even during periods of respite care.

Note: if one member of a couple has entered approved respite care, the
single rate is only payable if the person has remained, or is likely to
remain in approved respite care for at least 14 consecutive days. This
applies where either one or both members of a couple enter approved
respite care at the same time, either at separate aged care homes or the
same one.

A customer in approved respite care is eligible for the respite
supplement from the date of entry/admission but not for the date of
discharge from care.

Rent Assistance (RA) is not payable to customers for approved respite
care. However, if they are paying rent for their principal home and
receiving RA before entering respite care. RA is payable for a
continuous period of 52 days or less. The 52 days limit is in respect of
each period of approved respite care and is not cumulative.

If a customer is in hospital classed as a long-term patient and is
assessed as a nursing home type patient awaiting admission to an aged
care home, they have to pay fees, even though they may be in a public
hospital. These fees are based on the daily care fees payable by aged
care residents. A customer in hospital, being charged daily care fees
and not in approved respite care may be eligible for RA only if they do
not occupy an approved bed.

Updating customer records once customer has returned home

Care is required when updating customer records where the customer has
returned home after a period of respite care. Manual intervention coding
may be required in some circumstances for customers who were being paid
a transitional rate of pension before respite care entry. If these
pensioners lost their transitional status solely due to being paid the
single rate whilst in approved respite care, they are entitled to be
considered for the transitional rate upon returning home. A Manual
Follow-up (MFU) will need to be coded for the customer and partner to
check whether the transitional rate is payable. This MFU is coded with a
due date of when the customer/partner return home.

The Resources page has a link to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk Online
referral form. It also has a link to the Policy help desk contacts page.

Related links

Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Determining proof of rent for the Verification field on the
Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Change of address to an aged care home

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation

Carer is absent from caring situation

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Rapid Addressing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
