
Cancellation of Partner Allowance (PA) 102-10020220

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the cancellation of Partner
Allowance (PA).

Closure of Partner Allowance (PA)

Partner Allowance (PA) will cease on 1 January 2022. Customers will need
to transfer to Age Pension to continue receiving payment after this
date.

Partner Allowance is closed to new claims from 20 September 2003.
Current PA recipients will continue to receive payment unless their PA
is cancelled.

Before cancelling a customer's PA payment, it must be established that
the customer has lost entitlement for payment and that cancellation is
the appropriate action, as these payments can no longer be regranted.
Where a decision is made to cancel the payment, the customer may need to
test their eligibility for a different payment, for example, consider
whether the customer is eligible for the Age Pension.

Cancellation reasons

Cancellation of payments may be for various reasons. Most cancellations
will be due to new information supplied by the customer under their
obligation to notify of changes. Other cancellations may be due to the
customer's failure to comply with Services Australia's notification
obligations.

Coding PA cancellations

The preferred option is for the cancellation to be processed by the
system automatically after the customer's record has been updated. If a
customer contacts, or if a review is requested by the customer, all the
information is available online without the need for the file/paperwork
at the first contact. However, details regarding a manual cancellation
should be recorded on a DOC.

Restoration or regrant of PA

If a customer's payment is cancelled payment will not be restored,
unless it was cancelled due to agency error.

There will be no regrants of PA, regardless of the length of break in
payment. Customers who have had their payments cancelled will need to
test their eligibility for a different income support payment, such as
Age Pension.

When PA should not be cancelled

When a customer notifies multiple events within 14 days and the first
notifiable event results in an adverse decision, then the second
notifiable event results in a favourable decision which nullifies the
earlier event, payment should not be cancelled.

An example of when payment should not be cancelled can be found on the
Resources page of Partner Allowance (PA) qualification and savings
provisions.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Cancellation of payments

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Suspension of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Coding a cancellation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
