
Restoration of Partner Allowance (PA) and Widow Allowance (WA) 102-10040230

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about restoring Partner Allowance
(PA) and Widow Allowance (WA) payments following suspension or
cancellation.

Closure of PA and WA

PA and WA will cease on 1 January 2022. To avoid a break in payment,
customers will need to transfer to Age Pension on or before this date.

PA and WA payments can no longer be granted. Where the payment has been
cancelled, the customer will need to test their eligibility for a
different payment. When a customer notifies of multiple events within 14
days, and the first notifiable event results in an adverse decision and
the second notifiable event results in a favourable decision that
nullifies the earlier event, payment should not be cancelled.

Restoration of PA and WA

Payment of PA and WA can be restored if the payment is suspended or
cancelled in error, and the customer has continuous entitlement. If
there has been any break in entitlement, payment cannot be restored or
re-granted.

PA closed to new claims from 20 September 2003. WA closed to new claims
from 1 July 2018.

PA and WA payments will cease on 1 January 2022. To avoid a break in
payment, customers will need to transfer to Age Pension on or before
this date.

Check eligibility before restoration

When restoring a suspended payment, it is important to re-establish the
customer's eligibility and to recommence payment from the date they
became eligible again. If there have been changes in the customer's
circumstances, it is necessary to update any relevant information, such
as change of circumstances, before restoring the payment to avoid
incorrect arrears being generated.

Related links

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection reason codes (CLK)

Partner Allowance (PA) qualification and savings provisions

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
