
Exit applications from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) 103-20081031

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how participants can exit from the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC).

Cashless Debit Card exit applications

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participants can apply to exit the program if
they can demonstrate reasonable and responsible management of their
affairs, including financial affairs. This includes participants in the
NT who were previously on IM and have transitioned to the CDC.

They can apply to exit by completing an online exit application through
their Centrelink account or submit a paper Cashless Debit Card Exit
Application form (SS526) available on the Services Australia website or
in Service Centres. Resources has a link to the form on the Services
Australia website.

Applications can be completed:

-   online, or
-   using the Cashless Debit Card exit application form (SS526)

The participant can upload their completed exit application and
supporting documents directly to their Centrelink online account, in
person at a service centre, or by post.

A complete application form must contain:

-   All questions answered
-   Applicant’s signature and date signed
-   The participant’s Customer Reference Number, contact information and
    personal information
-   All of the required supporting documents required by the application
    form

Assessment of the application will not start until the participant has
supplied all supporting documents.

Any complete CDC exit applications, including supporting documents,
lodged on or after 17 March 2021 must be assessed within a 60 day
period. A participant will automatically exit the program on day 61 if a
decision is not made within 60 days.

The 60 day assessment period is calculated from the date the participant
provides a completed application form with full supporting documents. If
it is identified during the exit application assessment process that
updated documents or further documents are being required for the
application to be complete, the 60 day period will stop until the
documents are received. The 60 day assessment timeframe will be reset at
this point.

Need for a new application

A new exit application must be made when the participant:

-   did not supply supporting documents and the application closed, or
-   withdrew their application. A withdrawn application cannot be
    reopened

Who cannot make an application?

-   A person who is not a current CDC participant
-   Cape York CDC participants - these participants are not eligible for
    Exit application processes
-   Participants placed on the CDC program by the Family
    Responsibilities Commission (FRC) in Queensland
-   Volunteer CDC participants - these participants can request to exit
    the CDC at any time - an application form is not required, or
-   Northern Territory (NT) Income Management participants who consent
    to transition from IM to the CDC, but have not yet commenced having
    their payments delivered to their CDC

Assessment of exit eligibility

Exit applications are assessed using:

-   information from a phone interview
-   detail from the participant's record

The following criteria are used in the assessment:

the interest of any children the person is responsible for

in the last 12 months the person was:

-   convicted of an offence against a law of the Commonwealth, a State
    or a Territory, or
-   serving a sentence of imprisonment for such an offence

risks of homelessness

the health and safety of the person and the community

the responsibilities and circumstances of the person, and

the person's engagement in the community, including the person's
employment or efforts to obtain work

Services Australia will advise applicants of the decision in writing.
This letter will include their review and appeal rights.

Participants may contact the CDC Hotline to enquire on the progress of
their exit application or to advise they are not able to attend a phone
interview. See Process Table 5

For more information on the CDC exit application process see the
Services Australia website under How to apply to exit.

Appealing a decision

A participant may request an explanation of a CDC exit decision from a
subject matter expert (SME) under the internal review process.
Appropriately trained CDC Exit Team Service Officers can action a
participant’s request. See Process Table 9 for more details on providing
SME explanation.

A participant can request a review or appeal of the outcome of their
application, including any applications assessed by DSS prior to 1 July
2020. See Process Table 4 for more details on how to request an
explanation or apply for a formal review of a CDC exit decision.

Resources contains links to Forms, CDC Letters, Frequently Asked
Questions to help Service Officers answer a participant's general
enquiry, scenarios of documents received to support an Exit application,
Doc templates, Fact Sheets and other attachments, and information about
acceptable documents.

Related links

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation

Wellbeing Exemptions from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
