-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to be taken when a customer makes a
request to start, change (including suspend) or cancel a Centrepay
deduction.

Starting, changing or cancelling a Centrepay deduction

With the exception of court fines (CRT) and court infringement (CTI)
deductions, a Centrepay deduction may be started, changed, or cancelled
by:

-   [] using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
-   [] using the Centrelink online account
-   calling the smart centre
-   attending a service centre, or
-   a customer providing consent to a Centrepay Business to start or
    increase their Centrepay deduction via Centrelink Business Online
    Services (CBOS)

[] The preferred method for customers to manage their Centrepay
deductions is via Services Australia's self service options using their
Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app account.

Starting a Centrepay deduction

If a customer makes a request to start a Centrepay deduction over the
phone or in person at a service centre, Service officers are to process
the request via the Centrepay Guided Procedure or Centrepay workflow.

New Centrepay deductions can only be started from current or suspended
income support payments eligible for Centrepay. A new Centrepay
deduction may not be set up while processing a new claim activity.

Changing a Centrepay deduction

Customers may request to:

-   change or suspend a deduction for a specified period
-   change or cease a future or current suspension
-   change a Centrepay deduction from a future date, or
-   add or change an account reference number

If a customer makes a request to change a Centrepay deduction over the
phone or in person at a service centre, Service Officers should process
the request via the Centrepay Guided Procedure or Centrepay workflow.

Cancelling a Centrepay deduction

If a customer asks for a Centrepay deduction to be cancelled over the
phone or in person at a service centre, it should be actioned
immediately to prevent any overpayment to the Centrepay Business.
Service Officers should process the request via the Centrepay Guided
Procedure or Centrepay workflow.

If a Centrepay business requests the cancellation of a deduction, see
Starting, changing or cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request of
a business.

Involuntary Nominee arrangements and Centrepay

An involuntary nominee arrangement is where a third party has been given
legal right, as the result of a court, tribunal, guardianship or
administration order, to administer the customer's affairs.

-   In all instances of an involuntary nominee arrangement, Service
    Officers must contact the nominee or the customer's case manager
    from the public trustee to obtain approval to process any requests
    from the customer to start, change or cancel a Centrepay deduction
-   If the nominee does not provide approval to start, change or cancel
    the Centrepay deduction, or cannot be contacted, the Service Officer
    must reject the request. The name of the nominee, or the name of the
    officer from the nominee's organisation with whom contact was made
    or attempted, must be included on a DOC
-   If the nominee approves the request to start, change or cancel a
    Centrepay deduction, details of the approval must be annotated on a
    DOC. If the nominee is an organisation (for example, public trustee)
    the name of the officer from the organisation who provided the
    approval, together with the organisation's name and contact details
    must be included on a DOC

Voluntary Nominee arrangements and Centrepay

Customers with a voluntary nominee arrangement can still contact the
agency and conduct their own business, if they wish. No permission is
required from a nominee (correspondence (NOC), payment (NOP) or both
correspondence and payment (NOB) when the arrangement is voluntary.

Restrictions for customers with a nominee using self service

[] If a customer with a voluntary nominee arrangement wishes to use the
deduction service via self service channels there are restrictions in
place as follows:

Centrelink online account

-   A customer cannot action deduction updates when they have a
    voluntary nominee arrangement (NOC, NOP or NOB)

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

-   A customer cannot action deduction updates when they have a payment
    nominee (NOP or NOB) arrangement in place

Restrictions for nominee's using self service

[] The following restrictions are in place for a nominee using the
Deduction service via self service channels as follows:

Centrelink online account

-   A correspondence nominee (NOC) cannot action deduction updates when
    the customer has a payment nominee (NOP) who is a different person
-   If a nominee is both the correspondence and payment nominee (NOB)
    they can make deduction updates

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

-   All nominees (NOC, NOP and NOB) are unable to access the Centrelink
    Express Plus App on behalf of the customer

Centrepay deductions for court fines or court infringements

Under no circumstances should a Service Officer start a new Centrepay
deduction for court fines (CRT) or court infringements (CTI), unless the
court fine or court infringements is for the Department of Justice
Tasmania (Monetary Penalties Enforcement Services). For all states and
territories except Tasmania, advise the customer to contact the relevant
Court Administration Office to start a new deduction.

A customer cannot start, change (including suspend) or cancel a court
fine or court infringements Centrepay deduction online or via the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Once a Centrepay deduction has been set up for a court fine or court
infringements, a customer may request to change or cancel their
deduction by contacting a smart centre or attending a service centre at
any time. Service Officers should suggest the customer contact the
relevant State or Territory Court Administration Office to find out the
impacts of requesting the change or cancellation and offer alternatives
such as advance payments or a referral to a money management course
instead. Only after these actions have been undertaken should Service
Officer's action the customer's request.

Note: if a customer requests a Centrepay court fine or court
infringement deduction come out of a different payment, refer the
customer back to the relevant Court Administration Office to cancel the
current deduction and start a new deduction from the customer's
preferred payment.

Centrepay deductions for court fines or court infringements in Tasmania

The Department of Justice (Monetary Penalties Enforcement Services) in
Tasmania is the only Department of Justice that allows:

-   court fines to be set up using Centrepay using the service reason
    CTI
-   a Smart Centre Service Officer to set up such a deduction

The customer must provide an eight digit account code which commences
with the numbers '1' or '2'.

Transfer between Centrelink payment types

If a customer transfers from one Centrepay eligible income support
payment to another eligible payment type, their Centrepay deductions may
not transfer to the new payment. At the completion of a transfer
activity, the Service Officer must check to ensure any current Centrepay
deductions have also been transferred to the new payment and are showing
as being deducted from future income support payments. If the
instructions have not automatically transferred, the Service Officer
must recode the deduction instructions.

Centrepay deduction rules and limitations

Centrepay deductions can only be made from an eligible Centrelink
administered payment.

There are also deduction rules and limitations that mean a request
cannot be processed.

If a Service Officer is having difficulties coding a Centrepay deduction
request, the National Business Gateway - Centrepay helpdesk can be
contacted to assist with identifying the issue. The Centrepay helpdesk
will identify and advise the Service Officer of a workaround, or, if the
issue is to be referred to ICT for investigation.

Rent Deduction Scheme

A customer must be referred back to the relevant State/Territory
government housing authority if they wish to start a new, or vary a
current deduction for government housing. See Commencing a Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction or Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme
(RDS) deduction.

Cancellation requests can be actioned by Service Officers in Smart
Centres or service centres by manual processing via the Payment
Instruction Deduction Detail (PIDD) screen. State/territory government
housing deductions cannot be cancelled by the Centrepay guided
procedure. See Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction.

Deduction hierarchy

Centrepay deductions are voluntary, and are placed within the hierarchy
of all Centrelink deductions that can be taken from a Centrelink
payment. Mandatory deductions will be made before voluntary deductions.

Centrepay deductions will be made in the order they are set up, however
customers have the option of changing the order in which their Centrepay
deductions are made. They can make this request through the Smart Centre
or service centre.

The Resources page contains examples and links to additional resources
and Services Australia Website for information about Centrepay.

Related links

Deduction Statement

Deductions options online

Recording an end date or target amount on a Centrepay deduction

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Starting a Centrepay deduction for a business

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Self service for nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
