-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipients (VWPR) measure.

VWPR Income Management

To be eligible for VWPR Income Management, customers must be in receipt
of a category H welfare payment and:

-   reside within a VWPR Income Management area
-   not be income managed under a measure that is higher in the
    hierarchy of Income Management measures
-   not have an excluded payment nominee for Income Management purposes,
    and
-   have been assessed as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient by a
    social worker, or
-   be under 25 years of age and automatically identified for Income
    Management due to their circumstances

Social worker assessed VWPR Income Management

Services Australia social workers can assess customers as a Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipient and place them on Income Management.

When determining whether Income Management is suitable for a customer
who has one of the following vulnerability indicators:

-   financial hardship
-   financial exploitation
-   failure to undertake reasonable self-care
-   homelessness
-   Social workers will consider:
-   whether the customer is meeting their and their family's priority
    needs, and
-   whether Income Management is an appropriate support tool for the
    customer to meet their responsibilities, build and maintain
    self-care and manage their finances

Before referring a customer for Income Management, social work
assessment Service Officers must ensure the customer resides in an
Income Management location, or is currently subject to Income
Management. For information on when social work referrals can be made
for both income managed and non-income managed customers, see the
Resources tab in Social work service referral

VWPR Youth Income Management

Customers will automatically be identified for VWPR Youth Income
Management if they are:

-   under 16 years of age and in receipt of a Special Benefit (SpB-USY)
-   aged 16 years or over and in receipt of the Unreasonable to Live at
    Home (UTLAH) rate of Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support
    Pension (DSP) or ABSTUDY Living Allowance or
-   under 25 years and received a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the last
    13 weeks due to release from prison or psychiatric confinement

Customers will not be identified for Income Management if they are
full-time students or Australian apprentices, or currently on Voluntary
Income Management (VIM).

Duration of VWPR Income Management

-   Social worker assessed VWPR: A Vulnerable notice is generally for a
    period of 12 months, however a social worker can end the notice
    prior to this date. After 12 months, a social worker will make a new
    determination and may extend the notice provided the customer still
    meets the criteria
-   VWPR Youth - UTLAH and SpB-SUY customers: Income Management is for a
    one-off period of 12 months. When a customer has completed 12
    months, they will be automatically exited from VWPR Youth Income
    Management. Customers cannot be identified for Income Management
    under these categories for a second time, however they may become
    eligible if they receive a Crisis Payment upon release from prison
    or psychiatric confinement. IM will continue for a customer outside
    an Income Management area under the same rules as if they had
    remained in the declared Income Management area, for the duration of
    the 12 month period. For more information see Customer moves out of
    an Income Management area
-   VWPR Youth - CrP customers: Income Management will be for a period
    of 12 months. Eligibility for VWPR Youth Income Management under
    this category can apply again after the initial 12 month period

Note: VWPR Youth customers' Income Management will end if they are
granted an exclusion.

VWPR Youth customers can request to end IM if they no longer have the
applicable trigger reason VWPR Youth – UTLAH no longer receiving UTLAH
rate of payment or VWPR Youth-Crisis turns 25.

If a customer moves out of a VWPR Income Management area after being
identified for or commencing Income Management under this measure, their
payments may still be income managed. See Customer moves out of an
Income Management area.

Percentage of payments income managed

Under VWPR Income Management:

-   50% of a customer's regular fortnightly category I welfare payment
    (which includes category H welfare payment) are income managed, and
-   100% of lump sum payments are income managed

There are specific payments not income managed.

Exclusions from VWPR Youth Income Management

Customers will automatically be granted an exclusion from VWPR Youth
Income Management if they have received less than 25% of their maximum
basic rate of payment for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights.
Non-payment periods or reduced rates of payment due to non-compliance
are not included when determining eligibility. However, customers may
request to be assessed for this exclusion if they believe they meet this
criteria. The Income Management and Assessment Team (IMEAT) are
responsible for determining these exclusions.

A Services Australia social worker is responsible for assessing all
other requests for an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management if:

-   Income Management would put the customer’s mental, physical or
    emotional wellbeing at risk, or
-   is not practicable due to Support and Demonstrated capacity

All other exclusion and exit categories for VWPR youth Income Management
must be referred to the Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team
(IMEAT).

For more details about exclusions and referrals for an assessment, see
Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service Officers.

Note: customers who have been assessed as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient by a social worker cannot apply for an exclusion. However,
these customers can request a reconsideration of their circumstances.
For more information see Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notices assessed by social workers.

Reviews and Appeals

Customers who disagree with a decision relating to their Income
Management measure may appeal that decision. Normal review and appeal
processes apply.

Customers who have been assessed for VWPR Income Management by a social
worker can request a reconsideration of their VWPR Notice. This is
different from a request for a review of a decision as the customer is
seeking to have their circumstances reviewed by an Income Management
trained social worker to determine if they still meet the criteria as a
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient. Customers can request this review
every 90 days.

The Resources page contains examples of manual and automatic
identification for VWPR Income Management.

Contents

Determining and recording eligibility for Income Management as a
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) by a social worker

Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service Officers

Initial Assessment interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients

Disbursement interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
Income Management

Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient
(VWPR) Notices assessed by social workers

Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management by social workers

Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR) Income Management due to rate of payment

Related links

Hierarchy and movement between Income Management (IM) measures -
Overview

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Social work service referral

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
