
Cashless Debit Card (CDC) 103-03150000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about the Cashless Debit Card (CDC),
participant support, and roles in the administration of the CDC.

Government intent

The CDC aims to reduce the amount of cash in the community that could be
used for gambling and to buy alcohol and drugs. Eligible customers, who
are on income support payments, will have part of their payment
delivered via a CDC that cannot be used to buy alcohol, gambling
products, cash-like products, or to withdraw as cash. Cash-like products
are defined as gift or store cards, vouchers, money or postal orders,
shares or digital currency.

Overview of CDC

The CDC is currently operating in the following locations:

Ceduna and surrounding region, South Australia

East Kimberley, Western Australia

Goldfields region, Western Australia

Bundaberg and Hervey Bay region, Queensland

Cape York, Queensland

Northern Territory (NT) for customers who:

-   consent to transition from Income Management (IM) to the CDC
-   income support recipients in the NT who volunteer for the CDC

Once a customer is a participant in the CDC, the trigger payment and
additional restrictable payments they receive will be paid to their CDC
account.

Staff can view the Geospatial tool to determine if customer resides in a
CDC location.

CDC in the NT

In December 2020, legislation passed to allow income managed customers
in the NT the option to consent and transition to the CDC. The
legislation also allows for customers in the NT, who are in receipt of
an Income Support Payment, who are not currently on IM, the option to
volunteer for the CDC program.

From December 2021, participants within the Northern Territory will have
the opportunity to choose their preferred card issuer.

All participants receive a personalised CDC supplied by the card issuer.
Where a participant has a payment nominee, the nominee will be issued
the personalised card. The card will have the payment nominee's name
printed on the card and the participant's name printed underneath. The
online account linked to the CDC will also be managed by the payment
nominee.

In some cases the payment nominee may request the card only be issued in
the participant's name. In these instances the participant and the
payment nominee will have access to the online account.

When a payment nominee relationship is started, changed or ended, the
system will perform an eligibility check for CDC and take the
appropriate action automatically.

The card looks and operates like a normal bank card, except that it
cannot be used to buy alcohol, gambling products, cash-like products or
to withdraw cash. The card can be used at most shops that accept EFTPOS
or Visa. It will work online, for shopping and paying bills. The card
issuer website lists the approved merchants and excluded merchants for
the CDC. The card can be used at most merchants nationwide with EFTPOS
or Visa facilities, except merchants where the main business is:

-   the sale of alcohol
-   gambling services, or
-   online stores that have not been pre-approved by the card issuer

The card also cannot be used to purchase cash-like products, that can be
used to purchase alcohol or gambling products. Cash-like products are
defined as gift or store cards, vouchers, money or postal orders, shares
or digital currency.

Up to 80% of regular fortnightly and 100% of lump sums and arrears of
restrictable payments will be restricted and paid to the recipient's
CDC. The remaining percentage will be paid to the participant's normal
bank account.

Lump sums that are 100% restricted and paid to a participant's CDC are
payments that are not paid by regular instalment and include advance
payments.

For NT customers who consent and transition to the CDC, the percentage
of restricted funds is based on the previous IM measure. Interest is
paid on CDC account balances. For more information, see Talking points -
paying interest to CDC accounts in Resources. For any enquiries that
cannot be answered by Services Australia, advise participants to contact
the card issuer directly.

All cards and support services to access restricted funds on the CDC are
provided by the card issuer.

Referrals to the CDC in Cape York

The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC), a Queensland State
Government authority, is responsible for determining when a customer is
required to participate in the CDC program. The FRC will send a
notification to Services Australia.

The FRC may send a Notice to Commence the CDC because:

-   they believe the CDC will benefit the customer and their family, or
-   the customer has volunteered to participate in the CDC through the
    FRC

The FRC will determine the period of participation in the CDC program,
and the percentage of a participant’s payment that will be quarantined.

To be eligible for Cashless Debit Card in the Cape York the customer or
their partner must be in receipt of a category P or welfare payment and:

-   reside in a Cape York Initiative area
-   do not have an excluded payment nominee for the purpose of the
    Cashless Debit Card, and
-   have be referred by the Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC)

Eligibility for Cashless Debit Card

See Participation in Cashless Debit Card for more information on
eligibility for the CDC.

Cashless Debit Card locations

The CDC is operating in the following locations:

Ceduna and surrounding regions, South Australia (determination date is
15 March 2016)

East Kimberley, Western Australia (determination date is 26 April 2016)

Goldfields region, Western Australia (determination date is 26 March
2018)

Bundaberg and Hervey Bay region, Queensland (from 29 January, with a
determination date for customer eligibility of 21 December 2018)

Cape York, Queensland from 17 March 2021

Northern Territory for customers from 17 March 2021 who:

-   consent to transition from IM to the CDC
-   are income support recipients and volunteer for the CDC

Ceduna and surrounding region, South Australia

The Ceduna region in South Australia includes the Ceduna Local
Government Area (LGA) and locations surrounding Ceduna and west to
Nullarbor (near the Western Australian border).

The Ceduna region encompasses the following communities:

-   Ceduna LGAs: Bulinda, Carawa, Ceduna, Ceduna Town Camp, Chinbingina,
    Chinta, Cungena, Denial Bay, Dinah Line, Emu Farm, Kalanbi, Koongawa
    Dundee, Koonibba, Laura Bay, Maltee. Mudamuckla, Munda Wata Tjina,
    Munda Wanna-Mar, Murat Bay, Nunjikompita, Pimbaacla, Puntabie,
    Pureba, Smoky Bay, Thevenard, Tia Tuckia, Wandana, Warevilla and
    Yarilena
-   Surrounding regions: Bald Hill, Betts Corner, Bookabie, Border
    Village, Cactus Beach, Charra, Chundaria, Colona, Coorabie, Fowlers
    Bay, Glen Boree, Head of Great Australian Bight, Lookout Hill,
    Merghiny, Nadia, Nanbona, Nanwoora, Nullarbor, Nundroo, Oak Valley,
    Over Road, Penong, Pintumba, Scotdesco, Tallowon, Uworra, Watraba,
    White Well Corner, Yalata, Yellabinna and Yumbarra

East Kimberley, Western Australia

East Kimberley in Western Australia encompasses the following
communities:

-   Kununurra, Kununurra Region, Wyndham, Alligator Hole, Bell Springs,
    Bethal, Carlton Hill, Cockatoo Springs, Dillon Springs, Dingo
    Springs, Emu Creek, Flying Fox, Four Mile, Geboowama, Glen Hill,
    Goose Hill, Guda, Gulberang, Hollow Springs, Jimbilum, Kumbrarumba,
    Miniata, Mirima, Molly Springs, Mud Springs, Munthanmar,
    Ngulwirriwirri, Nimbing, Nullywah, Red Creek, Waringarri, Warrayu,
    Woolah, Wuggabun and Yirralallem

Goldfields region, Western Australia

The Goldfields region in Western Australia includes the Local Government
Areas (LGAs) of:

-   Kalgoorlie-Boulder including communities and suburbs of Kalgoorlie,
    Boulder, Victory Heights, Williamstown, Broadwood, Hannans,
    Lamington, Mullingar, Ninga Mia, Piccadilly, Somerville, West
    Lamington, East Goldfields Prison, South Boulder, Yilkari, Kanowna,
    Kalgoorlie Postal, Kurnalpi, Ora Banda, Parkeston, Rawlinna,
    Zanthus, Bulong, Cundeelee, Coonana, Emu Flat, Forrest
-   Coolgardie including communities and suburbs of Boorabbin,
    Bullabulling, Coolgardie, Kurrawang, Higginsville, Kambalda,
    Kambalda Community, Widgiemooltha
-   Laverton including communities and suburbs of Bandya, Lake Wells,
    Laverton, Cosmo Newbery, Mount Margaret, Mulga Queen, Wongatha
    Wonganarra, Ilkulka
-   Leonora including communities and suburbs of Menzies: Kookynie,
    Menzies, Marmion Village, Morapoi

The Goldfields region also includes the Western Australian state suburbs
of Menzies, Kookynie and Ularring.

Bundaberg and Hervey Bay region, Queensland

The Bundaberg and Hervey Bay region in Queensland means the area within
the boundaries of the Commonwealth Electoral Division of Hinkler as in
force on 31 May 2018 and includes the communities of:

-   Bundaberg: Ashfield, Avenell Heights, Avoca, Bargara, Branyan,
    Bundaberg Central, Bundaberg East, parts of Bundaberg North,
    Bundaberg West, Burnett Heads, Coral Cove, Elliott Heads, Innes
    Park, Kalkie, Kensington, Kepnock, Millbank, Mon Repos, Norville,
    Qunaba, Rubyanna, Svensson Heights, Thabeban, Walkervale,
    Windermere, Woongarra.
-   Bundaberg Region – South: Abington, Alloway, Apple Tree Creek,
    Beelbi Creek, Booyal, Burrum Heads, Burrum River, Burrum Town,
    Buxton, Calavos, Cherwell, Childers, Coonarr, Cordalba, Craignish,
    Doolbi, Duckinwilla, Duingal, Electra, Elliott, Eureka, Farnsfield,
    Givelda, Goodwood, Gregory River, Horton, Howard, Isis Central, Isis
    River, Kinkuna, Kullogum, North Gregory, North Isis, Pacific Haven,
    Promisedland, Pine Creek, Redridge, South Bingera, South Isis,
    Takura, Toogoom, Torbanlea, Woodgate.
-   Hervey Bay: Aldershot, Booral, Bunya Creek, Dundowran Beach,
    Dundowran, Dundathu, Eli Waters, Kawungan, Nikenbah, Pialba, Point
    Vernon, River Heads, Scarness, Sunshine Acres, Torquay, Urangan,
    Urraween, Walliebum, Walligan, Wondunna

Cape York, Queensland

The CDC program is available to eligible customers who reside in a Cape
York Cashless Debit Card area. This includes communities and their
associated outstations:

-   Aurukun – the Aurukun community includes (but is not limited to),
    the following outstations: Aayk, Ambang, Bullyard Outstation,
    Kencherrang, Kulinchin, Love River, Ochangan-thatnenh, South Kawiy,
    Stoney Crossing, Thaangkunh-nhiin, Ti Tree, Tiitch, Walngal,
    Wathanhiin, Wutan, Yaaneng.
-   Coen – the Coen community includes (but is not limited to), the
    following outstations: Birthday Mountains, Blue Mountains, Chuula,
    Glengarland, Holroyd River, Kulpa, Langi, Marina Plains, Meripah,
    Moojeeba, Port Stewart bottom, Port Stewart top, Puntimu, Silver
    Plains, Station Creek, Stony Creek, Theethinji, Umbila Wunta,
    Wolverton Station.
-   Doomadgee – The Doomadgee community includes (but is not limited
    to), the following outstations: Bannick Burn, Eight Mile, Gunhole,
    Ngooderi.
-   Hope Vale - the Hope Vale community includes (but is not limited
    to), the following outstations: Battle Camp, Bonny Glen, Brannihans
    Station, Elim, Fordy Farm, Gulgi-galbay, Hidden Valley, Mount Baird,
    Mount Webb, Ngulan, Normanby, Pleasant View, Spring Hill, Starcke
    Homestead.
-   Mossman Gorge

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Issuers

In the 2020-21 Budget, the Government announced its intention to trial
other issuers of the CDC. Additional issuers of the CDC offer a number
of benefits for participants, including:

-   greater choice
-   opportunities to have their CDC account at the same financial
    institution as their personal account,
-   reduced stigma (by providing CDC cards that look similar to other
    cards from the same institution), and
-   improved customer service experience

Cashless Debit Card participants in the Northern Territory can choose
between Indue and Traditional Credit Union (TCU) as their preferred card
issuer from 6 December 2021.

TCU is not an available card issuer choice to participants in other CDC
locations.

For further information about the differences in card issuer, see the
Card Issuer Choice document in Resources.

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) trigger payments

Ceduna and surrounding region, South Australia, East Kimberley region,
and the Goldfields region, Western Australia

CDC trigger payments are:

-   a payment under the scheme known as ABSTUDY that includes an amount
    identified as living allowance not being paid to another person
-   Austudy payment
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Carer Payment
-   Disability Support Pension
-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Special Benefit
-   Youth Allowance

Bundaberg and Hervey Bay region, Queensland

CDC trigger payments are:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (Job Seeker)
-   Parenting Payment (Single)
-   Parenting Payment (Partnered)

Northern Territory

CDC trigger payments are:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YAL) - Jobseeker or Apprentice
-   Special Benefit (Spl)
-   Parenting Payment (Single)
-   Parenting Payment (Partnered

Cape York

To be eligible for Income Management under the Cape York Initiative the
customer or their partner must be in receipt of a category P  welfare
payment and:

-   reside in a Cape York area
-   do not have an excluded payment nominee for CDC purposes, and
-   have been referred to the CDC by the Family Responsibilities
    Commission (FRC)

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) restrictable payments

For CDC participants, a restrictable payment is defined as any of the
following:

a trigger payment

ABSTUDY scheme payments that include a Pensioner Education Supplement
amount

Advance Payments (including advances of Pharmaceutical Allowance and
Mobility Allowance)

bereavement payments (other than in relation to Age Pension, Mature Age
Allowance or Special Needs Pension)

Carer Allowance

Carer Supplement

Child Disability Assistance

Double Orphan Pension

family assistance payments including:

-   Newborn Supplement/Newborn Upfront Payment
-   Family Tax Benefit (including 100% of FTB if received as a lump sum
    and Advance Payments)
-   Schoolkids Bonus
-   Stillborn Baby Payment

Mobility Allowance

Pensioner Education Supplement

Quarterly Energy Supplement

Telephone Allowance

Utilities Allowance

Using Cashless Debit Card account as the primary payment destination

Cashless Debit Card participants can request to set their CDC account as
their primary payment destination.

When a CDC participant commences on the program the card issuer creates
a bank account for a participant’s restricted portion to be paid. This
is the CDC account.

A CDC participant can contact the agency to request that their primary
payment destination be the same as their CDC account.

It is important that participants understand that 100% of their eligible
Income Support Payments will be subject to the restrictions associated
with CDC account. Once funds are paid into the CDC account, it will not
be possible to distinguish between the restricted and unrestricted
portions.

To update a participant’s payment destination, see Payment destination.

Using Cashless Debit Card funds

There are a number of ways participants can use their CDC account to pay
their rent, bills and other expenses. These include:

-   Centrepay
-   the Rent Deduction Scheme
-   BPAY and Direct Debit
-   transferring funds to other CDC accounts (Internal transfer)
-   Other Expenses limit (default limit is $200 per 28 days, excluding
    participants in the NT and Cape York; their default is $0)

Participants have the option to use their CDC card physically at
merchants that accept Visa or EFTPOS. Some merchants have been
specifically blocked to accept the CDC due to primarily selling
restricted goods or services. There is also a range of mixed merchants
that sell both restricted and unrestricted goods or services that
participants can shop at. A list of blocked and mixed merchants and
information can be found on the card issuer's website.

For situations where it's not possible for a participants to pay their
expenses via the above options, a request for a Housing or Other
Expenses limit can be made. Refer to Limit Changes for Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) customers.

Contactless Cashless Debit Cards

Contactless payments are available to all participants with personalised
cards with 'tap and pay' functionality.

This functionality is not automatically enabled for Traditional Credit
Union (TCU) issued cards. Participants need to go online or contact the
card issuer to activate this.

Indue issued cards have functionality automatically enabled.
Participants will need to use their PIN to activate this on their first
transaction.

Participants can add their Indue Cashless Debit Card to their digital
wallet (to use Visa mobile payment functions) if they have a smartphone
that:

-   has Near Field Communication (NFC) capability, and
-   supports Apple Pay, Samsung Pay or Google Pay

For more information about contactless cards, see Talking Points -
Contactless Cards in Resources.

Vulnerable Participants - Cashless Debit Card ONLY

'Vulnerable' for the purposes of the CDC, relates to online banking
only. A CDC participant is deemed vulnerable if they display low IT
literacy skills and require ongoing assistance with basic online
banking, as this increases the risk of them becoming a victim of fraud.

Participants who have been identified as 'vulnerable' for the purpose of
the CDC will have a display on access (DOA) DOC placed on their record
identifying them.

CDC Hotline Service Officers are responsible for identifying any
participants that may be 'vulnerable' for the purpose of the CDC and
unable to use online services due to very low IT literacy skills (not
because they do not have access to the internet or online banking). For
more information, see Cashless Debit Card Vulnerable customers.

Participation support

Services Australia is responsible for the service delivery of the CDC
nationally (this was previously the responsibility of the Department of
Social Services), which includes:

Program implementation and operations

Assessment and facilitation of Housing and Other Expenses Limits

Assessment and facilitation of Urgent funds transfers

CDC exit requests. See Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation

-   Wellbeing Exemptions
-   Exit Applications
-   Other Exits (Eligibility)

General assistance and support on how the CDC operates

Issuing a temporary CDC (Face to face only), see Temporary Cashless
Debit Cards (CDC)

Cashless Debit Card – Card Support

-   Card activations
-   PIN resets
-   Lost or stolen cards

Services Australia is unable to action any card related enquiries on
behalf of CDC participants. Service Officers are able to provide general
support on how participants can conduct these enquiries and should
direct them to Self Service terminals or service centre phones where
participant can action these requests themselves, online or through the
card issuer.

For more information on providing card support, see Table 3, Step 4 on
the Process page.

For further support or for complex issues, Service Officers can contact
the CDC Processing Team for assistance.

Note: this number is for staff use only, and staff should not give this
number to customers, nor transfer them through to the CDC Processing
Team directly.

Ending CDC participation Requests

See Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation.

The Resources page contains a link to the card issuer's website, task
cards to support participants with card related enquiries and examples
of who staff and participants should contact in certain scenarios, and
FAQs about interest payments and contactless cards.

Contents

Participation in the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Varying the restricted percentage for Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation

Housing and Other Expense Limits for Cashless Debit Card (CDC) customers

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Community Panels

Transferring Cashless Debit Card (CDC) funds

Temporary Cashless Debit Cards (CDC)

Cashless Debit Card Vulnerable Participants

Urgent payment requests from Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participants

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Volunteers

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) - changing initial waiting periods

Switching Cashless Debit Card (CDC) card issuers

Related links

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Cashless Debit Card under the Cape York initiative

Cape York initiative in the Business Hub

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
