
Inventory Tracking System (ITS) for temporary Cashless Debit Cards and BasicsCards 103-01230140

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the Inventory Tracking System and
how Cashless Debit Card, BasicsCard and BasicsCard printer stocks must
be received, stored and issued securely.

On this Page:

Inventory Tracking System (ITS)

The ITS tracks the movement of the temporary Cashless Debit Cards,
BasicsCards (cards) and BasicsCard printer stocks from the warehouse to
sites, and assists site contacts to code receipt of deliveries. Cards
'issued' or marked as 'damaged' in the Centrelink system will
automatically update the card status in the ITS for that site.

The ITS allows:

-   sites to view/monitor their 'available' BasicsCard stock levels
-   sites to monitor cards issued each day
-   stocks of cards and BasicsCard printers to be 'assigned' to Remote
    Servicing Team trip leaders
-   the tracking of stock orders of cards and BasicsCard thermal
    printers (Zenius, Pebble and Tattoo models) dispatched to sites from
    the Welfare Quarantining team and National Business Gateway (NBG)
-   automatic and manual stock status updates as cards are issued, or
    identified as damaged, deleted or missing
-   automatic email notification to site contact if any cards with an
    ITS status of 'missing', 'damaged' or 'deleted' are subsequently
    issued
-   stock trigger points and order amounts to be set for each site to
    allow automatic re-orders

Site responsibility

Each site must have a minimum of 2 site contacts who are responsible for
the receipt, storage and distribution of temporary Cashless Debit Cards,
BasicsCards and BasicsCard printer stocks in the Inventory Tracking
System (ITS).

Site contact responsibility

The site contacts are responsible for all temporary Cashless Debit
Cards, BasicsCards and BasicsCard printers received at the Service
Centre or Remote Service Centre. This includes checking that
consignments match the invoices, physically counting the cards, and
ensuring that all stock (cards or BasicsCard printers) are marked as
'received' in the ITS. Site contacts are also responsible for
undertaking site stocktakes and manually updating stock status for any
cards that are missing or damaged, prior to being issued.

System Access Requirements

Staff listed as a site contact will require the appropriate ICT Security
Portal (ISP) access to be able to make changes within the ITS. The
appropriate access will enable staff to update their site details and
complete the stocktake.

Access can be requested in the ICT Security Portal (Centrelink system)
under MF App Function> Income Security:

-   ITACSA1 - ITS primary and secondary contacts
-   ITARVT - ITS Remote Visiting Team trip leader access
-   ITANSO - ITS/NSO staff to manage the inventory

Site contacts will also require ‘Customer Update’ ISP access CDC.

Site contacts who manage multiple sites will need to ensure their User
Profile region code matches the site they are accessing. See UP Screen.

Site Stocktake

Each site is required to perform a monthly stocktake of cards and
BasicsCard printer stock and ensure the ITS accurately reflects the
physical stock on hand. An email will be automatically issued to site
contacts every 30 days to advise that a stocktake is now due, a report
of stock currently listed as, on hand within the ITS, is included.

Sites which have not issued a card and/or have not had a status change
within the ITS during the month will not be required to complete the
stocktake for that month. Sites that meet these requirements will not be
required to complete a stocktake for a maximum of 3 months.

When the stocktake report does not match the physical stock on hand, it
must be investigated and the ITS updated via the Manage Stock or Site
Details pages before the stocktake is completed. Once all checking and
updates are completed, the site contact must mark the stocktake as
complete.

The stocktake must be completed within 7 days. If not, a reminder email
will automatically be sent to the site contacts requesting the site to
complete their stocktake. The Deduction and Confirmation Branch will
also be notified.

If staff are unable to select save or save and exit when completing the
stocktake, they should check their ISP access is still current. Staff
that manage multiple sites should ensure that their region on the User
Profile (UP) screen in Customer First is set to the relevant site.

Note: there are separate Inventory Tracking menu options for Cashless
Debit Card and BasicsCard stock in Customer First. Once the stocktake
checkbox is selected in either of these Inventory Tracking System menu
options, it will complete the stocktake for both Cashless Debit Cards
and BasicsCards stock.

Please ensure all card stock in the site has been accounted for before
confirming the stocktake.

BasicsCard Printers in the ITS

Thermal printers are located in certain service centres where high
numbers of BasicsCards are issued. Printers are an accountable asset of
the agency and therefore need to be tracked in the ITS.

On the occasion where a BasicsCard printer needs to be transferred to
another site, the site contact is to email the Deduction and
Confirmation Branch - Welfare Quarantining team who will investigate and
approve the move.

This email must include:

-   site name requesting the printer
-   site name where the printer is currently stored
-   the serial number of the printer (located on the bottom of the
    printer)
-   Inventory Number - IT/barcode number
-   MAC address of the printer (located on the bottom of the printer)
-   name of requesting Service Officer
-   reason for the request

Deduction and Confirmation Branch - Welfare Quarantining team will
respond to this email advising, if and when the printer can be shipped
to the new site.

The Resources page contains a link to ICT Security Portal, required ISP
resources, contact details for the National Business Gateway for level 1
assistance with the ITS, and a link to the Deduction and Confirmation
Branch - Welfare Quarantining team for level 2 assistance.

Related links

BasicsCard

Initial offer or replacement of BasicsCard

BasicsCard customer reports a lost, stolen or damaged card

BasicsCard reactivate posted or previously suspended card

BasicsCard a third party reports card was found

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
