-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to manually assess an exclusion from
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management (IM)
and enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM) because of the customer's
rate of payment.

Exclusions for customers on IM are assessed by the Income Management
Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT) and by Service Officers who have
additional ISP access and training to undertake manual processes for
enhanced IM customers.

VWPR Youth IM and enhanced IM customer groups

Customers living in a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) IM
area or enhanced IM location will be identified for VWPR Youth IM or
enhanced IM if they are:

-   aged under 16 years of age, and in receipt of a Special Benefit
    (SpB-USY)
-   aged 16 years or over and in receipt of an independent rate of Youth
    Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP) or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance due to meeting the Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH)
    criteria, or
-   under 25 years and received a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the last
    13 weeks due to release from prison or release from psychiatric
    confinement

Customers will not be identified for IM or enhanced IM if they are a
full time student or Australian Apprentice, or currently on Voluntary M
or enhanced IM. For more information see Income Management and enhanced
Income Management for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR).

Exclusion from IM or enhanced IM due to rate of payment

Income Management

Customers who have received less than 25% of their maximum basic rate of
payment for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights will automatically
be granted an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management.

Where an automatic exclusion has not occurred, customers can request to
be assessed for this exclusion if they believe they meet the criteria.
Manual assessment and coding of these exclusions is completed by the
Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT).

Enhanced Income Management

Customers who have received less than 25% of their maximum basic rate of
payment for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights will be granted an
exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management.

Where a customer has been identified for an exclusion or a customer
contacts and requests to be assessed for this exclusion if they believe
they meet the criteria. Manual assessment and coding of these exclusions
is required and will be completed by enhanced IM Service Officers who
have additional access and undertaken training in manual processes.

If a customer requests an exclusion from VWPR Youth IM or enhanced IM
for any other reason, refer the customer to a social worker for
assessment. For more information see Exclusions for automatically
triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income
Management or enhanced IM for Service Officers.

Period of exclusion

The assessment of an application for an exclusion is a point in time
decision, and is applied for a 12 month period.

Customers still eligible for IM may need to re-apply for an exclusion
after the 12 month period if their exclusion is not automatically
re-granted. Customers still eligible for enhanced IM will need to
reapply for an exclusion after the 12 month period.

Where it is determined an exclusion has been applied incorrectly, the
exclusion can be manually terminated by the Income Management Exemption
and Assessment Team (IMEAT) for IM or manual processing Service Officers
for enhanced IM and the customer may again be identified for Income
Management or enhanced IM.

Reviews of exclusion decisions

Normal review and appeal processes apply to exclusion decisions. This
means customers can apply for a formal review of a decision to reject a
request for an exclusion from VWPR Youth IM or enhanced IM.

Related links

Income Management and enhanced Income Management for Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipients (VWPR)

Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management and enhanced Income Management
for Service Officers

Determining and recording eligibility for Income Management and enhanced
Income Management as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) by a
social worker

Reviews of Income Management and enhanced Income Management decisions

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Youth Exclusion
(Detrimental) Assessments - social work

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Exclusion (Not Practicable
due to Support and Demonstrated Capacity) Assessments in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Disbursement interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)
Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
