
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers appoint another person or
organisation the authority to receive payments on their behalf. The
third party is recorded as either a payment nominee or a group payment
organisation.

Changing payments to a third party

Take care when dealing with requests to re-direct customers' payments to
third parties.

Processes should put customers in control of their own finances.

Proof is needed if a customer is unable to organise a third party for
their payments due to:

-   a physical, intellectual or psychiatric disability, or
-   being able to consent but unable to sign

Examples of proof are:

-   recent certifications by a medical practitioner
-   a social worker's report
-   medical proof on file

Refusing to allow a nominee

Nominee requests must be refused where it is not in the customer's best
interests. Examples include:

-   the intended nominee cannot handle the customer's affairs.
-   the person has a nominee themselves

See Adding or rejecting a nominee request.

Payments to where the customer lives

Customers can ask to have their payments sent to the institution where
they live. The institution receives the customer's payments by group
schedule. Examples may include:

-   nursing homes
-   Australian Disability Enterprises
-   Public Trustees

Customers can:

-   change their payments to an institution. The customer must complete
    a Please send my payment to an institution form (SS270)
-   ask to appoint the institution as an organisation nominee. Complete
    the Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on your
    behalf form (SS313)

Choosing a nominee

Customers can choose a payment nominee. They must complete an
Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf
form (SS313).

Customers unable to sign the form are able to have it signed by:

-   a social worker
-   the customer's treating doctor, or
-   other third party authority

The customer must provide proof they cannot sign the form.

Advise the payment nominee what they need to do for both the customer
and Services Australia. This includes keeping records of how the
customer's payments are used.

Indigenous community arrangements

Indigenous customers who live in remote areas can have trouble accessing
their payments. These customers can use a payment nominee to have their
payments paid to either:

-   the Council Clerk, or
-   another Indigenous community representative

Cancelling a nominee

Customers or nominees can cancel a nominee at any time, unless it is
legally enforced. For example.

-   Guardianship Board
-   Public Trustee
-   other court orders

The Resources page contains links to the SS270 and SS313 forms and the
Services Australia website.

Contents

Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent
customers

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Payments to third parties and institutions for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Payments for students under 18 years paid to student, parent or a third
party

Payment to under 18 year old customers for Youth Allowance (YA)

Payments to joint bank accounts

Special arrangements for customers with budgeting difficulties

Organisation wants to become a Group Payment organisation

Group payment schedules and payments to organisations

Centrepay

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS)

Payment of residential costs option for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Related links

Nominees

Nominee organisations

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

Cancelling a nominee appointment

Review of nominee arrangements

Protection of customer payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
