
This document outlines information about options regarding how often a
customer's payments are received.

Government intent

Centrelink delivers payments on behalf of Services Australia that are
usually paid on a fortnightly basis in arrears. While fortnightly
payments are suitable for the majority of customers, some may have
difficulty budgeting for the 14 day period between payments. These
customers will often suffer considerable hardship towards the end of
each fortnight. To assist these customers with their budgeting problems,
some customers may be eligible to be paid their entitlement weekly.

Offsetting payments

Customers in receipt of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) have the choice to
offset FTB against their income support payment, which results in the
customer receiving a payment each week. Note: this choice is only
available for a limited number of payments or supplements. These are
FTB, Double Orphan Pension (DOP) and Carer Allowance (CA). Service
Officers can offer to offset payments for customers.

Financial hardship

Customers who are in severe financial hardship due to exceptional and
unforeseen circumstances may be eligible for an immediate payment such
as an urgent payment. This is not an additional payment but an early
delivery of part of the payment the customer would be entitled to
receive on their upcoming payday.

In addition to the customer's regular payments, customers may also be
eligible for an advance of part of their future payments as a lump sum.

Note: if a customer is on Weekly payments, they are not eligible to
receive an urgent payment but may be able to receive an advance payment
if they meet the eligibility criteria.

Overseas customers

Customers who are overseas long term or permanently are generally paid
every 4 weeks.

Contents

Weekly payments

Changing Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)

Advances

Related links

Offsetting Family Tax Benefit, Double Orphan Pension and Carer Allowance

Replacement payments

Payment destination

Payments to third parties

Immediate payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
