
Cashless Debit Card under the Cape York Initiative 103-01150000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines an overview of Cashless Debit Card under the Cape
York Initiative.

On this Page:

Rationale of Cashless Debit Card

Cashless Debit Card was introduced as a tool to support the Cape York
Welfare Reform. It aims to address passive dependence on welfare and
rebuild social norms in participating Cape York communities.

Referrals to Cashless Debit Card

The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) (a Queensland State
Government authority) is responsible for referring customers to Services
Australia to have their payments income managed.

The FRC may send a Notice to Commence Income Management or the Cashless
Debit Card because:

-   they believe the Cashless Debit Card program will benefit the
    customer and their family, or
-   the customer has volunteered for the Cashless Debit Card program
    through the FRC

The FRC will determine the period on the Cashless Debit Card program,
and the percentage of a customer’s payment that will be income managed.

Cape York Initiative areas

Cashless Debit Card is only available to eligible customers who reside
in a Cape York Initiative area. This includes the following communities
and their associated outstations:

-   Aurukun
-   Coen
-   Doomadgee
-   Hope Vale, and
-   Mossman Gorge

If a customer moves out of a Cape York Initiative area, after being
identified for or commencing Cashless Debit Card, their payments may
still be quarantined.

Duration of the Cashless Debit Card program under Cape York Initiative

A Cape York notice can be for a minimum of 3 months to a maximum of 12
months. The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) determines the
period of the Cashless Debit Card and can extend the initial period of
the Notice by submitting a new Notice to Commence Income Management or
the Cashless Debit Card.

The FRC can request the Cashless Debit Card be ended at any time by
sending a Revocation of Income Management or Cashless Debit Card.

Percentage and payments income managed

Under the Cape York Initiative:

60%, 75% or 90% of a customer's regular fortnightly payments are
quarantined:

-   category P welfare payment

The percentage of a payment quarantined is determined by the Family
Responsibilities Commission (FRC) and can be changed throughout the
customer's participation on the Cashless Debit Card program

100% of lump sum payments are quarantined

Referring authority reviews

Reviews of Cashless Debit Card are held between Services Australia and
the Family Responsibilities Commission.

The Cape York Cashless Debit Card Team will conduct a review with the
referring authority:

-   35 days prior to the end of the Cashless Debit Card period, and
-   when requested by the referring authority. This request may be
    prompted by a Change in Circumstances notification which is
    automatically received by the referring authority via the Business
    Hub

The Resources page contains links to the Family Responsibilities
Commission (FRC) and the Queensland Government's Department of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Partnerships Welfare reform.

Related links

Cashless Debit Card

Cape York initiative in Business Hub

Actioning Business Hub requests

Personal Information Disclosure for the Cashless Debit Card Cape York
initiative

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
