
Switching Cashless Debit Card (CDC) card issuers 103-21113040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The document outlines how Cashless Debit Card participants in the
Northern Territory can switch between the two card issuers operating in
the NT.

CDC in the Northern Territory

Income managed participants in the Northern Territory (NT) can consent
to transition to the CDC. Income support customers in the NT, who are
not currently on IM can also volunteer for the CDC. For more
information, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory

Choosing Card Issuers

Traditional Credit Union (TCU) is the second card issuer available to
participants on the NT CDC measure. The second card issuer provides
participants with choice and benefits including the opportunity to have
their CDC account at the same financial institution as their personal
account, reduce stigma (by providing CDC cards that look similar to
other bank cards) and improve the customer service experience.

Note: for the purposes of the switch card issuer process the following
terms are used;

-   Losing card issuer is the CDC financial institution the participant
    is currently with prior to switching
-   Gaining card issuer is the CDC financial institution the participant
    has consented to switch to, noting there is a pending period where
    the participant may have active accounts with both financial
    institutions

General Eligibility

TCU is only available as a card issuer for participants on the NT CDC
measure. Participants in other CDC locations cannot choose their issuer.

Customers that are newly eligible to transition to (or volunteer for)
the CDC in the NT can choose either Indue or Traditional Credit Union
(TCU) as their card issuer and Service Officers can process the
participant's card issuer of choice within the IM to CDC transition
workflow.

Participants must:

have transitioned from IM to CDC in the NT, or

be currently transitioning from IM to CDC in the NT, and

-   be on a current income support payment (i.e. not SUS/CAN/CZR)
-   not have switched issuers more than four times in the previous 12
    months
-   have a positive CDC balance
-   remain with their card issuer for 60 days prior to switching

Note: participants who have selected TCU as their card issuer and
subsequently, move out of the NT can choose to remain on CDC with TCU,
or they can request to switch to Indue.

Differences between TCU and Indue

There are key differences between TCU and Indue. These include;

-   Face-to-face support options
-   Replacement card services
-   Personalised servicing
-   The ability for participants to have their personal bank account and
    their CDC account with one financial institution

See Resources for the Card Issuer Choice document.

Receiving and Activating a Cashless Debit Card

Once a request to switch is processed, the gaining card issuer will mail
a personalised card and relevant supporting information including how to
activate the card. If a participant has a payment nominee, the new
personalised cashless debit card and information on how to use it will
be mailed to them.

Personalised Cards can be activated:

-   online through the card issuer’s website
-   through the card issuer’s mobile App. This can be downloaded from
    the App Store or Google Play
-   by phoning the card issuer
-   in person at a TCU branch (only TCU customers)
-   visiting a Service Centre
-   getting help from a Remote Servicing Team

Impacts on CDC Payments and Expense Limits

CDC Payments

Participants who have successfully switched issuer may have regular
payments set up from their losing card issuer, for example, BPay or
Direct Debits to other third parties.

Participants are responsible for ceasing any regular payments with their
losing card issuer. Services Australia will stop directing payments to
the account with the losing card issuer after the gaining card issuer's
activates the account, or after 56 days.

Participants are also responsible for re-establishing and managing their
ongoing payment arrangements with their gaining card issuer.
Participants can contact their losing card issuer to request a statement
of all current deductions to support this process.

Transfer Limits

All currently approved Transfer Limits (Housing & Other Expenses) will
be automatically transferred to the gaining issuer.

Participants will not need to reapply for a Transfer Limit increase.

Impacts on Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) and Centrepay deductions

There will be no impact to existing RDS and Centrepay deductions when a
participant switches CDC issuer. These deductions will continue as they
did before.

Related links

Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Transition in the
Northern Territory

Participation in the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Transferring Cashless Debit Card (CDC) funds

Temporary Cashless Debit Cards (CDC)

Cashless Debit Card Vulnerable Customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
