
Undelivered Income Management expenses and actioning Work Items 103-01050060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the rules for undelivered regular and one-off
Income Management expenses.

When an expense fails to deliver

An expense due on a certain day may fail to deliver for a number of
reasons. One reason could be due to insufficient funds in the customer's
Income Management account at the time of attempted delivery.

There are rules that determine how long the system will continue to try
to pay the expense.

Note: if an expense is unable to be paid, a Work Item is then generated
on the Income Management Summary screen for discussion at the next
customer contact.

-   A one weekly regular expense will attempt to pay for 7 days. If the
    expense is still undelivered at the end of this period, the system
    will stop trying to pay the expense and it will remain unpaid for
    this period
-   A two weekly regular expense will attempt to pay for 14 days. If the
    expense is still undelivered at the end of this period, the system
    will stop trying to pay the expense and it will remain unpaid for
    this period
-   A one-off expense will attempt to pay for 2 days. After this period,
    the system will not attempt to pay again and the expense will remain
    unpaid

Informing customers

When a customer contacts the agency, they are to be informed of the
undelivered expense and what options may be available to meet the
expense. This could include:

-   ceasing the expense
-   coding a new one-off expense
-   varying the amount of a one-off expense
-   varying the amount of a regular expense
-   changing the one-off expense to a regular expense
-   using their discretionary funds to meet the unpaid expense

The Resources page contains links to mySupport, National transfer
numbers and Customer 13 and 1800 numbers in Office Locator, Income
Management and Access Support Centre intranet pages and Level 2 Income
Management Policy helpdesk webform.

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Work Items and messages for Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
