
Starting, changing or cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request of a business 103-09010080

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a business can request to start, change or
cancel a Centrepay deduction. It also describes the process if a
business makes a request.

On this Page:

Starting a Centrepay deduction

A business can start a new deduction by using Centrelink Business Online
Services (CBOS). It will need customer authorisation and the required
access levels. This is the preferred method.

Changing a Centrepay deduction

A business may change a current Centrepay deduction by using Centrelink
Business Online Services (CBOS). The business will need customer
authorisation to increase the deduction or target amount and the
required access levels. This is the preferred method.

A business cannot use CBOS to suspend a deduction or change a deduction
that is currently suspended. A business submits these requests by
calling the National Business Gateway (NBG) Centrepay helpdesk, provided
the change is not for an increase.

Cancelling a Centrepay deduction

A business may request a Centrepay deduction be cancelled at any time.
This can be done without customer authorisation by using Centrelink
Business Online Services (CBOS). This is the preferred method.

A business must request a Centrepay deduction be cancelled within 3
business days of becoming aware a customer is no longer receiving any
goods or services provided by the business.

A customer may be put into hardship if a Centrepay deduction is not
cancelled when requested. Service Officers should use their discretion
to prevent hardship or overpayments.

Centrepay deduction rules and limitations

Centrepay deductions can only be made from an eligible Centrelink
administered payment.

There are also deduction rules and limitations that mean a request
cannot be processed.

If a Service Officer is having difficulties coding a Centrepay deduction
request, the National Business Gateway - Centrepay helpdesk can be
contacted to assist with identifying the issue. The Centrepay helpdesk
will identify and advise the Service Officer of a workaround, or, if the
issue is to be referred to ICT for investigation.

Rent Deduction Scheme

A customer must be referred back to the relevant State/Territory
government housing authority if they wish to start a new, or vary a
current deduction for government housing. See Commencing a Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction or Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme
(RDS) deduction.

Cancellation requests can be actioned by Service Officers in Smart
Centres or service centres by manual processing via the Payment
Instruction Deduction Detail (PIDD) screen. State/territory government
housing deductions cannot be cancelled by the Centrepay guided
procedure. See Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction.

Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS)

Most businesses can start, change, or cancel a Centrepay deduction
electronically by using the following services within Centrelink
Business Online Services (CBOS):

Deductions and Payments Application (DAPA)

-   With the appropriate customer deduction authority, DAPA enables
    approved Centrepay businesses to add, change or cancel Centrepay
    deductions one at a time
-   DAPA also allows a Centrepay business to view current and future
    Centrepay deductions, as well as a recent history of payments made
    on behalf of Centrepay customers

Deductions Bulk Upload Service (DBUS)

-   With the appropriate customer deduction authority, DBUS enables
    approved Centrepay businesses to submit a bulk file of multiple
    customer requests, to add, change or cancel Centrepay deductions.
    The DBUS file is submitted via the Organisational Online Mail (OOM)
    System, the same portal through which deduction reports are
    delivered. The submitted file must meet specifications to pass
    validation checks before the changes are applied to the customer
    record
-   For a business to use CBOS to manage customer Centrepay deductions,
    the business must have the correct DAPA or CBUS roles applied in the
    Registration and Access Management for Business (RAMB) application

Customer deduction authority (consent)

A deduction authority is the consent and instructions from a customer or
the customer's representative.

Customer consent is required before a Centrepay deduction can be started
or increased. A deduction authority can be captured in writing,
verbally, or [Self service option is available] online. All deduction
authorities must include the minimum requirements as specified in the
Centrepay Procedural Guide for Businesses. See Resources for a link to
the Centrepay Procedural Guide for Businesses.

On receipt of a deduction authority, the Centrepay business must process
the deduction within 3 business days of receiving consent from a
customer.

Centrepay businesses must keep a copy of a customer’s deduction
authority for a period of 2 years after the deduction has ceased. It
must be securely stored in a manner that can be audited by Services
Australia, if required.

The Resources page contains a link to the Centrepay Policy and Terms,
Centrepay Procedural Guide for Businesses and contact details for the
National Business Gateway (NBG).

Related links

Starting, changing and cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request
of a customer

Recording an end date or target amount on a Centrepay deduction

Deductions options online

Searching for an approved Centrepay business

Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) access for Deduction and
Confirmation Programs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
