-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the second and final part of the process for
determining an exemption from Income Management for customers with
dependent children. It explains what evidence of responsible parenting
is needed in order to grant an exemption.

On this Page:

Compulsory school age children

Before following this procedure a financial vulnerability test must be
conducted. If this test determines that there have been no signs of
financial vulnerability in the last 12 months, the customer is then
required to provide evidence that they are undertaking responsible
parenting.

Customers with children of compulsory school age for the purposes of
Income Management need to provide evidence for one of the following, if
the child is:

-   enrolled in and attending school, and has no more than 5 absences
    for each of the previous 2 school terms that are not satisfactory to
    the person responsible for the operation of the school. This can be
    school reports that have a record of unauthorised absences
-   enrolled in and attending school and has more than 5 absences that
    are not satisfactory to a person responsible for the operation of
    the school, but the person is taking reasonable steps to ensure that
    the child attends school as required
-   being provided home based schooling that has been approved by the
    state/territory Department of Education. The written consent letter
    from the Department of Education approving home schooling would be
    required

Considering alternative activities for non-participation

If there are circumstances where it is not reasonable for a child to be
regularly attending school, or it is not reasonable for the parent to be
held responsible for the child's non-participation, alternative
activities to enrolment and regular attendance at school may be
considered. The written consent letter from the Department of Education
approving the child non-attendance in school would be required.

If both parents wish to apply for an exemption and have 50/50 shared
care of a child, only the 'primary carer' as per Services Australia
records can apply for an exemption 'with dependent children'. The other
carer will need to seek an exemption via the employment or 'without
dependent children' avenue.

Children under compulsory school age

Evidence is required for the following circumstances:

-   Immunisation appropriate for the child's age
-   A general health check-up for each child. This could be a report
    from a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner
-   Participation in an individualised plan for the child from an allied
    health professional. This could be a report from a speech therapist,
    occupational or physical therapist

If a customer has requested an exemption from Income Management and is
lodging health related evidence to prove a child has had their 3 to 4
year old health check, this evidence can also be used to satisfy the
requirement for the Healthy Start for School initiative.

Depending on the age of the child, the customer may also be required to
provide evidence of participation or engagement in early education
support services where those services are available or there are special
circumstances that make it difficult for the customer to find such
appropriate support services.

Service offer when granting an exemption

When a customer is granted an exemption from Income Management, they are
to be offered Voluntary Income Management.

The Resources page contains a link to the Income Management helpdesk
webform.

Related links

Customers requesting exemptions from Income Management

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording Exemption Service Offer for customers with dependent children

Requirements for an exemption from Income Management for customers with
dependent children

Conducting the financial vulnerability test for an exemption from Income
Management for customers with dependent children

Disbursement interview for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipient (LTWPR) Income Management

Voluntary Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
