
About payment delivery 103-03000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia delivers a variety of
payments on behalf of a range of government agencies.

Government intent

The agency delivers these payments to customers on either a weekly or
fortnightly basis (depending on the customer's circumstances). All
payments are passed to the Reserve Bank of Australia, who then transfers
the payments to the customer's financial institution (for example bank,
building society, credit union).

On this Page:

Payment delivery

Customers are able to nominate the way in which their payment is
delivered. Payments are delivered by two methods; direct credit to a
bank account owned and operated by them, or to the bank account of an
appointed payment nominee. The majority of customers are paid on a
fortnightly basis but weekly payments are available to eligible
customers who need assistance with budgeting. See Weekly payments.

In some instances, payments may not be received by the customer or they
are returned by the bank and require a replacement payment to be issued.
See Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments returned from financial institution.

There is also legislative protection for government payments that
restricts the amount of payments able to be used to repay an overdrawn
account or to repay a third party organisation.

Third party payments and deductions

Customers may also request that a payment be made to a third party. This
request must be made via a payment nominee arrangement and the request
must be in writing.

Third party payments can also be deductions that are to be taken out of
the customer's payment.

Customers are also able to request any deductions to be taken out of
their payments. Most requests need to be made in writing.

Payments to customers overseas

Customers who go overseas permanently have additional payment options
depending on the country in which the customer is living. These
customers are paid:

-   into an Australian bank account
-   into an overseas bank account (for some countries)
-   by cheque (from some countries where overseas bank account payments
    are not possible), or
-   by overseas payment voucher (OVP) (in exceptional circumstances
    only)

See Portability of payments and Delivery of payments to Centrelink
customers outside Australia.

Payment delivery to the customer's account

Payment delivery has been consolidated into two runs. These are:

-   overnight delivery for Newstart System (NSS) payments
-   36 hour delivery for Pension (PEN), Parenting Payment (PP), family
    assistance payments, ABSTUDY and Mobility (MOB) payments

The delivery of the payment is also dependent on the payment being
processed before the payment delivery strip times occur.

Payment reconciliation

Payment reconciliation is an automatic process performed daily to check
that the payments calculated for customers, match the actual payments
issued by the Payments System. If a discrepancy is identified between
calculated entitlement and actual payment delivered, a work item will be
created on the customer’s record to ensure the customer has not been
under or over paid.

Common reasons for a payment reconciliation discrepancy are:

-   Customers reporting late
-   Advance, Arrears or Urgent payments
-   Weekly payments
-   Holiday Processing

For information on actioning Payment Reconciliation DOCs see, Processing
Payment Reconciliation (PAYREC) DOCs.

Contents

Processing Payment Reconciliation (PAYREC) DOCs

Related links

Frequency of payments

Immediate payments

Payment deductions

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Income Management

Payment of arrears after reassessment

Payment delivery strip times

Payment destination

Payments to third parties

Replacement payments

Protection of customer payments

Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
