
103-05040030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines qualifications for advance payments of Family
Household Allowance (FHA) and how to process a request for an advance
payment. The advance payment is also known as the standard advance or
$500 advance.

On this Page:

Qualification for an advance payment

To qualify for an advance payment, an FHA customer must:

-   have been in receipt of an income support payment for a continuous
    period of more than 3 months
-   be residing in Australia
-   not owe any money to the Commonwealth that is being recovered or may
    be recovered by repayments from their FHA payments
-   not have received an advance payment in the previous 12 months
-   not have an existing advance payment (this does not include other
    types of advance payments such as Family Tax Benefit, Pharmaceutical
    Allowance or Mobility Allowance)
-   be eligible for an advance payment of at least $250
-   be able to repay the advance payment without suffering financial
    hardship

How often can an advance payment be paid?

Customers can receive one advance payment in any 12 month period,
regardless of the amount granted.

Customers must be advised of this before any advance is finalised, so
the customer has the option to change the amount of the advance
requested. A customer who receives an advance payment of any amount
between $250 and $500 will not be eligible for another standard advance
payment for a full 12 months. However, they may be eligible for an
advance of another payment such as Family Tax Benefit.

Amount of advance

An advance payment can only be granted if the customer can afford to
repay the advance without being placed in financial hardship. For this
reason, the customer will only be offered an amount they can afford,
based on the amount they state they can afford to repay each fortnight.
For example, if a customer states they have $30 left over each fortnight
they will only be offered an amount equal to 13 times this amount even
though they may otherwise be eligible for a higher amount.

If a reduced or suspended repayment arrangement is in place for an
existing advance, this should be reviewed before any new advance is
assessed. If repayments on the existing advance cannot be returned to
the standard rate without causing financial hardship, a further advance
should not be granted.

Minimum advance

The minimum amount for an advance payment is $250. If a customer applies
for less than $250 or they are not entitled to receive at least $250,
the application for the advance payment will be rejected.

Maximum advance

The smaller of:

-   the amount requested by the customer (up to $500)
-   the percentage of the customer's annual rate of payment worked out
    below (up to $500)

7% of their fortnightly payment rate x 26:

The fortnightly payment rate is 14 x the daily rate paid to the customer
on their last Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) before they applied for
the advance payment. It includes any Rent Assistance (RA),
Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) and Energy Supplement paid.

-   If the amount was nil, the customer wll not qualify for the advance
    payment
-   If the amount was reduced because of income, the amount they may be
    eligible for will be less than $500

In these cases, the customer may decide to withdraw their application
and reapply after they receive their next payment which will be paid at
a higher daily rate.

Applying for an advance payment

FHA customers can apply for an advance payment:

-   over the phone
-   in person
-   by lodging an Application for Advance Payment (SS352) form

Customers with a nominee arrangement

Only a customer or their correspondence nomimee can apply for an advance
payment.

If a customer with a nominee applies for an advance payment, the Service
Officer must determine if there are any restrictions preventing it being
granted.

-   If an involuntary nominee arrangement is in place, the advance
    payment can only be approved with the nominee's permission. If the
    customer has applied, the Service Officer must contact the nominee
-   If a voluntary nominee arrangement is in place, the Service Officer
    is to contact the nominee if the customer has applied and the
    Service Officer has concerns about the customer's capacity to
    understand what an advance payment is and their ability to make
    regular fortnightly repayments at the set rate

When approving an advance payment for a customer with a payment nominee,
ensure the customer is aware the payment will go to the nominee's bank
account as per their normal payments.

Payment of advance

FHA advance payments are paid as a lump sum into the customer's normal
bank account.

Unlike other advance payments, advance payments of FHA cannot be paid in
instalments.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions about advance
payment applications, payments, debts and repayments, and a link to the
Application for an Advance Payment (SS352) form.

Related links

Advances

Nominees

Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
