
Repaying a debt to obtain a Social Security advance payment 103-05040080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers in
processing an application for an advance payment for pension customers
or advance payment for non-pension customers where a lump sum repayment
of a debt has been made. The procedure is also relevant to Special
Employment Advance (SEA).

Excluded payments or allowances

This procedure does not apply to:

-   Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advances
-   Lump sum repayment of advance payment
-   Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Outstanding debt preventing receiving an advance payment

A customer may not meet the eligibility criteria for a standard advance
payment of their Social Security entitlement payment, Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Advance or SEA due to an outstanding debt to the Commonwealth. In
this case, the customer may make a lump sum repayment to finalise
recovery of the debt in order to meet the eligibility criteria for the
advance payment.

It is important to consider that the outstanding debt may not be the
only factor preventing the customer from receiving an advance payment.
Making a repayment against a debt will not address any other factors
affecting the eligibility for an advance payment.

Recording of repayment of the debt and over-ride procedure

The recording of the repayment of the debt through Essentials will not
immediately be reflected against the outstanding debt amount, and
therefore an additional step to override the rejection is required to
ensure the customer's entitlement to an advance payment is correctly
assessed.

Note: this over-ride procedure is only available for advance payments
where the repayment of the debt will not update until the next working
day and / or the remaining amount of less than $0.05 will not clear
until the next normal pay.

Cash procedure

Normal cash repayment procedures will need to be followed when a lump
sum payment by cash or cheque is received. Note: customers cannot repay
more than the outstanding amount of the debt, for example: if the
outstanding amount is $67.67, customer can only pay $67.65 and the
remaining $0.02 will be recovered from the next regular payment. As the
outstanding amount is less than $0.05, the advance rejection due to the
customer still having a debt can be overridden.

Related links

Advances

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment

Helping customers to build their financial capability

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
