
Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia 103-04020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the payment method options available to
Centrelink customers who leave Australia. The payment methods available
depend on if the departure is permanent or temporary, the country they
are travelling to and the type of payment.

Payment outside Australia

International Services (CIS) only pays customers receiving a social
security pension (other than Parenting Payment Single) who:

-   leave Australia and remain payable for more than 26 weeks, or
-   are paid under an International Agreement

If a customer intends to be outside Australia for less than 12 months,
payment will generally continue to their normal Australian bank account
every 2 weeks.

Responsibility for coding overseas bank accounts

Only staff in International Services (CIS) are to code overseas payment
arrangements.

CIS pension customer payment options

If an International Services (CIS) pension customer intends to be
outside Australia for more than 12 months, there are 3 possible payment
options available depending on the country in which the customer is
living:

-   Direct deposit into a bank account in Australia
-   Direct deposit into an overseas bank account
-   Cheque to an overseas address

Payments can be made to an Australian or overseas bank account held in
the name of the customer or their payment nominee. Direct deposit and
cheque payments may not be possible in some countries.

Group payments to institutions or organisations outside Australia are
not possible.

Payments options for non-CIS customers including family assistance

A customer who is not an International Services (CIS) pension customer
will continue to be paid into their Australian bank account every 2
weeks while their payment remains portable, no matter how long they are
outside Australia.

Due to system limitations, ongoing family assistance payments (for
example, Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Parental Leave Pay (PPL)), cannot
be paid to bank accounts outside Australia. These payments can only be
deposited into an Australian bank account every 2 weeks, regardless if
the customer has moved to another country.

For example, a person cannot receive their FTB into a bank account in
the Netherlands. These customers will need to arrange access to their
money from their normal Australian bank account while outside Australia.

However, CIS staff can issue a one-off payment to an address outside
Australia.

CIS pension customer payment frequency

Regular payments are made outside Australia every 4 weeks.

International Services (CIS) pension customers living in any country can
choose to continue to receive payment into an Australian bank account.
These customers' records can remain in the home environment with
payments every 2 weeks. Transferring customer records to Environment I
will result in payments every 4 weeks.

Customers receiving payment into their Australian bank account may
access the payment:

-   using an Automated Teller Machine (ATM), or
-   arrange for their bank to transfer money to their overseas bank
    account

Automated Clearing House country

Payment by direct deposit is mandatory for International Services (CIS)
pension customers wanting to be paid in:

-   an Automated Clearing House (ACH) country, or
-   a Legacy ACH country

Customers who live in an ACH country can be paid into an Australian bank
account. Unless a valid exemption reason exists, payment by cheque to an
ACH country or Legacy ACH country is no longer an option.

Worldlink Wire payments

International Services (CIS) pension customers wanting to be paid in a
Worldlink Wire (WWR) country generally have payments made by direct
deposit.

Customers who live in a WWR country can also have payments made into an
Australian bank account.

Payment by cheque is also an option. However, it should be discouraged
as a long-term payment option because it is not the quickest or most
secure way for the customer to receive their payment and may not be cost
effective for them.

Cheque payments

Cheque payment can be made to customers:

-   if the cheque payment option is available in the destination country
    (see Countries where there are payment limitations or sanctions),
    and
-   they are living in an ACH country or Legacy ACH country and have an
    acceptable exemption reason, or
-   they are living in a Worldlink Wire country, and do not want direct
    deposit payments made to either an Australian or overseas account.
    Note: direct deposit should be encouraged as it is safer and faster,
    but it is not mandatory for customers in these countries

Approval must be sought and given by International Programme before a
customer can be paid by cheque.

Cheques are sent every 4 weeks in local currency or US Dollars. Cheques
cannot be issued to an Australian address.

Currency of payments and exchange rates

Customers paid by direct deposit into a bank account outside Australia
will generally be paid in local currency every 4 weeks. If the local
currency cannot be used, US Dollars is generally paid. The Resources
page has links to the attachments Currency used for direct deposit and
Currency used for International cheque payments.

The payment is converted by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) using
the exchange rate applicable at the time of conversion on the day of
issue of the payment. Current and historical exchange rates applied to 4
weekly payments outside Australia are available on the International
Programme intranet page.

If payments are not made in the local currency, it is important to make
sure that the customer's bank account will accept payment in the
currency paid. The intermediary bank involved in the transfer of the
non-local currency payment to the beneficiary bank, will deduct a fee
from the customer's payment.

One-off payments or arrears to beneficiaries outside Australia

International Services (CIS) staff can use a Notice to prepare a Refund
Account (SF030) form to issue a one-off payment or arrears to a
Centrelink beneficiary outside Australia. Payment can only be to an
overseas bank account or an Australian bank account. Payment cannot be
via cheque.

An SF030 can be issued to:

-   a former family assistance payment customer who is entitled to
    arrears (for example, from reconciliation), but has left Australia
    and closed their Australian bank account
-   overseas estates, and for certain other payments, if no alternative
    is available

Countries where there are payment limitations or sanctions

Due to international sanctions, it is not possible to pay customers by
cheque or direct deposit in the following countries. The customer can
choose to have payments issued to a nominated Australian bank account or
to a payment nominee in Australia or another country.

-   Cuba
-   Iran
-   North Korea
-   Russia
-   Sudan
-   Syria

It is not possible to pay customers by cheque in the following countries
but they can be paid by direct deposit:

-   Austria
-   Belgium
-   Denmark
-   Finland
-   Ireland
-   Kenya
-   Malta
-   Netherlands
-   New Zealand
-   South Africa
-   Tunisia

Gathering international or Australian bank account details

The customer must provide their overseas bank account details by:

completing and returning the international Bank Account Details (AUS178)
form relevant for their country, or

giving a bank statement or document that shows their overseas bank
details, including:

-   relevant bank account details
-   currency of the account, and
-   name(s) of the account holder(s)

contacting International Services (CIS) and providing their overseas
bank account details over the phone. The customer will need to provide a
bank statement or completed AUS178 form of their new payment details as
soon as possible to confirm the details given over the phone

If the customer wants payment to their Australian bank account, the
details can be taken over the phone.

If the customer wants to appoint a payment nominee, the customer and
nominee are to complete and return the relevant Authorising a person or
organisation to enquire or act on your behalf form.

Contents

Issuing a one-off payment or arrears to a Centrelink beneficiary outside
Australia

Related links

Portability of payments

Inter-environment change of address (ICoA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
