
Centrelink Payment Summaries 103-07000000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides an overview of payment summaries for customers
and includes information about where it can be viewed. This document
will also provide directions to specific information about the
generation and issue of payment summaries, amendments and the transfer
of payment summary data to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and
Child Support.

Payment summary

The payment summary is calculated after the end of financial year
processing for customers who have received a reportable payment type
within the financial year period (1 July to 30 June). It is not
calculated on what the customer was entitled to during the financial
year. See Resources for an example.

The payment summary will display:

-   reportable or tax exempt payments including Remote Area Allowance
    and any tax deductions. See Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt)
    payments for Centrelink Payment Summary
-   any reportable or tax-exempt payment that is cancelled within the
    financial year. The payment summary is generated at the end of the
    financial year following the cancellation. See Tax features within
    the Centrelink system

The payment summary will not display:

-   any taxable payments that are not reportable to the ATO or Child
    Support. These payments cannot be reported by our Agency and should
    be reported separately by the customer. See Resources for more
    information
-   any non-taxable or exempt payments not reportable to the ATO

The payment summary is in single page format. The page is divided into 2
sections, the top half includes reference and customer payment
information. The bottom half includes general information about the
payment summary and how to get more information from the ATO.

When generated, payment summaries are then available from the Tax
Payment Summary screen (TXGS) in the first week of July for the relevant
financial year. All historical payment summaries are available from TXGS
screen. See Issuing Payment Summaries. Information relating to the
current financial year can be found on the TXYTD screen.

In some instances when a payment summary is generated a manual follow-up
(MFU) is created which must be finalised before the payment summary is
available. See General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax
activities.

Note: Payment Summaries are no longer automatically issued to the
customer via their preferred channel (surface mail or secure online
mail) after end of financial year processing.

[] Customers can view or obtain a copy of their payment summary through
self-service channels:

-   request a document option online
-   Express Plus Applications
-   Self-service terminals located at service centres
-   Via the IVR

If customers are unable to access their payment summary through the
self-service channels, a Service Officer can issue one. See Issuing
Payment Summaries.

Amendments

Where there is an adjustment made to a payment summary an amended
payment summary will generate and automatically issue to the customer
via their preferred channel.

Automatic adjustment of a payment summary already issued occurs in the
following circumstances:

-   Debt Processing - Where changes to debt details require the
    reportable components for a debt to be modified for amounts
    previously reported on the payment summary
-   Benefit Transfers (BTR) - Where a benefit transfer occurs with a
    transfer period affecting a previously issued payment summary(s).
    This requires an adjustment to reduce the period and amounts
    reported for the payment being transferred from. Arrears for the
    reportable payment the customer is transferring to will be included
    in the current financial year payment summary. There is no BTR
    processing for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) payments
-   Returned payments - Where a returned payment is received for a
    period covered by a previously issued payment summary for a previous
    financial year. The amount of the returned payment needs to be
    deducted from the payment summary as the customer did not receive
    this payment in the period reported

The Tax Payment Summary Detail (TXGD) screen will identify an amended
payment summary by displaying an amended reason in the Amend Rsn field,
otherwise the payment summary is an original.

Note: the TXGD screen is not available in Process Direct. Amendments to
Payment Summaries can be viewed in Customer First.

Lump Sum Arrears payments issued for a previous financial year that require documentation for ATO tax payable reassessment

Arrears payments of taxable income support payments issued for previous
financial years are reported on the payment summary in the financial
year in which they are received. This will result in a customer
receiving a higher reportable amount on their payment summary, which may
lead to additional tax obligations for the customer.

Arrears payments received where the entitlement is within the financial
year reported on the payment summary do not impact tax obligations.

The ATO have provisions where, in some circumstances, a customer can
offset their tax obligations though apportionment. In these instances,
the customer will contact us and advise they are applying for a tax
offset with the ATO. A breakdown of the arrears amounts apportioned
against the respective financial year must be calculated and provided to
the customer in a Q999 letter.

Service Officers can refer the enquiry to the Payment Summaries,
Allowances and Supplements team to complete the calculation.

Transfer of payment summary data to Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and Child Support

Following the end of financial year processing, the payment summary
information is electronically transmitted to:

-   ATO and automatically pre-filled into the mutual customers
    Individual Income Tax Return. See Electronic transfer of Payment
    Summary details to the Australian Taxation Office
-   Child Support for mutual customers. See Transfer of information
    between Centrelink and Child Support

Employers using income statement

Many employers now report straight to the ATO during the financial year.
This shows at the end of the financial year on an income statement in
the ATO online service through myGov. These employers no longer give
their employees a payment summary at the end of the financial year,
instead, their employees get their income statement using ATO online
services via myGov.

Services Australia does not use income statements to provide customer
payment details to the ATO. Payment details are recorded on the
Centrelink payment summary and sent to the ATO for pre-filling.

Lodging tax returns

Customers must work out if they need to lodge a tax return with the ATO.
To do this they can use the Do I need to lodge a tax return? tool on the
ATO website.

Customers should not lodge their tax return too early. If they lodge a
tax return before all their payment details are available in myTax, they
may have to amend their tax return later.

The Resources page contains information about changes affecting 2021-22
Centrelink payments summaries and links to the Australian Tax Office
(ATO) website.

Contents

Issuing Payment Summaries

Request for Part Year Tax Statement

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

How Payment Summaries are calculated

Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)

Related links

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office

Tax features within the Centrelink system

General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
