
Advance payment for non-pension customers 103-05040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the qualification requirements for non-pension
advance payments and how non-pension advance payment amounts are
calculated. The advance payment is also known as the standard advance or
$500 advance.

Standard advance

This procedure only relates to customers receiving:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Austudy
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Widow Allowance (WA)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

This procedure does not apply to:

-   Customers receiving Age Pension, Carer Payment (CP) or Disability
    Support Pension (DSP). Advance payment for pension customers has the
    relevant details for these customers.
-   Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans
-   Advance payments of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Special Employment Advance (SEA), or
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advances

Eligible customers can ask for an advance payment of part of their
future entitlement as a lump sum. There is no requirement for a customer
to advise Services Australia how they intend to use the advance payment.

Qualification for an advance payment

To qualify for an advance payment, a non-pension customer must:

be currently receiving one of:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Austudy
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Widow Allowance (WA)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

be in Australia when the application is lodged

not have an outstanding debt to the Commonwealth

not have received an advance payment in the previous 12 months

not have an existing advance payment - this does not include other types
of advance payments such as Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA), Family Tax
Benefit (FTB), or Mobility Allowance (MOB)

be eligible for an advance payment of at least $250 (this is the
legislated minimum advance amount payable)

be able to repay the advance payment without suffering financial
hardship

have been receiving a social security entitlement payment for a
continuous period of 3 months immediately before the customer's
application for the advance payment. Exception: ABSTUDY or Austudy
customers, and YA customers undertaking or about to undertake an
approved course of education or study, do not need to have received
income support for more than 3 months

Note: customers receiving Special Benefit (SpB) are not eligible to
apply for an advance payment, but periods on this payment may contribute
towards the 3 month continuous period. Customers who transitioned to JSP
will be eligible to apply for an advance payment from 20 March 2020, if
they meet all other eligibility requirements.

Applying for an advance payment

[] To apply for an advance payment, or to access other advance payment
options, customers should be strongly encouraged to use the available
digital channels, unless they are ineligible. Digital services available
include Online Services, Express Plus mobile app or Interactive Voice
Recognition (IVR).

Customers ineligible to use digital services to apply for an advance
are:

-   Customers who have a nominee arrangement in place
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers who are under 18 can claim by
    telephone or a service centre. They need to have a discussion either
    over the phone or in person before applying to make sure
    consideration has been taken regarding the impacts/risks or an
    advance payment
-   Weekly payment customers can apply via telephone or at a service
    centre but cannot use self service channels
-   Independent customers under 18 years of age are considered 'at risk'
    customers and must have a face-to-face interview when applying for
    an advance (except if rural and/or remote). Rurally isolated
    customers are those who live in rural or remote areas who live more
    than 90 minutes from a service centre and have no access to a
    service centre
-   Customers who face physical or intellectual barriers to accessing
    digital options can apply over the telephone or in person
-   Customers applying for Pharmaceutical Allowance Advance, Farm
    Household Allowance Advance and/or Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Note: if the customer states self-service options are unavailable, check
NNU, Newsflash and Bulletins to confirm this before processing the
Advance manually.

How often can an advance payment be paid?

Customers must be advised of how often they can be paid an advance, so
they have a chance to change the amount before any advance being
finalised.

Non-pension customers can receive one advance payment in any 12 month
period regardless of the amount granted. Exception: Parenting Payment
Single (PPS) customers who apply for an advance payment within 28 days
of becoming single may receive an advance payment regardless of when
they last received an advance payment. They must meet all other
qualification requirements.

A customer who receives an advance payment of any amount between $250
and $500 will not be eligible for another standard advance payment for a
full 12 months. The customer must be advised of this before the advance
is finalised so they have the option to increase the amount taken, if
they wish. However, the customer may be eligible for another type of
advance, for example:

-   Family Tax Benefit Advance
-   Special Employment Advance
-   Mobility Allowance Advance
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance Advance

Customers who transitioned to Jobseeker Payment (JSP) will have any
advances granted in the previous 12 months included when determining
their eligibility to an advance. This means, if the customer was granted
an advance before 20 March 2020, they will not be eligible for a new
advance payment for 12 months from the date of that advance payment.

'At Risk' customers

Customers who are independent Youth Allowance (YA) or independent
ABSTUDY recipients and are aged under 18 years are considered to be 'at
risk' and must have a face-to-face interview when applying for an
advance payment (except if rural and remote).

A thorough assessment of the customer's individual circumstances is
needed before the advance is assessed.

Rural and/or remote customers are those who live in rural or remote
areas who live more than 90 minutes from a service centre and have no
access to a service centre.

Weekly payment customers

Weekly payment customers cannot use self service channels to apply for
an advance payment. These customers must either have a face to face
interview or contact the Smart Centre.

Note: the details currently displayed in the advance payment workflow in
Customer First, about weekly payment customers needing face to face
contact to request an advance payment is incorrect.

Weekly payment customers need a thorough investigation of their
circumstances and ability to repay without placing themselves in
financial hardship before an advance being granted. If a recipient may
have a gambling, alcohol, other addiction or financial issues, consider
other options such as:

-   referring the recipient to a social worker
-   suggesting the customer apply for a smaller advance, or
-   after thoroughly assessing the customer's expenses, a rejection
    under hardship may be appropriate

Under no circumstances should an advance be granted and repayments
immediately reduced.

Customers must be made fully aware of the impacts of taking the offer of
an advance payment.

Before any advance is granted staff should take into consideration:

-   The customer's living arrangement. (Do they have stable
    accommodation? If not any additional expense may impact on their
    ability to secure this)
-   Any expenses they already have, that will be reducing their
    fortnightly available funds
-   Is the amount the customer has declared to have left each fortnight
    after expenses reasonable? As weekly payments is used to help
    customers with their budgeting needs, if the customer is declaring a
    large excess each fortnight, this may not be realistic and careful
    investigation of their financial situation may be needed

Customers with a Nominee Arrangement

If a customer with a nominee applies for an advance payment, the Service
Officer must determine if there are any restrictions preventing the
advance payment being granted. If an involuntary nominee arrangement is
in place, the Service Officer must contact the nominee before granting
the advance. If a voluntary nominee arrangement exists, the nominee
should be contacted if it is considered to be in the customer's best
interest.

Involuntary nominee arrangements

An involuntary nominee arrangement is where a third party has been given
legal right, as the result of a court, tribunal, guardianship or
administration order to administer the customer's affairs.

Under no circumstances is an advance payment to be granted at the
request of the customer without the nominee's approval

If the customer appears eligible for an advance payment, contact must be
made with the nominee and approval obtained before granting it

-   It will be extremely rare for an advance payment to be approved by
    the nominee, particularly where the nominee is a state/territory
    trustee organisation

If the nominee does not provide approval for the advance payment, or
cannot be contacted, the Service Officer must reject the application.
The name of the officer and/or organisation with who contact was made or
attempted, must be included in the DOC

If the nominee approves the granting of an advance payment, the names of
the officer contacted who provided the approval, and the organisation
must be annotated in the DOC

Under no circumstance is the nominee arrangement to be cancelled, or the
payment destination changed without approval from the nominee

Voluntary nominee arrangements

A voluntary arrangement is where a third party has been appointed as a
nominee at the request of the customer. Only the customer, or their
correspondence nominee on the customer's behalf, can apply for an
advance payment.

The Service Officer is to contact the nominee (correspondence or
payment) if possible before approving the advance payment to make sure
due consideration is given as to the benefit to the customer of granting
the advance, if:

the customer appears eligible for an advance payment, but during the
interaction with the customer, the Service Officer has concerns about
the customer's understanding of:

-   what an advance payment is
-   their capacity to repay
-   the excess income per fortnight they are declaring (after expenses)
    seems to be unrealistic, or
-   what the impact on their regular fortnightly payment the repayments
    will have, that is, they do not understand that their payment will
    be reduced by the fortnightly repayment amount
-   If the customer has different correspondence and payment nominees,
    the Service Officer will contact the correspondence nominee
-   if the customer has a payment nominee only, or the correspondence
    nominee cannot be contacted, the Service Officer is to discuss only
    very basic information about the application with the payment
    nominee, including:
    - that an application for an advance payment has been made, and
    - the fortnightly rate of repayments

If a reason for the advance application has been provided by the
customer, it should not be discussed with the payment nominee.

If the nominee cannot be contacted, the Service Officer is to action the
advance payment request and annotate the DOC with the information. The
customer should not be disadvantaged if the nominee cannot be contacted
in a timely manner.

If the nominee does not think payment of the advance is in the
customer's best interests, the Service Officer must discuss this with
the customer. If after this discussion the Service Officer is satisfied
that granting the advance payment will be for the customer's benefit and
will not place them in hardship, the Service Officer is to action the
request based on the customer's request and annotate the DOC with this
information.

Note: if the advance payment is to be approved for the customer who has
a payment nominee, make sure the customer is aware the payment will go
to the nominated person's bank account as per their normal payments.

Minimum amount of advance payment

For non-pension customers, the minimum advance payment payable is $250,
this is the minimum amount set by legislation. If a customer applies for
less than $250 or they are not entitled to receive more than $250, the
application for the advance payment will be rejected.

Maximum amount of advance payment

The maximum advance payment payable is the smaller of:

the amount requested by the customer (up to $500), or

the percentage of the customer's annual rate of payment worked out below
(up to $500). Note: for customers of Age Pension age receiving a
non-pension payment that attracts the Pension Supplement, the rate of
payment used to determine their advance payment amount includes the full
Pension Supplement and Clean Energy Supplement (CES) unless the minimum
Pension Supplement and CES is taken as a quarterly payment

-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers - 6% of their annual
    payment rate
-   Widow Allowance (WA) customers - 6% of their fortnightly payment
    rate x 26
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP), YA, PP partnered, ABSTUDY and Austudy
    customers - 7% of their fortnightly payment rate x 26

The fortnightly payment rate used in calculating advance payment
entitlement is 14 x the daily rate paid to the customer on their last
Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) before they applied for the advance
payment.

-   If the amount the person was paid on their last payday was nil, the
    customer will not qualify for the advance payment
-   If the amount of their payment is reduced because of income, the
    amount they may be eligible for will be less than $500

If this occurs, the customer may decide to withdraw their application
and reapply after they receive their next payment, which will be paid at
a higher daily rate. The fortnightly rate amount includes any Rent
Assistance (RA), Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) and CES payable and the
application of income and parental means tests.

Amount of advance payment based on affordability

An advance payment can only be granted if the customer can afford to
repay the advance without being placed in financial hardship. For this
reason, the agency will only offer an amount the customer can afford,
determined by the amount the customer states they can afford to repay
each fortnight.

For example, if a customer states they have $30 left over each fortnight
they will only be offered an amount equal to 13 times this amount even
though they may have otherwise been eligible for a higher amount.

If a reduced or suspended repayment arrangement is in place for an
existing advance (for example, FTB), this should be reviewed before any
new advance is assessed. If the repayments on the existing advance
cannot be returned to the standard rate without causing financial
hardship, then a further advance should not be granted.

The 'next possible advance date' field in the workflow

The Advance Payments workflow will provide the following information
about entitlement to future advances on the overview page:

-   If an advance is able to be paid now, today's date will display
-   If a date in the future can be determined, the date will be
    displayed. The customer should be advised that the next possible
    advance date is only a guide. If there is any change to their rate,
    the date they may be able to have an advance may also change. The
    information is not a guarantee of the date they will be eligible.
    The customer should not rely on this information as a basis to enter
    into financial obligations or incur expenses

[] The 'next possible advance date' will also be available via online
and phone self service channels.

Note: the date is calculated from the information currently held on the
record, and it may change if the customer's circumstances change. The
only accurate assessment is on the day of application.

Advance payments for income managed customers

Income Managed customers who apply for an advance payment will have 100%
of their advance (excluding Special Employment Advance (SEA)) income
managed. This means the full advance amount is credited to their Income
Management account and not their nominated bank account. Funds are
available in the Income Management account the following day and
customers can access these funds in the usual way, such as transferring
money to their BasicsCard or arranging payments to a Third Party
Organisation.

Dependent YA customers

Dependent Youth Allowance (YA) customers under 18 years of age who have
their regular YA payments directed to their parents may qualify for an
advance payment but the payment must be directed to the parents or
payment nominee, unless the parent directs otherwise. A parent cannot
claim an advance payment on behalf of their dependent YA child unless
the parent is a correspondence nominee.

ABSTUDY customers

Advance payments are not available to ABSTUDY secondary school boarding
students when payments are made via ABSTUDY boarding instalment to a
boarding school or hostel, or to students with an outstanding debt.

Dependent ABSTUDY students aged under 18 years must have parental
approval to receive an advance payment. A parent cannot claim an advance
payment on behalf of their dependent ABSTUDY child. Dependent ABSTUDY
customers aged under 18 who have their regular ABSTUDY payments directed
to their parent(s), will also have any advance payment directed to the
parent's account.

Dependent ABSTUDY students aged under 18 may apply for an advance
payment by phone or in person, with parental approval confirmed via a
statement from the parent or by telephone.

Other options if customer is not eligible for an advance payment

Centrepay

Centrepay is a free bill-paying service offered to customers receiving
Centrelink payments. Through Centrepay, they choose to pay bills by
having a regular amount deducted from their payments and transferred
electronically to an approved organisation.

The Resources page has an example of determining suitability for an
advance payment for weekly payment customers, frequently asked questions
(FAQs), and links to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Advances

Advance payment options online

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Advance payments of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payments obtained fraudulently without customer consent

Deletion of advance granted on incorrect record or fraudulently claimed

Helping customers to build their financial capability

Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Raising debts of advance payments

Repaying a debt to obtain a Social Security advance payment

Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment

Using Centrelink self service

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Transfer income managed funds to BasicsCard online

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
