
Exchange of information with Income Management and Cashless Debit Card referring authorities 103-17062000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the exchange of information between Services
Australia and referring authorities for the purposes of Income
Management and the Cashless Debit Card.

On this Page:

Information sharing

Information about a person may be disclosed to Services Australia by:

Cashless Debit Card

-   the Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) – customers may be
    referred for the Cashless Debit Card if the FRC believe it will
    benefit the customer and their family. Customers can also volunteer
    through the FRC to participant in the Cashless Debit Card program

Income Management

-   a State or Territory Child Protection Authority - Income Management
    is a tool for Child Protection Authorities to help protect children
    who are experiencing abuse or neglect
-   an Approved referring authority – Income Management provides another
    support tool for these authorities to assist individuals and/or
    families
-   State/territory housing authorities – Housing authorities can refer
    suitable customers for an assessment by a social worker for the
    Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) measure. The decision to
    income manage a customer’s payment sits with the social worker

Services Australia may disclose information about the person to the
authority where it relates to the customer’s Income Management or
Cashless Debit Card.

Information exchange between the Services Australia and referring authorities

Information exchanged between Services Australia and referring
authorities may in some instances be verbal, for example, via phone
contact between the Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) and the
referring authority during a review of the customer's Income Management
or Cashless Debit Card circumstances.

For Income Management, information will be exchanged via the Unified
Government Gateway (UGG).

For Cashless Debit Card in Cape York, information will be exchanged via
the Business Hub.

See Resources for details of information exchanged with referring
authorities via the UGG.

Note: a State or Territory Child Protection Authority, Supporting People
at Risk (SPaR) approved referring authority or a state or territory
housing authority can also refer a customer to Services Australia to
discuss Voluntary Income Management. Information would not be exchanged
in these circumstances and there is no obligation for the customer to
attend an appointment to discuss Income Management or enter into a
Voluntary Income Management Agreement.

Information exchange with state and territory housing authorities

There is no electronic exchange of information to notify housing
authorities of the outcome of Vulnerable or Voluntary Income Management
referrals.

Under the Public Interest Certificate (PIC), Services Australia can
release certain information (without a client’s consent) about mutual
customers who have been referred for a Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient assessment.

Advice provided to housing authorities is restricted to Income
Management Contact Officers (IMCO). Information is provided verbally
only.

Sharing information with Child Protection Authorities

As the priority for Child Protection Income Management (CPIM) customers
is the welfare of children, Child Protection Authorities can get basic
information from a customer's Centrelink record relating to eligibility
and feasibility of Income Management at the Disclosure of Information
(DOI) stage. For example, payment type, payment rate.

In extremely rare cases if there is a threat to the life, health or
welfare of a person, an Income Management Contact Officers (IMCO) may
disclose relevant information to the Child Protection Agency. In these
instances, Service Officers must get approval via their manager and the
Income Management Programme Helpdesk prior to disclosing any
information.

The Resources page contains a link for the Income Management Policy
Helpdesk support webform, tables of the information exchanged between
Services Australia and Child Protection Authorities and state and
territory housing authorities.

Related links

Unified Government Gateway (UGG)

Business Hub

Cashless Debit Card

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Income Management

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

Actioning Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests

Actioning Business Hub requests

State/Territory Authority's role in Child Protection Income Management
(CPIM)

Ongoing review for Cape York, Child Protection and Supporting People at
Risk Income Management (CPIM)

Services Australia role in Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

When to notify the Child Protection Authority case worker under Child
Protection Income Management (CPIM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
