
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of an approved referring authority in
SPaR Income Management.

Role of referring authority

The approved referring authority will:

-   make a request for Disclosure of Information (DOI) with Services
    Australia. This request for disclosure allows the referring
    authority to gather information to help them decide if a referral
    for Income Management is appropriate
-   advise the customer/s they are going to be referred to Services
    Australia for SPaR Income Management and explain what this means,
    including expected duration
-   provide Services Australia with a Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management for the customer. The
    notice will include contact details and duration of Income
    Management
-   provide Services Australia with a Revocation of Income Management or
    enhanced Income Management notice if it is to cease before the end
    of the original period stated in the Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management
-   advise Services Australia of any changes in the family's
    circumstances that may impact upon Income Management

Income Management referrals

The approved referring authority contact person is responsible for
providing Services Australia with details of customers who they have
determined would benefit from Income Management.

Once a customer has been referred by the relevant approved referring
authority, Services Australia will determine if they meet all other
eligibility criteria required under SPaR Income Management. If the
customer is eligible, their payments will be income managed.

Review and appeal rights

A customer can request a review of the approved referring authority's
decision to refer them to Services Australia for Income Management. See
Reviews of Income Management decisions.

In this case, Services Australia will refer the customer back to the
approved referring authority where regular internal review processes
should apply. The approved referring authority will provide customers
with information on their review and appeal rights.

Related links

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

Eligibility for Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
