
Auto Income Management and suspension of payments when a customer fails to attend Initial Assessment interview 103-01020020

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines suspension of payments for customers, as a result
of non-attendance at an Initial Assessment interview. This is for
ABSTUDY, Austudy, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment (PP) and
Youth Allowance (YA) customers only.

On this Page:

Auto Income Management

If the customer does not attend the Initial Assessment interview for
Income Management they will commence on Auto Income Management.

Notification of Income Management

Customers will be sent a letter to advise them Auto Income Management
has commenced, requesting they contact Services Australia to have an
Initial Assessment interview.

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Further attempts will be made by Services Australia to contact the
customer before the Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) places the
customer on Auto Income Management, where the customer has not attended
their Initial Assessment interview. This involves the Income Management
Contact Officer (IMCO) contacting the customer's relevant State or
Territory Child Protection Authority case worker.

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

Further attempts will be made by Service Australia to contact the
customer before the Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) places the
customer on Auto Income Management, where the customer has not attended
their Initial Assessment interview. This involves the Income Management
Contact Officer (IMCO) contacting the SPaR approved referring authority.

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)

Customers will be placed on Auto Income Management by the system if they
do not attend an Initial Assessment interview within the Income
Management engagement period.

Further attempts will be made by a Services Australia social worker to
contact the customer before Auto Income Management commences, where the
customer has been identified for Income Management under this measure,
as a result of a social worker determination.

Compulsory Income Management (CIM) - Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR)

The customer is placed on Auto Income Management by the system if they
do not attend an Initial Assessment interview within the Income
Management engagement period.

Nominee Income Management (NIM)

Customers who are identified as eligible for Income Management as a
result of their payment nominee relationship, will be manually placed on
Nominee Income Management (NIM) where they or their payment nominee have
not contacted Services Australia within the Income Management engagement
period. The customer's Income Management status will be the same as
their payment nominee, that is, Auto or Manual.

When a Nominee Income Management customer is placed on Manual Income
Management, the applicable advice letter will be issued and their
payments will not be suspended as a result of non-attendance at an
Initial Assessment interview.

Income Management account

While Auto Income Management applies, Income Management funds are held
in the customer's Income Management account. Depending on the Income
Management measure the customer is being income managed under, the
relevant percentage of the customer's income support and family payments
will be directed to their Income Management account. Deductions from the
account cannot be made until the customer makes contact with Services
Australia to discuss Income Management. However if there is an existing
Centrepay arrangement in place that is clearly for a priority need, the
Centrepay deduction can be converted to an Income Management expense
prior to the customer attending an Initial Assessment interview.

Initial Interview Assessment after Auto Income Management commences

If a customer contacts after being placed on Auto Income Management, an
Initial Assessment interview is required. This interview explains Income
Management to customers in detail and determines how income managed
funds can be best used to meet their and their family's priority needs.
Refer to Initial assessment of Income Management.

Customers who fail to attend their Income Management Initial Assessment
interview will have their payments suspended.

Note: policy authority only allows for suspension of ABSTUDY, Austudy,
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment (partnered and single) and
Youth Allowance. These payments will be automatically suspended after a
certain number of days from when Auto Income Management commenced
depending on the type of measure:

-   for Child Protection Income Management (CPIM), Supporting People at
    Risk (SPaR), Disengaged Youth (DEY), Long Term Welfare Payment
    Recipient (LTWPR) and Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR),
    after 28 days

Related links

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Initial Assessment interview for Child Protection Income Management
(CPIM)

Initial assessment interview for Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipients

Initial Assessment interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients

Nominee Income Management

Services Australia role in Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
