
Changing Enh1ment Period End Dates (EPED) 103-05030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to change a customer's lodgement/reporting
date or Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) and the effects this change
will have on the payments received by a customer.

Individual circumstances to be considered

Each request must be considered on the basis of a customer's individual
circumstances. It is important to ensure that any change will not cause
or intensify a customer's hardship and will assist with a customer's
ongoing and regular budgeting requirements. An example of this would be
changing the customer's payday to coincide with a major regular expense
like rent.

In most cases, the EPED for couples will be the same but, depending on
their payment type, their delivery dates may be different. Exceptions to
the aligning of payments for couples are listed on the Resources page.

A customer's EPED must not be changed to issue the customer with an
early payment when they are not eligible for an urgent payment.

Customers with debts

When an entitlement period is altered, the first payment will be an
arrears payment for a reduced period (less than 14 days) to align the
customer with their new payday code. Where customers have an outstanding
debt, the system will allocate any arrears payments to recover the debt.

Please discuss this with customer prior to making any changes,
discussing options such as repaying the debt prior to changing EPED, or
calling back on the first day of a new entitlement period to limit the
arrears payment.

Referral to specialists

Consecutive or regular requests may indicate that a customer is having
difficulty managing their finances, or other ongoing problems. In such
cases a Social Worker or other specialist officer may be able to provide
options for more appropriate ways of assisting the customer.

Note: a change of lodgement/reporting date, Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
offset date or EPED is not to be used as an urgent payment or to
generate an immediate payment. Frequent changes of the EPED should not
be done as this may cause corruption of the customer record.

Customers paid via group schedule

Customers who have their payment sent to an organisation through group
payments/group schedule cannot choose their own payment delivery day.
All customers paid via group schedule must be paid on delivery day 'D'.
These customers may be in a nursing home or paid to a Protective
Office/Guardianship Authority/state based authority, for example, a
Public Trustee.

Customers overseas

Customers who are overseas long term or permanently and are paid in
Environment I cannot choose their own payment delivery day.

When an EPED should be changed

The EPED is not the customer's payday. The customer's EPED will either
be 1 or 2 days prior to the payday, depending on the payment type.

Advise the customer that a change of payday code may shorten the length
of the first entitlement period (less than 14 days) and that they may
receive a reduced first payment after the change.

Staff must show strong support for these guidelines and the decisions
that are based on them.

As a guide to Service Officers the following is a list of situations
where a change of lodgement/reporting date or EPED may be approved.
These examples include but are not limited to:

-   If the customer is only in receipt of FTB and is not linked with a
    partner who is in receipt of a payment from Services Australia
-   If the customer is a statement reporter and is working in regular
    employment (part-time or casual), engaged in voluntary work or
    training on the usual day of lodgement or reporting. Note: care
    needs to be taken if changing an EPED when there is employment
    income. Consider how employment income will be assessed in a
    shortened entitlement period. Under no circumstance should the EPED
    be changed in order to change the effect of employment income
-   If the customer is a statement reporter and lives in a rural or
    remote area and the lodgement day does not coincide with visiting
    services, mail services (in the case of postal lodgers) or regular
    trips to town using transport services
-   The customer has requested the change to assist with their ongoing
    and regular budgeting, for example, requests to change the payday to
    coincide with major regular expenses such as rent. Note: a change of
    lodgement/reporting date, FTB offset date or EPED is not to be used
    as an urgent payment or to generate an immediate payment
-   The customer has a history of late lodgement/reporting. In these
    cases, it may be in the customer's interest to change their payday
    to a more suitable day in the week
-   Where a customer feels disadvantaged, due to the delay in payment
    arising from the lodgement date or EPED falling at the end of the
    week
-   Note: where a customer is suspended, their payment should be
    restored prior to changing EPED

Review EPED decision

As the decision is not legislatively based, the formal review and appeal
process does not apply. Any request to reconsider a rejection of a
request to change the customers EPED should be referred to

-   in Smart Centre Call - a Technical Peer Support (TPS) officer, or
-   in a service centre - Subject matter expert (SME) or the local
    leadership team

Urgent payments

It is important to remember that a change of lodgement/reporting date or
EPED is not an urgent payment, and should never be used to generate an
urgent payment. If the customer requires an urgent payment or assistance
with a one off circumstance, they are to be advised to apply for an
urgent payment and the request for a change of lodgement/reporting date
or EPED should be rejected.

In addition, if a customer's request for an urgent payment has already
been denied, and the request for a change of lodgement/reporting date or
EPED is not to assist with the customer's ongoing and regular budgeting
requirements, it should then be considered as a reconsideration of the
rejection of the urgent payment and the reconsideration should be
referred to

-   in Smart Centre Call - a Technical Peer Support (TPS) officer, or
-   in a service centre - Subject matter expert (SME) or the local
    leadership team

Note: if the customer has been paid an urgent payment within their last
fortnightly period, additional consideration should be taken when
assessing a request to change their date of lodgement/reporting or EPED,
as approving the request may cause or intensify the customer's hardship.

Urgent Payments under Weekly Payments

Customers cannot receive an urgent payment whilst they are on a weekly
payment cycle.

Any request for an urgent payment should be rejected as customers cannot
be removed from a weekly payment cycle to allow the urgent payment to be
made and then placed immediately back onto a weekly payment cycle.

If a customer is on the 'Legacy Model' and an urgent payment is granted
it will exit them and they will lose their 'grandfathering' status.
Should they request access to Weekly Payments again they will be placed
onto the New Model.

If a customer is issued a hardship advance or urgent payment in the
current entitlement period, staff will not be able to commence the
weekly payment cycle, until the current period has ended.

Weekly payments

For some customers, having payments delivered weekly may be a preferable
alternative to changing the customer's EPED. Customers who may be
eligible for weekly payments should not have their Entitlement Period
End Date (EPED) changed to enable the weekly payment to commence sooner,
as this could result in the customer experiencing budgeting issues in
the future.

When a customer in receipt of weekly payments becomes partnered their
pay codes must be aligned. The customer and partner's future payments
should be manually checked to ensure the correct rate of payment.

Income Management

For customers whose payments are income managed, changing a customer's
Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) or payment offset arrangements will
impact their Income Management expenses. In these situations, regular
Income Management expenses will need to be reviewed and updated to align
with the customer's new EPED or offset arrangements.

Home Equity Access Scheme

Changing the Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) for customers who
participate in the Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) will adversely
impact the fortnightly calculation of compound interest on the Scheme
loan balance. Interest is calculated and added to the customer’s loan
balance every fortnight on the EPED+1, therefore changing the EPED will
result in the interest being applied inconsistently. The EPED cannot be
changed for customers who participate in the Scheme, including those who
no longer receive fortnightly loan payments but have an outstanding loan
balance to repay.

The Resources page contains links to Office Locator and the Centrelink
Payments Calendar as well as exceptions to alignment of entitlement
periods for couples.

Contents

Offsetting Family Tax Benefit, Double Orphan Pension and Carer Allowance

Related links

Payment delivery strip times

Reporting overview

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Frequency of payments

Working Credit

Weekly payments

Calculating weekly payments

Special arrangements for customers with budgeting difficulties

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessing, coding and reviewing weekly payments

Coding Income Management expenses

Home Equity Access Scheme

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
