
Cashless Debit Card Vulnerable Participants 103-20052554

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information on Cashless Debit Card participants
deemed as vulnerable for the purpose of the Cashless Debit Card ONLY.

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Vulnerable Participants

'Vulnerable' for the purposes of the CDC, relates to online banking
only. A CDC participant is deemed as vulnerable regarding their CDC
account if they display low IT literacy skills and are unable to conduct
basic online banking themselves as this increases their risk of becoming
a victim of fraud.

If a participant has been deemed as vulnerable they have consented to
have their CDC online account deactivated and will have a Display on
Access (DOA) DOC on their record identifying them.

Participants deemed as vulnerable are still able to pay their rent,
bills and other expenses using their Cashless Debit Card and funds
available in their CDC account, however for all online transfers,
participants are required to contact the CDC Hotline for the
facilitation of these transfers.

Services officers are responsible for identifying participants who may
be at risk due to being unable to use online services because of very
low IT literacy skills (not because they don’t have access to the
internet or online banking). For more information, see Cashless Debit
Card.

CDC vulnerable requests:

-   Other Expenses Limit transfer - request to transfer participant's
    $200 Other Expenses Limit available every 28 days
-   Indue to Indue transfer - request to transfer funds internally from
    one CDC participant's Indue account to another CDC participant's
    Indue account
-   Housing - transfer of funds for a housing related expense. For
    example rent to a Real Estate, private rent, board and lodgings,
    mortgage repayments
-   Other Expenses - transfer of funds for an ongoing expense. For
    example, Loans and Pay Day Lenders, child care fees, gym fees
-   One-off expense/transfer - transfer of funds for a once off
    purchase/expense. For example, purchasing a car, motor bike or
    bicycle or second hand goods.

Resources contains a link to contact details for the Access Support
Centre and a link to Tutorials on the Indue website.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
