
Payment of income managed funds to Third Party Organisations (TPOs) 103-01050100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia deliver Income Management
payments to Third Party Organisations.

On this Page:

Using Income Management funds

Customers can request regular or one off payments to Third Party
Organisations (TPO) irrespective of whether they are contracted to
receive Income Management funds, as long as the purchase is not for
excluded goods or services.

When a customer requests a regular or one-off payment and they have
available funds, the customer should be encouraged to access their
income managed funds in the following order:

1.  BasicsCard at a BasicsCard Merchant
2.  regular deductions to a contracted TPO
3.  regular deductions to an un-contracted TPO
4.  one-off payment to a contracted TPO
5.  one- off payment to an un-contracted TPO

Customers requesting a regular or one-off payment to a BasicsCard
merchant using an un-contracted payment method should be strongly
encouraged to use their BasicsCard. Payments to these merchants via the
un-contracted payment methods should only be considered in exceptional
circumstances (for example EFTPOS outage, customer has lost their
BasicsCard and unable to wait for a replacement/is in hardship).

Note: in all circumstances when coding Changes to Income Management
expenses, staff must consider whether a customer's priority needs should
be reassessed. See Determining a person's priority needs for Income
Management.

Delivery of funds for payments to Third Party Organisations

In some circumstances, Income Management funds may be paid to Third
Party Organisations who do not have a contractual arrangement with the
agency. These payments are generally in the form of one-off payments,
however payments can also be made by the following methods:

-   Scheduled Transfer
-   BPAY
-   credit card

Note: These options are not the agency's preferred methods of payment,
as they do not provide timely access to funds as those to contracted
TPOs. The agency is also unable to provide assurances that the
customer’s Income Management funds will be handled in accordance with
the Merchant Terms and Conditions and the agency's Business Terms and
Conditions.

Urgent Requests for One off Payments

A request for an urgent one-off payment is dependent on the Third Party
Organsiation accepting the urgent payment method. For urgent request
guidelines, see Changes to Income Management expenses.

The Resources page contains attachments with a list of Income Management
Deduction Service Reasons.

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management expenses

Recall of Income Management funds

BasicsCard offer and issue of initial BasicsCard

Payment of fines from income managed funds

Business and organisation search tools

BasicsCard

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
