
Eligibility for Child Protection Income Management 103-01160050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility for Child Protection Income
Management. An Income Management Contact Officer will determine if a
person referred to Services Australia for Income Management by a State
or Territory Child Protection Authority case worker, is a mutual
customer and eligible for Income Management.

On this Page:

Eligibility criteria for Child Protection Income Management

To be eligible for Child Protection Income Management the customer or
their partner must be in receipt of a category H welfare payment and:

-   not be income managed under a measure higher in the hierarchy of
    Income Management measures
-   not have an excluded payment nominee for Income Management purposes,
    and
-   be referred for Income Management by a State or Territory Child
    Protection Authority

Note: it is not expected that a Child Protection Authority will refer a
customer for Income Management who does not live in a Child Protection
Income Management area. However, if a valid Notice for a customer who
does not reside within a declared area is received, Services Australia
can still apply Income Management to the customer. The customer's
address has no bearing on determining if a notice is valid or not.

The customer does not have to be living with the child/ren for their
payments to be income managed. If the Child Protection Authority
believes that a customer's income support payment is contributing to
meeting the priority needs of the child/ren, they can request that
Income Management be applied to the customer's payment.

Percentage and payments income managed

Under Child Protection Income Management:

-   70% of a customer’s category H and category I welfare payments are
    income managed, and
-   100% of lump sum payments are income managed

There are specific payments not income managed.

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

If a customer moves out of a Child Protection Income Management area
after being referred or commencing Income Management, their payments may
still be income managed. For more information, see Customer moves out of
an Income Management area.

Related links

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Actioning Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests

Initial Assessment interview for Child Protection Income Management
(CPIM)

Disbursement interview for Child Protection Income Management

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
