
How Payment Summaries are calculated 103-07030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For use by ICT Service Desk or Services Australia ICT staff only.

This document outlines how the details displayed on Payment Summaries
(previously known as group certificates) are calculated. Amounts on a
Payment Summary are based on receipt, that is, when the customer
receives the payment.

On this Page:

Contents of the Payment Summary

The payment summary contains the following information:

-   the start and end dates covered by the Payment Summary
-   the taxable and tax exempt amounts
-   the amount of Remote Area Allowance (RAA), if any
-   the tax withheld amount, if any

Payment Summaries for periods prior to 1 July 2003

Note: prior to 1 July 2003 Payment Summaries where calculated based on a
customer’s entitlement period and not the when the customer received the
payment.

The pre 1 July 2003 payment summaries are calculated using the Audit,
Determination and Daily files. These files are often referred to as the
'X-files', which are background files where all the information used to
calculate the payment summaries is stored.

Amounts on a pre 1 July 2003 Payment Summary are derived from
entitlement and adjustment details. Certain symbols are used in regard
to the naming of these files.

Payment Summaries for periods starting on or after 1 July 2003

From 1 July 2003 Payment Summaries are calculated using the Payment and
Debt files with information about benefit transfers extracted from the
DETM file. These files are often referred to as the 'X-files', which are
background files where all the information used to calculate the payment
summaries is stored.

Related links

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Issuing Payment Summaries

Request for Part Year Tax Statement

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
