-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines nominee arrangements and the impact on Income
Management (IM) and the BasicsCard and enhanced Income Management
(enhanced IM) and SmartCard.

Payment nominee definition

For the purposes of IM and enhanced IM, a payment nominee is a person or
organisation who has been nominated to receive payments on behalf of
another person (the 'principal'). A payment nominee includes:

-   an appointed nominee
-    the parent to whom payments for an under 18 year old Youth
    Allowance (YA) dependent customer are directed

A payment nominee is responsible for determining allocations from the
Income Management account or enhanced IM account of the principal.

Income Management:

A BasicsCard can be issued in the name of the principal or the payment
nominee, however only the payment nominee can request the card be issued
in the principal's name.

Enhanced Income Management:

The SmartCard will be issued to the payment nominee. The payment
nominee’s name is printed on the front of the card (the customer’s name
is printed underneath the nominee’s name), and the BSB code and account
number on the back of the card. The enhanced IM account that is linked
to the SmartCard is also managed by the customer’s Payment Nominee.

In some cases, the Payment Nominee may request for the SmartCard to be
issued in the principal’s name - in these cases, both the customer and
the Payment Nominee will have access to the enhanced IM account.

Under 18 YA dependent customers

If the parent/guardian receiving payments for an under 18 year old YA
dependent customer is welfare quarantined, there is currently no
functionality for the YA customer (principal) to be welfare quarantined
under Nominee IM (NIM) or Nominee enhanced IM (NeIM).

Service Officers should take the opportunity to remind YA customers that
once they turn 18, payments must be directed to an account in their own
name or a formal payment nominee arrangement must be made.

Note: the above restrictions relating to NIM or NeIM does not affect a
YA customer's eligibility for IM or enhanced IM in their own right.

Customer has a payment nominee

The appointment of a payment nominee can affect eligibility for IM or
enhanced IM. All IM or enhanced IM measures prohibit a customer being
placed on IM or enhanced IM if they have an excluded payment nominee. An
excluded payment nominee is defined as a payment nominee, under a formal
payment nominee arrangement, who is:

-   a public trustee, or
-    an individual who is not income managed, or
-    an organisation

If the customer has an excluded payment nominee for Income Management
(IM) and enhanced IM purposes and are currently on IM or enhanced IM,
welfare quarantining needs to end.

Since 4 September 2023 the IM program has closed to new customers. A
customer may become eligible for enhanced IM if their payment nominee
becomes welfare quarantined, they cease their payment nominee
arrangement or they appoint a payment nominee who is welfare quarantined
under IM or enhanced IM.

Where a customer has a payment nominee who is on IM or enhanced IM under
the Cape York, Child Protection, Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) or
Compulsory (Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients)
measures, they will be welfare quarantined under the same measure as
their payment nominee unless they are eligible under another measure in
their own right.

Customer is a payment nominee

A welfare quarantined customer currently acting as a payment nominee may
result in the principal also being welfare quarantined.

When a welfare quarantined person is a payment nominee and is on IM or
enhanced IM under the Cape York, Child Protection, Supporting People at
Risk or Compulsory (Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare Payment
Recipients) measures, the principal's payments will also be welfare
quarantined through their payment nominee. The principal will be welfare
quarantined under the same measure as the payment nominee, unless they
are eligible under another measure in their own right.

Note: customers on NIM or NeIM under the Disengaged Youth or Long Term
Welfare Payment Recipient measures are not eligible to apply for an
exemption.

Customers who are payment nominees and become eligible for enhanced IM
under the Cape York, Child Protection, Supporting People at Risk (SPaR)
or Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient measures, must have their
appointment reconsidered to determine whether the arrangement is
appropriate. Payment nominee arrangements should be cancelled or revoked
if not in the best interests of the principal.

Reviewing payment nominee arrangements

In all circumstances, whether a customer is or becomes a payment
nominee, or has or appoints a payment nominee, and either the principal
or payment nominee is referred to or identified as eligible for enhanced
IM, a review of the payment nominee arrangement should occur to ensure
the arrangement is in the best interests of the principal. Further, if
at any time there is concern that a nominee arrangement is not in the
best interests of a customer, the appointment must be reviewed. For
information on Nominee reviews refer to Reviewing nominee arrangements.

Customers referred for enhanced IM under the Cape York, Child
Protection, Supporting People at Risk or Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient measures, who have a payment nominee arrangement, or request a
payment nominee arrangement, must have the appointment investigated to
determine if the arrangement should be suspended, revoked or rejected,
regardless of whether the nominee is an excluded payment nominee.

The removal of a payment nominee for IM or enhanced IM will not be
suitable for all customers. As part of the decision making process, the
Service Officer will need to consider the customer's ability to manage
their discretionary funds and assess if other alternatives such as
Centrepay may be better able to assist the customer.

Care should be taken to ensure that the appointment of a payment nominee
is not as a direct result of the customer avoiding IM or enhanced IM

Payment nominees and the BasicsCard

A payment nominee can decide to have the principal issued with the
BasicsCard. The system identifies that a customer has a payment nominee,
and can choose to have the BasicsCard issued in the principal's name
rather than their own.

Should the payment nominee decide to have the card assigned to the
principal, the principal will need to sign the BasicsCard receipt.

Note: if an under 18 year old Youth Allowance customer is income managed
in their own right, and wishes to have the BasicsCard issued in their
parents name and the parent approves, the under 18 year old Youth
Allowance customer must appoint their parent as a formal payment
nominee.

Balance on Receipt (BOR)

If a payment nominee decides to have the BasicsCard issued in their name
they will be able to 'opt in' or 'opt out' of Balance on Receipt.

Should the payment nominee decide to have the BasicsCard issued in the
principal (customer) name then the principal should be asked if they
would like to 'opt in' or 'opt out' of Balance on Receipt.

Note: there are a group of national retailers that are BasicsCard
Balance on Receipt merchants. These merchants have the functionality to
print BasicsCard balances on EFTPOS receipts for customers.

Enhanced IM account and SmartCard

The SmartCard will be issued to the payment nominee. The enhanced IM
account that is linked to the SmartCard is also managed by the payment
nominee.

Payment nominees can access temporary SmartCards at selected service
centres, participating Agent sites, or Traditional Credit Union (TCU)
branches (TCU customers only), or from a visiting Remote Servicing Team
(RST).

Role of correspondence nominee

Under all of the IM and enhanced IM measures, correspondence nominees
can, where there is no payment nominee, generally act in place of, or on
behalf of, the customer in the application of Income Management.

If a correspondence nominee requests to enter or exit Voluntary IM or
enhanced IM on behalf of the principal, Services Australia must confirm
the principal (customer) is in agreement with the instructions of the
correspondence nominee prior to commencing or ending a Voluntary
Agreement.

A correspondence nominee can terminate the Voluntary Income Management
Agreement verbally at any time after completing the mandatory 13 week
period, by contacting the agency.

In some circumstances, a correspondence nominee can act in place of a
principal.

Appointment and removal of payment nominees

The appointment and removal of payment nominees should take into account
the following:

-   Payment nominee arrangements are not used as a way to avoid IM or
    enhanced IM
-    How the customer came to be referred to IM or enhanced IM
-    Whether the current nominee arrangements are in the best interests
    of the customer and their children
-    Any negative consequences of the direct payment of the customer's
    discretionary funds to the customer

The Resources page contains a table summarising which nominees can be
issued a BasicsCard (where the customer is on IM) or SmartCard for
customers on eIM and make allocations and sign forms and statements on
behalf of the customer.

Related links

Hierarchy and movement between Income Management and enhanced Income
Management measures - Overview

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)

Income Management

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Nominees

Nominee Income Management and enhanced Income Management

Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent
customers

Nominee Income Management (NIM) processing for National Business Gateway
(NBG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
