
Changes to Income Management priority needs 103-01040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 17 March 2021, Income Management (IM) customers based in the
Northern Territory (NT) can permanently transition to the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) program. Customers on an income support payment who are
living in the NT and are not currently on IM, will be able to volunteer
for the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) from this date.
For more information on this process or to initiate an IM to CDC
transition, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory, which also contains staff
resources and links to the transition overview Intranet page for
additional information.

This document explains when a customer requests a review of their
priority needs or they have had a change in their circumstances.

Review of priority needs

Before changing any regular expenses Service Officers are to confirm a
person's priority needs are being met.

When completing a review of priority needs, Service Officers are to also
review any voluntary deductions (that is, Centrepay and Rent Deduction
Scheme payments).

Under Child Protection Income Management (CPIM), the State or Territory
Child Protection Authority may recommend where income managed funds
should be directed. Social workers who assess a customer as a Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) can also recommend how income managed
funds should be directed.

Service Officers do not need to comply with the recommendation, but
should document how these needs will be met when conducting an
assessment or reviewing a customer's priority needs.

An understanding of how to determine a customer's priority needs is
required, before making any changes.

Related links

Priority needs and expense allocation

Coding Income Management expenses

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Work Items and messages for Income Management

Payment of School Meals Programs (SMP) expenses from Income Managed
funds or Centrepay

Income Management Summary Screen

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
