
Reissuing a rejected payment 103-04040090

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how rejected payments are identified and how the
different types of rejected payments can be reissued.

Rejected Payments

Rejected payments refers to those payments, or part thereof, that have
not successfully been delivered. Certain components of a payment may be
rejected by the system. In these cases, it is not necessary to reissue
the entire amount, only the rejected components should be reissued.

While rejected and returned payments both display as 'RTN' in Customer
First, they are separate processes.

This file does not cover rejected Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) or
New Payments Platform (NPP) payments. To action these, please refer to
one of the files that relates to these payment methods (see Related
links).

Returned payments

A rejected payment is different from a returned payment. A returned
payment refers to when a customer, financial institution or third party
has received a payment in error and they wish to return it to Services
Australia. If a returned payment is received, process the returned
payment.

To re-issue a returned payment to an updated payment destination, see
Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments returned from financial institution.

Note: Service Officers must determine whether the customer is entitled
to the payment before re-issuing.

Possible rejected payment scenarios

Arrears

When granting/restoring a customer's payment with a backdated start
date, there is a limit on the amount of money that can be reissued in a
single payment. If the payment is over the system arrears limit, the
payment will be rejected. The system arrears limit is the amount that is
able to be issued in 1 payment per day minus $500 (to allow for any
regular payment that may also issue). When the amount is over the limit,
when payment is reissued, the system should establish the daily limit
minus $500 and issue the payments over the required number of days.

Group Payment Schedule

If the customer is being paid via a group payment schedule, an immediate
payment (for example, an Advance Payment, a reissued payment) will
automatically reject if it was issued on any code other than Entitlement
Period End Day (EPED) code B. Payment can be reissued but will not be
received by the organisation until the next group schedule payday.

Overseas Bank Accounts (Family assistance payments)

Family assistance payments (for example, Family Tax Benefit) can only be
deposited into an Australian bank account every 2 weeks no matter which
payment method is chosen by the customer.

If a former family assistance customer is entitled to arrears (for
example, from FAO reconciliation) but has moved overseas and closed
their Australian bank account these payments will reject. Centrelink
International Services (CIS) staff can issue a one-off payment to an
overseas address. A one-off payment can also be used to issue payments
to overseas estates and for certain other payments if no alternative
option is available.

Nominees

Where the customer has a nominee acting on their behalf the payment
should be made to the account the regular payment is usually delivered
to (that is, if a payment nominee exists, the rejected payment should be
reissued to the nominee's bank account).

Age Pension and Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) payments

If Age Pension and PBS payments are granted on the same day and the
combined payment exceeds the system limitation amount of $80,000, the
payment will reject. A manual grant letter (Q999) should be sent once
all the payments have been reissued.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) delivered by an employer

The Paid Parental Leave Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT) is responsible
for re-issuing PPL returned payments where PPL delivery is via the
employer.

Resources contains information about searching for rejected payment
activities, and a full list of payment rejection reasons.

Related links

Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments at a customer's request

Replacing direct credits, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments returned from financial institution

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Immediate payment by payment method New Payments Platform (NPP)

Protection of customer payments

Processing a returned payment

Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia

Payment Delivery

Group payment schedules and payments to organisations

Service Officers role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart
Centres

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
