-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for when a customer makes contact to
advise that a payment has not been received or the payment was made to
the wrong account, branch or financial institution, and the customer
does not have legal access to the account. Services Australia has a
responsibility to make sure that the customer's payment is replaced (if
eligible) as soon as possible.

Note: this procedure covers direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP)
or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments. For Electronic Benefit
Transfer (EBT) cards, see Replacing an Electronic Benefits Transfer
(EBT) card at a customer’s request.

Student Assistance Act

The Student Assistance Act 1973 now gives the agency the power to
request the recovery from financial institutions of incorrect ABSTUDY
and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) scheme payments and those for
deceased customers.

Returned payment

If the customer advises payment has not been received, and the system
advises that the financial institution has returned the payment, follow
the process in Reissue a payment returned from a financial institution.

For Child Care Subsidy (CCS) payments, check the Payment List in
Workspace. Returned payments will have a Returns Reason in the text
field.

Payments made to nominee or third party

For customers who have payments made either via a nominee or a third
party, the replacement payment is made to the nominee or third party,
unless the nominee or a third party agree for the payment to be made to
the customer.

Unauthorised changes to a customer's payment destination

When dealing with customers who are the victims of unauthorised access
to online accounts, and their payment destinations have been altered
without their consent or knowledge, the suspected fraud must be reported
via the 'Report a Suspected Fraud' tool and the customer's online
account must be suspended pending investigation of the security breach.
For more information, see Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink
self service access.

Aspects of the record should also be checked to make sure that the
record has not been intertwined with another customer record. If it is
determined that intertwining has occurred an Intertwined Referral Form
must be completed.

Income Management customers

For customers whose payments are income managed, payments not yet
returned from a financial institution can only be issued where the
customer is in financial hardship and subject to approval by the Income
Management helpdesk.

Checks before reissuing

Before reissuing the payment to the customer, the Service Officer must:

-   check if a delay in processing and crediting the customer's account
    has occurred at the Financial Institution for all payment methods
    except payments delivered via the New Payments Platform (NPP)
-   check the customer has legal access to bank account (is the account
    in the customer’s name?)
-   update the customer's payment destination details, and
-   check that the customer is entitled to the payment

Related links

Replacement payments

Reissue a payment returned from a financial institution

Request the return of a payment made to an incorrect recipient

Requesting refunds from third parties

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Protection of customer payments

Changing payment destination

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Payments for students under 18 years paid to student, parent or a third
party

Immediate payment by payment method New Payment Platform (NPP)

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
