
Billing at Source and Billing in Arrears for Centrepay businesses 103-09020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps required to add, update or remove
Billing in Arrears, view or reissue a tax invoice sent to a Centrepay
business as well as the process for a rejected invoice for a Billing in
Arrears business.

Billing at Source and Billing in Arrears for Centrepay businesses

Most Centrepay businesses are charged a transaction fee. As per the
Centrepay Policy and Terms, this fee is not to be passed on to Centrepay
customers.

See Processing a Centrepay Business Application for information about
Centrepay fee-free businesses.

The Centrepay fee can be paid via the following options:

-   Billing at Source (BAS), this method is automatically applied to all
    Centrepay businesses. The fees and GST are automatically withheld
    from customer’s Centrepay deductions before they are paid to the
    business
-   Billing in Arrears (BIA), this is an additional condition which some
    businesses may be approved for. Billing in Arrears allows the
    business to receive the full customer deduction amount and be
    periodically billed for the fees

Approving Billing in Arrears for a Centrepay business

On request from a business, BIA can be approved by National business
Gateway - Business application staff or Third Party Programmes team for
real estate agents, councils, and schools, except where a prior
determination has been made by Deduction and Confirmation - Centrepay.

Staff should consider the reason the business has asked for BIA to be
applied and the number of deductions the business expects to receive. If
the business expects to have less than 9 customers, the BIA request
should be rejected on this basis.

All other requests for BIA must be referred to Deduction and
Confirmation Branch - Centrepay for a decision.

Tax invoices for a Centrepay business

A Centrepay business can receive the following tax invoices:

Billing at Source tax invoice: Services Australia will automatically
issue a compulsory tax invoice for businesses who are billed at source
via the Organisational Online Mail (OOM) system. The invoice will be
produced on or after the last working day of the calendar month when any
GST has been collected in that month.

The tax invoice will provide the following information to the business:

-   total number of deductions
-   total amount of all deductions (dollar amount)
-   total fees including GST
-   GST component
-   net payment delivered to organisation

Billing in Arrears tax invoice: Services Australia will automatically
issue a compulsory tax invoice 10 business days from the end of each
month. The tax invoice will be emailed to the ‘invoice’ contact on the
Organisation Contact Summary (OSCD) screen of the business record.

The tax invoice will provide the following information to the business:

-   Total number of deductions at what fee price
-   GST component
-   Total amount due

Billing in Arrears tax invoices may fail to generate due to a number of
reasons. An 'auto invoice rejected report' is generated and sent to
National Business Gateway - Centrepay.

The Resources page contains links to Contact Details for appropriate
teams, a link to the Services Australia website for Centrepay Procedural
Guide for Businesses and the Centrepay Policy and Terms.

Related links

Centrelink Deduction Reports and Organisational Online Mail (OOM) for
Deduction and Confirmation Programmes

Processing a Centrepay Business Application

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
