
Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notices assessed by social workers 103-01180030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information in relation to reviews and
reconsiderations undertaken for a customer assessed by a social worker
as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)

On this Page:

Social worker initiated review of VWPR Notice

If a customer is assessed by a social worker for VWPR, they will have a
VWPR Notice applied and only a social worker can end, continue or review
the Notice.

A social worker can review a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
Notice at any time. This review may be as a result of contact with the
customer, or an indication that circumstances have changed
significantly.

When to review VWPR notice

The VWPR Notice is reviewed by a social worker at the following times:

-   a Manual Follow Up (MFU) will be generated 35 days before the VWPR
    Notice end date (unless changed by the social worker), for the
    social worker to conduct a review. This is a mandatory review prior
    to the Notice expiring
-   on a date/s specified by the social worker at the time the VWPR
    Notice commences (this may be scheduled at 3 months, 6 months, or
    any other date)

Social workers will attempt to contact the customer to complete the
review, but can also complete the review by file assessment, on the
basis of relevant documents and information available.

See Outcome of Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) reviews
below.

Request for reconsideration of VWPR Notice

Customers are able to have a social worker reconsider the VWPR Notice
once every 90 days.

If a customer requests a reconsideration, the social worker is required
to undertake a new assessment of the customer's current circumstances,
with the customer given the opportunity to provide evidence to support
the reconsideration.

A history of reconsideration requests made by the customer can be viewed
on the Vulnerable Notice screen. The history of reconsiderations
include:

-   date of the reconsideration request
-   reason for reconsideration, and
-   outcome of reconsideration request

See Outcome of Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) reviews
below.

Request to appeal decision

A customer can appeal the original VWPR Notice by a social worker that
declares the customer is a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient, at any
time.

The restrictions on the customer requesting a reconsideration of their
VWPR Notice does not impact appealing the original decision.

Under the appeal process, a social worker (not the decision maker) is
required to undertake a review of the original decision and determine if
the Notice assessment of the customer is correct.

A new Social Worker Information System (SWIS) Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) report is required if new information is provided and
the original decision is to be overturned.

Customer moves out of declared IM area (portability review)

If a customer with a VWPR Notice moves outside of a declared Income
Management area, and updates their permanent address, an activity is
triggered for a social worker to review the customer's circumstances.

This prompts the social worker to complete a wellbeing review the
customer's circumstances, and make contact with the customer's local
social workers for further wellbeing checks.

If the social worker determines that VWPR may need to end, they will
undertake a formal review of the Notice (and complete a SWIS report).

If no formal review is required, the social worker will record the
relevant information in SWIS case notes.

Considerations for review of VWPR Notice by a social worker

When undertaking any form of review of the VWPR Notice a social worker
must consider:

-   Whether the customer is experiencing an indicator of vulnerability,
    or if they are likely to experience an indicator if VWPR is not
    continued, including:
-   financial hardship
-   financial exploitation
-   failure to undertake reasonable self care
-   homelessness or risk of homelessness
-   Whether the customer is not meeting their priority needs, or it is
    likely they would not meet their priority needs if VWPR is not
    continued
-   Whether Income Management is an appropriate support for the customer
    to meet their responsibilities, build and maintain self care and
    manage their money

Voluntary Income Management

Under the hierarchy of Income Management measures, social workers cannot
consider Voluntary Income Management unless the customer no longer meets
the decision making principles to determine a customer a Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipient.

A review of the VWPR Notice requires the completion of a Social Worker
Information System (SWIS) Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
review report and the outcome of the review to be recorded in the VWPR
Notice workflow.

Outcome of VWPR Notice reviews

After undertaking a review of the VWPR Notice, the social worker must
record the outcome of the review in the Vulnerable Notice workflow.

If the review of the VWPR Notice is at the customer's request, either a
review of the determination or a reconsideration of circumstances, a
Social Work Information System (SWIS) Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) review report must also be completed.

Updates to the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notice can
only be made by a social worker with delegation.

Options for social worker

The social worker has a number of options to consider:

-   Continue the Notice: There is no change to the period of the current
    Notice
-   Vary the Notice: The social worker can decide to reduce or extend
    the period of the VWPR Notice, e.g. reduce the Notice from 12 months
    to 9 months, or extend the Notice from 3 months to 6 months
-   Cease or Revoke the Notice: The social worker can decide to end the
    VWPR Notice. A customer is to be exited from Income Management once
    their VWPR Notice has ended. However if a customer is eligible for a
    lower compulsory measure of Income Management, the customer will
    continue to be income managed under that measure

Customers exiting Income Management

Customers who are not eligible for another compulsory measure of Income
Management and are exiting Income Management can choose to attend a
Disbursement interview to discuss how they can continue meeting their
ongoing expenses and how any residual funds will be disbursed.

Customers can also choose to continue with Voluntary Income Management
(if eligible).

If a customer does not make contact to discuss the disbursement of their
residual funds the Auto Disbursement rules will apply.

Related links

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Income Management

Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) measure

Determining and recording eligibility for Income Management as a
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) by a social worker

Reviews of Income Management decisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
