
Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Volunteers 103-21112947

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to end a volunteer’s participation on the
Cashless Debit Card (CDC) when requested.

Eligibility criteria

From 1 August 2022 customers can no longer volunteer for the Cashless
Debit Card. Existing voluntary participants may continue on the program
until a decision has been made by Government on the future of Cashless
Welfare.

Restricted percentage for volunteers

The default percentage of restricted funds for volunteers:

-   Ceduna, East Kimberly, Goldfields and Bundaberg and Hervey Bay
    measures are 80%
-   Northern Territory are 50%.

The remaining funds will be paid to the participant’s unrestricted bank
account.

Choice of Card Issuers

CDC volunteer participants in the NT have a choice of two card issuers
Indue Ltd (Indue) or Traditional Credit Union (TCU). The Card issuers
are responsible for all card related services including:

-   creating bank accounts for participants
-   issuing and activating personalised cards
-   balance checking and transaction history
-   replacing lost or stolen cards
-   assisting participants set up deductions and transfers from the CDC
-   other associated banking services

Participants should use their online account or contact the card issuer
for support on:

-   assistance accessing funds
-   card transfer, BPAY and direct debit for approved purchases

Both card issuers' websites have a series of ‘How-To’ tutorial videos
that provide a step-by-step process on how to use the CDC, including:

-   how to login to your account
-   direct debit payments
-   BPAY payments
-   online transfers from the CDC account.

TCU can help with all transactional and banking enquiries between the
hours of 9:00 am to 4:30 pm (AEST) Monday to Friday. In addition the
service offer above, TCU also has:

-   a branch network in the NT that provides ‘face to face’ support:
-   in-language support in branches and via their Call Centre,
-   a network of ATMs located in remote communities for free balance
    checking.

Indue helps participants with all transactional and banking enquiries
between the hours of 8:00 am to 8:00 pm (AEST) Monday to Friday and 8:00
am to 1:00 pm (AEST) Saturday.

Volunteers requesting to end participation on the CDC

Voluntary CDC participants will have their participation ended
immediately upon request, with their next full payment being delivered
to their normal bank account. Service Officers can direct voluntary
participants to the CDC Hotline to end their arrangement.

Voluntary participants residing in the NT who choose to end their
participation may become eligible for a compulsory IM measure when
removed from the program.

The Resources page contains a link to the CDC intranet page, and links
to Services Australia, Department of Social Services (DSS) and the card
issuer websites.

Related links

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Participation in the Cashless Debit Card

Temporary Cashless Debit Cards (CDC)

Switching Cashless Debit Card (CDC) card issuers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
