-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the payment arrangements for Youth Allowance (YA)
dependent 16 or 17 year old customers. Payments for these customers are
paid to the parent(s) unless the parent requests the payment be directed
to the customer.

On this Page:

Youth Allowance (YA) directed to customer's account

YA customers who are under 18 but being paid as an independent person
may have their payment directed to their own bank account, without
permission from their parent(s).

If the YA customer is dependent but has turned 18 then the payment is
directed to their account.

YA directed to parent's account

To establish whether the customer's YA payment should be directed to a
parent's bank account, check whether the customer is claiming a
dependent rate of YA and that they are under 18 years of age.

To do this check for new claims:

Check responses to the following questions on the online claim or Claim
for Youth Allowance (SY001) form:

-   Marital Status
-   Dependent Children
-   Homeless
-   Independence questions

Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH) Assessments

Payment to the young person should also be considered if the young
person is claiming independence on the grounds of it being Unreasonable
to Live at Home (UTLAH). For further information see Unreasonable to
live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance (YA),
Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary
Access Payment (TAP). While a claim for UTLAH is being considered, YA
can continue to be paid on the basis of parental means test. If a young
person is claiming UTLAH this may be an indicator that the payment is
not being used for the customer's benefit, especially where the young
person is considered to be at risk.

The assessment or recommendation of whether the YA should be directed to
the young person is often made by the Social Worker but it can be made
by the Service Officer.

If in any doubt a Service Officer should consult with a Social Worker.
However the YA should not continue to be paid to the parent if the
Service Officer is satisfied that the payment is not being used for the
customer's benefit. The Service Officer does not have to wait for the
determination of UTLAH to make this decision.

It is not acceptable to suspend or cancel a payment while making a
decision about UTLAH or payment determination. A payment should only be
suspended/cancelled if the Service Officer is satisfied that the person
is not qualified for YA or the payment isn't payable.

The Resources page contains an example of when payments should or should
not be made to parents, and a link to the Claim for Youth Allowance
(SY001) form.

Related links

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Payments for students under 18 years paid to student, parent or a third
party

Payment to under 18 year old customers for Youth Allowance (YA)

Changing payment destination

Rejecting a Centrelink claim

Protection of customer payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
