
Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen 103-07040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to correctly use the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD)
screen. Services Australia has payment information held on a customer's
Centrelink record, which provides details of taxable and reportable
non-taxable amounts, the tax withheld from payments and the Remote Area
Allowance (RAA) amounts.

On this Page:

Access to payment summary details

Centrelink payment summary details for all customers who receive a
reportable Centrelink payment within the financial year are
electronically transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) if
they are pre-filled to a customer's income tax return. For more
information, see Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

Note: customers can access their Payment Summary through a range of self
service options.

Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen

The TXYTD screen allows staff to retrieve a customer's payment details,
as they will appear (in summary form) on a Centrelink payment summary
for a given period.

The income details provided on the screen uses the same payment details
that are produced on Centrelink payment summaries and takes into account
information such as overpayments, benefit transfers and other tax
adjustments.

Any future payments are not to be included in the retrieval of
information.

The TXYTD screen does not replace payment summaries but is able to be
used to cross check the payment details made to a customer who is
currently receiving or has received reportable payments.

The TXYTD screen can be accessed in Customer First or Process Direct.

In Customer First, the TXYTD screen shows details for payment summary
periods via a web browser hyperlink using Microsoft Internet explorer.
Details before 1 July 2003 will show directly on the TXYTD screen.

In Process Direct the TXYTD screen shows payment summary year to date
details from the start of the current financial year until the end of
the customer’s most recent payment period. Payment information for
previous financial years is not available in Process Direct.

Related links

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Issuing Payment Summaries

Request for Part Year Tax Statement

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

How Payment Summaries are calculated

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
