
Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service Officers 103-01180050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details for Service Officers about exclusions
from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
Youth Income Management.

Customer suicidal or at immediate risk

As per normal business process, if a customer is suicidal or at
immediate risk, they should be referred for assistance immediately.

VWPR Youth Income Management exclusion categories

Automatically triggered VWPR Youth Income Management customers may be
eligible for an exclusion from Income Management.

Customers will automatically be granted an exclusion from VWPR Youth
Income Management if they have received less than 25% of their maximum
basic rate of payment for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights.

Non-payment periods or reduced rates of payment due to non-compliance
are not included when determining eligibility. However, customers may
request to be assessed for this exclusion if they believe they meet this
criteria.

The Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT) are
responsible for determining an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income
Management due to rate of payment.

This exclusion does not require a social worker assessment.

Social workers may determine a VWPR Youth Income Management customer is
eligible for an exclusion for the following reasons:

Income Management would place the customer's mental, physical or
emotional wellbeing at risk, which includes any situation where a
customer:

-   Cannot meaningfully engage with the agency due to mental health
    issues, or
-   Does not have the capacity to comprehend the operation of Income
    Management, or
-   Is experiencing serious instability in their housing or living
    situation and Income Management would substantially impair their
    ability to meet housing costs

Referring a customer to a social worker

Before referring a customer to a social worker for assessment of an
exclusion from Income Management, consider the customer's current
circumstances. The following customer circumstances are NOT to be
referred to a social worker for an assessment:

-   the customer can be exited from Income Management without needing an
    exclusion as they no longer meet the eligible triggers, see reasons
    for Income Management ending
-   the customer is seeking an exclusion due to their rate of payment

Requesting an exclusion

Except for the above scenarios, Income Management exclusions are
assessed by an Income Management trained social worker.

Therefore, if a customer requests an exclusion, even when it appears
they do not meet the criteria, they are to be referred to a social
worker within their declared Income Management area for an assessment.
Where possible, this referral should be made to the Service Centre where
the customer was triggered for Income Management.

Note: customers can only apply for an exclusion every 90 days.

Period of exclusion

If the social worker determines a customer is eligible for an exclusion,
they will exclude the customer from VWPR Youth Income Management for a
period of 12 months.

Social workers are able to end the exclusion period early if required,
which may result in the customer resuming Income Management, provided
they meet all the eligibility criteria. An exclusion assessment must be
completed by an Income Management trained social worker if ending an
exclusion prior to the 12 month period.

Note: customers granted an exclusion by a social worker because Income
Management would place their wellbeing at risk, are automatically
excluded from Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment
Recipients (LTWPR) Income Management during this period.

Reviews of exclusion decisions

Normal review and appeal processes apply to exclusion decisions.
Customers can apply for a formal review of a decision (by an Income
Management trained social worker or the Income Management Exemption and
Assessment Team (IMEAT)) to reject a request for an exclusion from VWPR
Youth Income Management.

Restriction on the customer requesting another exclusion from VWPR Youth
Income Management (that is, once every 90 days) does not stop the
customer applying for a formal review of the original decision not to
grant an exclusion.

Voluntary Income Management

Customers who are granted an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management
may be eligible for Voluntary Income Management. Service Officers should
advise customers of the option to apply for Voluntary Income Management
where they meet the eligibility criteria.

The Resources page contains a link to the Income Management Policy
helpdesk webform and links to the Social Work Consolidated team,
customer 13 and 1800 numbers, National Transfer Numbers and the Access
Support Centre in Office Locator.

Related links

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Social work services

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Income Management

Disbursement interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)
Income Management

Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management by social workers

Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management due to rate of payment

Voluntary Income Management

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Overview and hierarchy of Income Management measures

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
