
Transferring Cashless Debit Card funds 103-20021916

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about transferring funds from a
Cashless Debit Card account to a non-restricted account.

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Participants can use their CDC account to pay their rent, bills and
other expenses through various payment options. These include:

-   Centrepay
-   the Rent Deduction Scheme
-   BPAY and Direct Debit
-   transferring funds to other CDC accounts (internal transfer,
    including Indue to TCU and vice versa)
-   using their Other Expenses Limit (default limit is $200 per 28 days,
    excluding participants in the NT and Cape York; their default is $0)

Participants can make these transfers themselves via the online banking
portal or mobile phone app without contacting Services Australia.

For situations where it is not possible for a participant to pay these
expenses via the above options, a request for a funds transfer can be
made by contacting the Cashless Debit Card Hotline.

The default percentage for an NT participant’s regular entitlement is
50% cash (to their regular bank account) and 50% restricted funds to
their CDC. When assessing an NT participant's request for a One-off
expense or urgent transfer, their restricted percentage should be
considered when making an assessment.

Participants deemed as ‘vulnerable’ for the purpose of the CDC have
their online account deactivated and will not be able to conduct these
transfers themselves. Vulnerable participants will have a DOA DOC
identifying them. See Cashless Debit Card Vulnerable Participants.

Cashless Debit Card - One-off Expense

One off payments can be facilitated as a Direct Entry transfer to a
business/seller where the other payment options cannot be used. One-off
expenses must be for a specific purchase and supported by documentation.

Urgent transfers via Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Participants may request an Urgent Transfer via RTGS when they have:

-   lost their Cashless Debit Card, are unable to obtain a temporary
    replacement card and require funds urgently, or
-   recently commenced on the CDC and have not received their
    personalised card from the card issuer, and are unable to obtain a
    temporary replacement card

Service Officers should advise participants where they can obtain a
temporary replacement card.

For Indue participants, temporary cards are available at;

-   all service centres throughout Australia
-   participating Agents in the Northern Territory and Cape York
-   selected Australia Post Outlets and Local Partners

For TCU participants, temporary cards are available at;

-   all Northern Territory service centres, and some select bordering
    service centres
-   participating Agents in the Northern Territory
-   TCU Branches

A participant’s card issuer can be viewed in Customer First on the
Payment Details Lodgement (PDL) screen by checking the BSB for the
restricted account.

-   Traditional Credit Union participants' BSB will be 704 119
-   Indue participants' BSB will be 704 772

In Process Direct, the Card Issuer can be viewed on the CDC Account
History (CDCAH) screen.

Service Officers must determine if the request is urgent and needs to be
paid the same day. The card issuer processes Urgent Transfers via RTGS.
If the request is not urgent consider a one-off expense.

Note: RTGS processing may arrive in the participant’s nominated
unrestricted account on the same day (dependent on their banking
institution and time of transfer request). All RTGS requests must be
submitted to the card issuer by 2:30pm AEST. Some banking institutions
may charge a fee direct to the participant for this payment. RTGS
requests cannot be processed on NSW public holidays.

Switching CDC Card Issuers

Eligible CDC participants in the NT are able to switch between CDC card
issuers after 28 February 2022. See Switching Cashless Debit Card
Issuers. When a customer is in the process of switching card issuers
they may have multiple active accounts that can be viewed on the Request
Funds Transfer screen. For a funds transfer, care must be taken to
ensure the correct Card Issuer is selected from the Active Account list.

Approving CDC Funds Transfers

Requests lodged through the CDC Request Funds Transfer workflow are
allocated to appropriately skilled staff via Workload Manager for
approval. Service Officers with access to process transfer requests at
first contact must do so.

Where a participant has switched CDC card issuers, Service Officers will
not be able to perform a Funds Transfer from the ‘old’ CDC account.
However, participants can transfer money from one restricted account to
another restricted account through their online portal or App.

Appealing the decision to not transfer funds from the CDC

If a participant does not agree with a decision to not transfer funds
from the Cashless Debit Card they may request an explanation or apply
for a formal review of the decision. The usual review and appeal process
applies.

Related links

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation

Housing and Other Expense Limits for Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
participants

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Community Panels

Temporary Cashless Debit Cards (CDC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
