-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens when a customer who is exempted from
Income Management (IM) has a change of circumstances, and the process
when an exemption from Income Management ends.

Period of exemption

Exemptions from Income Management are generally granted for 12 months.
The exemption may be reassessed prior to the end of the 12 month
exemption period in cases where an individual's circumstances have
significantly changed, for example, change in principal carer, customer
enrols as a full time student and withdraws from the course.

Should a customer wish to be income managed during the period of the
exemption the customer should be offered Voluntary Income Management.

Vulnerable customers

If a customer becomes vulnerable during a period of exemption from
Income Management, they should be referred to a Services Australia
social worker as per business as usual referrals. The social worker will
consider what resources may best assist the customer, including an
Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient
Measure.

Automatically ending exemptions

An exemption is ended automatically when a customer has lost eligibility
for Income Management (for example, income support payment is cancelled)
for 13 weeks. This means that if the customer becomes eligible for
Income Management again after 13 weeks they would need to re-apply for
another exemption. If the customer becomes eligible for income
management again within the 13 week period, the previous exemption will
apply up to its original end date.

Expiring exemptions

When an exemption expires the customer is sent a letter inviting them to
contact Services Australia for an initial assessment interview. The
customer has 28 days, or 56 days if remote, to engage with the agency
before Auto Income Management applies (additional grace periods apply
for parents applying for an exemption during the initial engagement
period). A Work Item and Issue appears on the customer record to alert
Service Officers that an initial assessment interview is required. The
customer can reapply for an exemption during this process.

Voluntary Income Management

Customers who are granted an exemption from Income Management under the
Disengaged Youth (DEY) or Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR)
measures can volunteer for Voluntary Income Management (if eligible).

Note: customers on VIM will revert to Income Management under the DEY or
LTWPR measure if their exemption ends and they continue to meet the
criteria for those measures.

The Resources page contains an example of an exemption reassessment for
a change in principal carer arrangements and an example of when a
reassessment of an exemption for a full-time student prior to the end of
the 12 month exemption period may be conducted.

Related links

Exemptions from Income Management

Income Management and BasicsCard Work Items

Initial Assessment interview for Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipients

Identifying customers for Income Management under Disengaged Youth (DEY)
or Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR) measures

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
