
Effect on Income Management when payment is restored or re-granted 103-01050090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when an Income Management customer's
income support payment has been restored or re-granted.

On this Page:

Income Management Work Items

A work Item is generated when an Income Management customer has their
income support payment restored. Service Officers must investigate the
record and determine what action is required. This may include:

-   reconfirming the customer's eligibility for Income Management (for
    example, confirming the customer's measure or making sure the Notice
    from the referring authority is still 'active')
-   manual reinstatement of Income Management where applicable
-   a review of priority needs, or
-   making a one-off payment from available Income Management funds for
    missed expenses. For example, if the customer has missed a rent
    expense and now has sufficient funds to pay for this, a one-off
    payment may be required in consultation with the customer

Note: if a customer has moved out of a declared Income Management area,
their payments may still be income managed upon restoration or re-grant
of an income support payment. For more information see Customer moves
out of an Income Management area.

Cape York Initiative, Child protection and Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) measures

Customers will automatically have their Income Management reinstated if
they are income managed under the Cape York Initiative, SPaR measures,
when the following conditions are met:

-   the restoration or re-grant is from date paid to +1 day, and
-   Income Management cancellation reason was 'customer trigger
    cancelled' (CTC) or 'partner trigger cancelled' (PTC), and
-   the customer had an 'active' Income Management Notice at the time
    their income support payment was cancelled or the Notice is 'active'
    when payment is re-granted

If the restoration or re-grant is not date paid to+1 day (that is, there
is a gap in their trigger payment entitlement), the usual Income
Management engagement period will apply.

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)

Reinstatement of Income Management for customers income managed under
VWPR measure, is dependent on the category applicable to the customer at
the time Income Management ended.

VWPR Youth UTLAH and Special Benefit (SpB):

-   If less than 12 months has passed since the customer's Income
    Management first commenced, Income Management will be automatically
    reinstated for the remainder of the 12 month period when a payment
    is restored or re-granted.
-   Reinstatement will occur irrespective of when the restoration or
    re-grant occurs within that 12 month period, if there is a break in
    payment, or where the customer is living. See the Resources page for
    examples.

VWPR Youth Crisis Payment (CrP):

-   If less than 12 months has passed since the customer's Income
    Management first commenced, Income Management will be automatically
    reinstated for the remainder of the 12 month period.
-   Reinstatement will only occur if the reason for Income Management
    cancellation was 'customer trigger cancelled' (CTC) and restoration
    or re-grant is within 13 weeks of cancellation. This is irrespective
    of where the customer is living or they have turned 25 years of age.
-   If it is more than 13 weeks since the customer's income support
    payment was cancelled, the customer will need to requalify for
    Income Management and the usual engagement period will apply. See
    the Resources page for examples.

VWPR social worker assessed: Income Management will be automatically
reinstated when the reason for Income Management cancellation was
'customer trigger cancelled' (CTC), and:

-   there is an 'active' Vulnerable Notice, and
-   the restoration or re-grant is within 13 weeks of the cancellation,
    and
-   the restoration or re-grant is from date paid to +1 day
-   If more than 13 weeks have passed since the customer's income
    support payment was cancelled, the usual Income Management
    engagement period will apply

Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR)

Customers will automatically have their Income Management reinstated if
they are income managed under the DEY or LTWPR measures, when the reason
for cancellation was 'customer trigger cancelled' (CTC) and their
payment is restored or re-granted within 13 weeks of the cancellation.

If more than 13 weeks have passed since the customer's income support
payment was cancelled, the usual Income Management engagement period
will apply.

Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

Customers will have Income Management reinstated if they are income
managed under VIM, when the following conditions are met:

-   the restoration or re-grant is within 13 weeks of the cancellation,
    and
-   the restoration or re-grant is from date paid to +1 day, and
-   Income Management cancellation reason was 'customer trigger
    cancelled' (CTC), and
-   the customer has an 'active' VIM Agreement at the time their income
    support payment is restored or re-granted

As VIM has a mandatory period of 13 weeks, customers who are present at
the time of restoration or re-grant and who have had their agreement in
place for more than 13 weeks will be given the option to continue or
terminate their VIM agreement,. If the customer is not present, Income
Management will be automatically reinstated. Note: customers can still
request to exit Income Management at a later time.

Arrears of Social Security payments

Lump sum arrears of an Income Management customer's income support
payment are 100% income managed.

Where a customer is in arrears, they can be issued an amount equal to
the normal amount of discretionary funds they would have received for
their last fortnightly payment. The process for issuing these funds will
depend on whether the arrears payment has already been credited to their
Income Management account. See Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCP).

This ensures a person in receipt of arrears has access to their regular
fortnightly amount of discretionary funds and is not placed in financial
hardship.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   declared Income Management area
-   Income Management helpdesk webform
-   the Income Management and Income Management Contact Officers (IMCO)
    intranet pages, and
-   examples of restoration and re-grant of payments for VWPR Youth
    customers

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Effect on Income Management when payment is suspended, on zero rate or
cancelled, or Unemployment Non-Payment Period applied

Effect of a compliance failure penalty on Income Management

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Work Items and messages for Income Management

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
