
This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines priority needs for customers and the allocation
of income managed funds to meet these priority needs and any other
expenses.

Priority needs

When a customer’s payments are income managed, the funds in their Income
Management account are used to meet their and their family's priority
needs.

While a person and their family's circumstances will differ, Service
Officers will need to consider how the following basic items are to be
paid when assessing a person’s priority needs:

-   School Meals Program (if applicable)
-   food, basic personal hygiene and basic household items
-   housing, for example, rent or loan repayments
-   utilities, for example, electricity, gas, water, sewerage
-   clothing and footwear
-   medical needs

Who recommends priority needs?

Under Child Protection Income Management, a State or Territory Child
Protection Authority may recommend where a person’s income managed funds
should be directed.

Social workers who assess a customer as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient and place them on Income Management can also recommend how a
customer’s income managed funds should be used.

Service Officers are not required to comply with the recommendation, but
should take it into consideration and document how these needs will be
met when conducting an assessment or reviewing a customer’s priority
needs.

Priority needs assessment

A customer’s priority needs can be reviewed throughout the period of
Income Management. Reviews identify if there have been any changes to
their priority needs so Income Management expenses can be updated
accordingly. An assessment of priority needs must be completed:

-   at the Initial Assessment interview
-   when there is a change in the customer’s circumstances, for example,
    change of address
-   when a Work Item is raised indicating priority needs must be checked
-   when the customer requests a review of their priority needs

Service Officers are to review the customer’s voluntary deductions (that
is, Centrepay and Rent Deduction Scheme payments) when conducting a
priority needs assessment. This review will identify whether any
deductions can be converted to an Income Management expense or if there
is any duplication of payments.

Priority needs assessments should be conducted by Service Officers
trained in Income Management. Staff not trained in Income Management can
conduct these assessments, and can seek assistance from a specialised
Service Officer (if available) or a Service Support Officer, or contact
the Access Support Centre (select 'Income Management' option) if
required.

Using income managed funds

Customers can use their income managed funds to pay for their expenses
by:

-   using the BasicsCard - a reusable PIN protected card which allows
    customers to use their income managed funds to purchase goods and
    services at approved BasicsCard merchants through the Electronic
    Funds Transfer at Point Of Sale (EFTPOS) network
-   making payments to third parties, including Third Party
    Organisations

If all current and reasonably foreseeable priority needs are being met,
any remaining income managed funds can be used for other non-prohibited
expenses.

Contents

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Payment of School Meals Program expenses from Income Management funds or
Centrepay

Payment of fines from income managed funds

Income Management customers accessing funds while travelling

Effect of a compliance action on Income Management

Coding Income Management expenses

Ongoing reviews and contacts with income managed customers

Ongoing reviews for Cape York, Child Protection and Supporting People at
Risk Income Management

Creating a new Third Party record for the receipt of uncontracted Income
Management deductions

Related links

BasicsCard

Managing Income Management funds

Payment of income managed funds to Third Party Organisations (TPOs)

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Initial assessment of Income Management

Income Management and BasicsCard Work Items

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
