
Income Management customers accessing funds while travelling 103-01040050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help Income Management customers when they
are travelling and how they can access their available funds.

Travel and Income Management

Income Management customers are still required to meet their priority
needs such as accommodation, food, clothing, medical expenses and
transport costs while travelling. This can include expenses in their
home location or their current location.

Customers may require payments to be made to contracted or uncontracted
Third Party Organisations in an area they are visiting. These payments
are generally in the form of one-off payments and may include the
following uncontracted payment methods:

-   Scheduled Transfer
-   BPAY®
-   Credit card (used for urgent and immediate requests for expenses
    like food and travel)

During the period of travel, particularly when travelling overseas, it
may be necessary for a portion of the customer's income managed funds to
be paid directly to them by way of a Restricted Direct Payment (RDP).
RDPs are assessed by the Income Management Policy helpdesk.

Contact prior to travel

Income managed customers are encouraged to contact Services Australia
before travelling to discuss how they can access their income managed
funds to meet their priority needs while travelling.

When the customer contacts, Service Officers will also discuss with them
whether any regular expense allocations need to be varied or suspended
during the period of travel.

BasicsCard

Income managed customers who have a BasicsCard can use their BasicsCard
when travelling. They should be advised to take their BasicsCard with
them.

BasicsCards are accepted at approved BasicsCard merchants across
Australia, which includes a large number of National BasicsCard
merchants.

Locating Income Management and BasicsCard merchants

Customers can use a search tool on the Services Australia website and
the Locator tool on the Express Plus mobile app to search for approved
Income Management and BasicsCard merchants in a specified area.

For information on how to use this search tool, see Business and
organisation search tools.

Hardship

Service Officers should always consider the full range of options
available to help any customer in hardship or urgent need, such as:

-   referral to specialist officers including Indigenous Service
    Officers (ISO), Multicultural Service Officers (MSO) and social
    workers
-   referral to external support services and/or
-   issuing an urgent payment

The Resources page contains links to the following:

-   Find a business or organisation tool for customers
-   Contact details for IMPACT and the Income Management Policy Helpdesk
-   Income Management intranet page
-   Income Management Organisations intranet page
-   BasicsCard intranet page
-   State Income Management Co-ordinators and Income Management Contact
    Officers (IMCO) intranet page, and
-   Locator

Related links

Priority needs and expense allocation

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Payment of income managed funds to Third Party Organisations (TPOs)

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

Transfer income managed funds to BasicsCard online

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Urgent payment requests from Income Management customers

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
