
Initial Assessment interview for Child Protection Income Management (CPIM) 103-01160060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 17 March 2021, Income Management (IM) customers based in the
Northern Territory (NT) can permanently transition to the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) program. Customers on an income support payment who are
living in the NT and are not currently on IM, will be able to volunteer
for the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) from this date.
For more information on this process or to initiate an IM to CDC
transition, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory, which also contains staff
resources and links to the transition overview Intranet page for
additional information.

This document outlines how to conduct an Initial Assessment interview to
place a customer onto Income Management, under the Child Protection
measure.

Initial Assessment interview

An Initial Assessment interview is required to place a customer on Child
Protection Income Management (CPIM). The interview:

-   explains how Income Management works
-   determines how their Income Managed funds can be best used to meet
    the priority needs of the customer and their family, and
-   provides information about other services which may assist them,
    including Centrepay

The interview is held face to face or over the phone. This is conducted
with the customer and if applicable, their partner or payment nominee.

The Child Protection case worker may wish to attend the Initial
Assessment interview with the customer. The customer must give their
permission for their case worker to attend. If permission is not given,
the Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) will advise the case
worker.

Failure to attend interview

If a customer does not attend an Initial Assessment interview within
their Income Management engagement period, Income Management will be
automatically applied to their payments.

If a customer has still not attended an Initial Assessment interview 28
days after Auto Income Management commences, their payments may be
suspended.

Preparing for an initial assessment interview

To prepare for an Initial Assessment interview, Service Officers should:

Check whether the customer requires an interpreter, and book interpreter
if required

Check whether the customer has an excluded payment nominee for Income
Management purposes:

-   If the customer does not have an excluded payment nominee, the
    customer is eligible for Income Management. However, the payment
    nominee must attend the Initial Assessment interview as they are
    responsible for managing the customer's payments, or
-   If the customer is a payment nominee for another person, that
    person's payments will also be income managed

Check the record for any vulnerability indicators

Check the customer's current rate of payment and any regular income

Check whether the customer has any current Centrepay deductions or Rent
Deduction Scheme payments

Have relevant Income Management and self-service communication products
available for the customer

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia website, Income
Management contacts and Office Locator links.

Related links

Child Protection Income Management

Eligibility for Child Protection Income Management

Initial Assessment of Income Management

Actioning Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Auto Income Management and suspension of payments when a customer fails
to attend Initial Assessment Interview

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

Appointment, ACTDOC and Callback protocols

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
