
Customer requests Centrepay account statement 103-09030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to view and print Centrepay account
statements.

On this Page:

Centrepay statements

There are 2 types of statements available for Centrepay deductions:

-   Account statement - Centrepay deductions listed by business, service
    reason and payment, for a period of up to 3 years' history (per
    statement)
-   Deduction statement - snapshot of all deduction details, including
    non-Centrepay deductions

[] Customers can use their online account or Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app to view their deduction history for up to the last 15 months
(the current search limit online).

If the customer requires a written statement, they can receive deduction
details for the previous periods by requesting a Centrepay account
statement from a Service Centre or Smart Centre. The period the
statement covers is determined by the date range entered. The maximum
period per statement is 3 years. If the customer requires details
greater than 3 years, they must request a separate Centrepay account
statement for a different period

If the customer requires further years of information, see the Process
page for instructions.

Note: government housing and Child Support deductions are not handled by
Centrepay. The customer needs to request these statements directly from
the appropriate state or territory housing authority or the Child
Support Agency.

Account statement

The account statement will show payments made to a particular Centrepay
business for up to 3 years, including the total amount of deductions
sent. Each statement contains details of deductions to a business from
one payment type for one service reason.

The customer will need to request multiple statements if they are making
deductions from multiple payment types, or for periods greater than 3
years.

The account statement is available through the customer's [] Centrelink
online letters when requested through the Smart Centre or Service Centre
and can be obtained directly from a Service Centre, or mailed to the
customer if they contact the Smart Centre

Customers can obtain an Account statement by:

-   attending a Service Centre, or
-   calling a Smart Centre

If a customer attend a Service Centre, the account statement can be
printed locally and provided to the customer. Alternatively, Smart
Centre or Service Centre officers can select to print the account
statement centrally, which will issue by mail or deliver the statement
to Centrelink online letters (if the customer is subscribed).

Deduction statement

A deduction statement is available for customers to track all their
deductions (including Centrepay deductions). It provides details of the
customer's next regular payment/s they are due to receive, the amounts
being deducted from the payment/s, and the balance remaining.

Customers can obtain a Deduction statement by:

-   using their [] online account,
-   using the []Express Plus Centrelink mobile app,
-   using phone self service,
-   attending a Service Centre or
-   calling a Smart Centre

The Resources page contains links to Centrepay information on the
Services Australia website.

Related links

Deduction Statement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
