-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a customer, who is subject to Income
Management, requests the return of a payment sent to a Third Party
Organisation (TPO).

Recalling funds

A customer may advise that the Income Management funds sent to a TPO
need to be recalled. Although Services Australia is required to assess
any customer request to recall funds, the following reasons are the most
common:

-   funds have been sent to an incorrect TPO
-   the customer is no longer able to access the TPO, for example, they
    have had a change of address which no longer makes the TPO
    accessible
-   the good/services required by the customer are no longer available
    from the TPO
-   funds have been distributed on customer's behalf incorrectly

School Meals Program

Parents and carers are responsible for ensuring their child attends
school and collects their meals at the scheduled times, particularly
breakfast.

Customers contributing to a School Meals Program must notify the agency
of any change in circumstances which impact on the child's ability to
participate, such as transferring to another school and extended student
absences.

If a child is absent from school for longer than 5 consecutive school
days, it is the responsibility of the customer contributing to the
program to notify the agency immediately of their change in
circumstances. Once notified, the agency can suspend the payments for a
period as requested by the customer.

Customers must notify the agency if their child/ren transfers to another
school or community, so payments can be transferred to the new provider
or stopped if there is not a program in the new location.

Customers are not entitled to a refund of any contributions made to a
School Meals Program arising from a child's temporary absence from
school. When calculating the cost of School Meals Programs, allowance is
made for absences and public holidays to enable costs to be kept to a
minimum. Customers can also arrange for meals to be collected from the
school during short periods of absence.

The agency acknowledges extraordinary and unanticipated circumstances
may arise where a customer may have a reasonable claim to request
recovery of payments made to a School Meals Program. For example,
customers may have been unable to notify the agency of an extended
absence, or transfer to another school due to circumstances beyond their
control.

If a customer believes they have such a claim, they should contact the
agency where the same recovery process will be applied.

For more information about School Meals Programs, see Payment of School
Meals Program (SMP) expenses from Income Management funds or Centrepay.

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review of decision

If the amount returned by a TPO is less than the amount initially
requested, the customer may request an explanation or apply for a formal
review of the decision.

An explanation will be provided by a Subject Matter Expert in the
National Gateway Recoveries Team. A formal review will be undertaken by
an Authorised Review Officer.

The Resources page contains links to Office Locator for the National
Transfer numbers and customer 13 and 1800 numbers. It also contains
links to the Services Australia Website for self service options for
Income Management and BasicsCard and the Organisation Finder service for
customers.

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Death of an income managed customer

Income Management debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
