-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on advance payments and how the
primary objective is to make payments more flexible to the needs of
customers. An advance payment is not an additional payment. It is a lump
sum payment of a social security entitlement.

Types of advance payments

There are different types of advance payments that can be made to a
customer, which may include:

-   Pharmaceutical Allowance Advance
-   Farm Household Allowance Advance
-   Special Employment Advance (SEA) ($50 - $500)
-   Advance payments for non-pension customers ($250 - $500)
-   Advance payments for pension customers (value varies depending on
    the customer's circumstances)
-   Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB) (13
    fortnightly payments at standard or higher rate)
-   Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) (can be a combination
    of 'regular' or 'one-off' advances, the total amount that can be
    advanced varies based on the customer's circumstances)
-   Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans. Note:
    this document does not apply to advance payments paid through the
    HEAS

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) customers

Advance payments of loans paid through the HEAS are administered
differently to advance payments for other payments. Advance payments
paid through the HEAS are added to the customer’s loan balance rather
than being recovered from the customer’s fortnightly payments.

The loan (including costs and interest) are generally recovered when the
loan is settled, however customers can choose to make loan repayments at
any time.

See Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans for more
details.

Alternatives and support

An advance payment can be considered as one alternative to payday loans
from a commercial provider. The procedure Helping customers to build
their financial capability contains information about other alternatives
and support.

Applying for an advance payment

[] To apply for an advance payment, or to access other advance payment
options, customers should be strongly encouraged to use the available
digital channels, unless they are ineligible. Digital services available
include Online Services, Express Plus mobile app or Interactive Voice
Recognition (IVR).

Customers ineligible to use digital services to apply for an advance
are:

-   Customers who have a nominee arrangement in place
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers who are under 18 can claim via
    telephone or a service centre. They are required to have a
    discussion either over the phone or in person prior to applying to
    ensure consideration has been taken regarding the impacts/risks or
    an advance payment
-   Weekly payment customers can apply via telephone or at a service
    centre but cannot use self service channels
-   Independent customers under 18 years of age are considered 'at risk'
    customers and must have a face-to-face interview when applying for
    an advance (except if rural and/or remote). Rurally isolated
    customers are those who live in rural or remote areas who live more
    than 90 minutes from a service centre and have no access to a
    service centre
-   Customers who face physical or intellectual barriers to accessing
    digital options can apply over the telephone or in person
-   Customers applying for Pharmaceutical Allowance Advance, Farm
    Household Allowance Advance and/or Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Note: if the customer states self-service options are unavailable, check
NNU, Newsflash and Bulletins to confirm this prior to processing the
Advance manually.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions for advance
payments and links to the Services Australia Website.

Contents

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advances

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment

Repaying a debt to obtain a Social Security advance payment

Advance payments obtained fraudulently without customer consent

Deletion of advance granted on incorrect record or fraudulently claimed

Work items for advance payments

Related links

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans

Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Helping customers to build their financial capability

Advance payment options online

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
