
Restricted Direct Payments (RDP) 103-01050110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can access their income managed
funds as cash to pay for an expense that is unable to be paid by one of
the standard Income Management payment methods.

Restricted Direct Payment (RDP)

A Restricted Direct Payment (RDP) is a payment issued when the standard
Income Management payment methods such as BasicsCard, deduction or
one-off payment to a Third Party Organisation cannot be used. Usually
the only option for the customer is to pay for the expense by cash.
Restricted Direct Payments should only be granted in exceptional
circumstances and are assessed and approved by the Income Management
Helpdesk, with coding completed by the National Business Gateway (NBG).

An RDP is available to income managed customers under any measure.

This payment should not be confused with an Unrestricted Cash Payment
(UCP) which allows for an approved amount of the person's income managed
funds to be available for their discretionary use.

Access to process RDPs is restricted. The Income Management Helpdesk
will determine if an RDP is payable, and the National Business Gateway
(NBG) will process the payment.

Customers accessing Income Management funds for travel

Income Management continues (subject to usual payment portability) when
a customer travels anywhere within Australia or overseas.

During the period of travel, particularly when travelling overseas, it
may be necessary for a portion of the customer's income managed funds to
be paid directly to them by way of an RDP. When determining if this is
the most appropriate option, Service Officers must consider:

-   the reason for travel
-   if the customer's dependents are travelling with them
-   if dependents are not travelling with the customer, how are the
    priority needs of their dependents going to be met whilst the
    customer is travelling, and
-   how the customer's priority needs are being met, including any
    ongoing payments that need to be made while they are travelling (for
    example, rent, utilities, etc.)

The Resources page contains links to the Income Management helpdesk
webform, contact details for the Income Management helpdesk and the
Income Management Payments and Contact Team (IMPACT).

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Changes to Income Management expenses

Initial Assessment interview for Voluntary Income Management

Coding Income Management expenses

Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCPs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
