-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines an overview of Child Protection Income Management
(CPIM) and Child Protection enhanced Income Management (CPeIM).

On 4 September 2023, legislation came into effect which allows existing
CPIM customers to transfer to CPeIM. It also means that all new
customers referred for CPIM will instead commence on CPeIM.

Purpose of CPIM and CPeIM

The aim of CPIM and CPeIM is to encourage responsible behaviour by
parents to enhance the wellbeing of their children.

Case workers from a State or Territory Child Protection Authority may
make a decision that welfare quarantining will contribute to improved
outcomes for children at risk.

A customer may be referred to Services Australia to have their eligible
welfare payments income managed. This is at the discretion of child
protection authorities. The agency then determine if the customer meets
the eligibility requirements for Income Management.

CPeIM referrals

If Services Australia get a new Child Protection notice, the customer
will commence on CPeIM through the enhanced IM program (provided they
meet other eligibility requirements).

Before a referral for enhanced IM is made, the State or Territory Child
Protection Authority will request a Disclosure of Information (DOI) from
Services Australia. This will provide them with information that will
assist in determining if Welfare Quarantining is suitable and will be of
benefit, given the customer's circumstances.

Once a Notice to Commence Income Management or enhanced Income
Management has been lodged by the relevant State or Territory Child
Protection Authority, Services Australia will determine if the customer
meets all other criteria required under CPeIM. The customer will
commence on enhanced IM with an initial waiting period of 28 days and a
letter will be sent to the customer to advise they’ve commenced on
enhanced IM.

CPeIM is compulsory, however, the Child Protection Authority case worker
can revoke the notice at any time.

The partner of an income managed customer will not be automatically
income managed. However, the State or Territory Child Protection
Authority may refer both partners for enhanced IM where they believe
this is in the best interest of the child/ren concerned.

CPIM and CPeIM areas

CPIM and CPeIM is available in the following states:

-   New South Wales
-   Northern Territory
-   Queensland
-   South Australia
-   Victoria
-   Western Australia

Duration of CPIM and CPeIM

A CPIM or CPeIM notice can be for a period of 3, 6, 9 or 12 months. The
notice can be extended beyond a 12 month period if the Child Protection
Authority case worker believes this would benefit the customer. This is
requested with a continuation notice.

The State or Territory Child Protection Authority can request Income
Management/enhanced IM be ceased at any point in time by sending a
Revocation of Income Management or enhanced Income Management.

Percentage of payments income managed

Income Management and enhanced IM

The following payments are income managed under this measure:

-   70% of a customer's regular fortnightly eligible welfare payments is
    quarantined
-   100% of lump sum payments income managed

There are specific payments not income managed.

Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO)

Services Australia has nominated a position known as the Income
Management Contact Officer (IMCO). The IMCO is responsible for liaising
with the State or Territory Child Protection Authority in relation to
customers referred to the agency, who might benefit from their payments
being managed under Income Management/enhanced Income Management.

Services Australia’s role

Services Australia will:

Action any requests from a State or Territory Child Protection Authority
received through the Unified Government Gateway (UGG)

Be the single point of contact to receive any referrals for Income
Management/enhanced Income Management sent by Child Protection
Authorities

Once a customer has been identified, determine if the customer meets all
eligibility criteria for CPIM/CPeIM

Commence the customer on enhanced IM with an initial wait period of 28
or 56 days (depending on location), the customer will receive a letter
advising they have been referred for enhanced IM

-   Note: if a Notice to continue income management for a CPIM customers
    is received and the Notice takes effect the day following the end
    date of the initial notice, the customer will continue on CPIM
    rather than CPeIM.

Provide the customer with enhanced IM program, account and SmartCard
support whilst they are on enhanced IM, including referring customer to
internal and external support services

Contact the Child Protection Authority case worker 35 days prior to the
end of the IM or enhanced IM period to discuss whether the current
notice should be extended or ceased

Complete the end date review where Referring Authority has confirmed the
notice will cease, including ending CPIM or CPeIM

Undertake further reviews/contact during the period as appropriate

Facilitate the flow of information between Services Australia and the
Child Protection Authorities in relation to the referred customer, for
example, changes in care or changes in payment

Role of the Child Protection Authority

The State or Territory Child Protection Authority will:

-   make a request for Disclosure of Information (DOI) with Services
    Australia. This request for disclosure allows Child Protection
    Authorities to gather information to assist them in determining if a
    referral for Income Management (IM)/enhanced Income Management
    (enhanced IM) is appropriate
-   advise the customer/s that they are going to be referred to Services
    Australia for Child Protection enhanced IM and explain what this
    means, including expected duration
-   provide Services Australia with a Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management for the customer. The
    notice will include contact details and duration of enhanced IM
-   provide Services Australia with a Revocation of Income Management or
    enhanced Income Management notice if it is to cease before the end
    of the original period stated in the Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management
-   provide Services Australia with a Notice to Continue Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management, if deemed appropriate at
    the end of the initial period.
-   case manage the family as they would normally do
-   advise Services Australia of any changes in the family's
    circumstances that may impact upon Income Management or enhanced IM

Enhanced Income Management referrals

The Child Protection Authority case worker is responsible for providing
Services Australia with details of customers who the relevant State or
Territory Child Protection Authority has determined would benefit from
enhanced IM.

Once a customer has been referred by the relevant State or Territory
Child Protection Authority, Services Australia will determine if they
meet all other criteria required under Child Protection enhanced IM. If
the customer is eligible, their payments will be quarantined under
enhanced IM.

Revocation of Income Management and enhanced Income Management

A customer’s payments can only be income managed (under Income
Management or enhanced IM) while a customer has an open case file with
the Child Protection Authority. If the customer no longer has an open
case, the Child Protection Authority will send Services Australia a
Revocation of Income Management or enhanced Income Management notice. If
Services Australia is advised that case management of the customer has
ceased, contact should be made with the State/Territory Child Protection
Authority, to discuss the future of Income Management or enhanced IM for
the customer in question. This contact with the State/Territory Child
Protection Authority will be made only by Services Australia Income
Management Contact Officer (IMCO).

Hierarchy of Income Management and enhanced IM measures

A customer could be eligible for more than one Income Management or
enhanced IM measure at the same point in time. In these cases, a
hierarchy is used to determine under which measure the customer will be
income managed. CPIM and CPeIM are ranked second on the hierarchy of
Income Management measures, only behind the Cape York enhanced IM
measure.

Note: selected State or Territory Child Protection Authorities can refer
a customer to Services Australia to discuss Voluntary Income Management.

Child Protection and DVA payments

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) administers payments which are
'Category H' (IM) and 'Category A' (enhanced IM) payments and therefore
eligible for CPIM, CPeIM, Voluntary Income Management (VIM) and
Voluntary enhanced IM (VeIM).

The DVA trigger payments are:

-   Service Pension
-   Income Support Supplement
-   Age Pension paid by DVA
-   Veteran Payment

DVA customers are subject to the same Income Management and enhanced IM
rules as Services Australia's customers. The task of providing this
service to these customers is controlled by the Statement of Intent
between DVA and Services Australia.

It will be necessary to confirm that the customer receives one of the
DVA eligible payments and that they reside in an area where the relevant
measure is available. An Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) will
handle all DVA cases.

Right to Appeal

A customer can appeal the Child Protection Authority's decision to refer
them to Services Australia for Income Management or enhanced IM. In this
case, Services Australia will refer the customer to the Child Protection
Authority where usual internal appeals processing should occur. The
Child Protection Authority will provide customers with information on
their appeal rights.

The Resources page contains contact information for customers who are
receiving an eligible DVA payment and want to be income managed on
enhanced IM.

Contents

When to notify the Child Protection Authority case worker under Child
Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Eligibility for Child Protection Income Management

Initial Assessment interview for Child Protection Income Management

Disbursement interview for Child Protection Income Management

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Actioning Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests

Enhanced Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
