
Urgent payment requests from Income Management customers 103-01050010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process an urgent payment request for an
Income Management customer.

Definition of urgent payment

Urgent payment is the early delivery of part of a customer's entitlement
because they are experiencing severe financial hardship due to
exceptional and unforeseen circumstances.

When a customer receives an urgent payment their next regular payment
will be less than their usual entitlement.

Separate procedures apply if the customer is requesting an urgent
payment due to:

-   Centrelink delay
-   expenses associated with a funeral
-   holiday processing

Offering alternative help to customers

Before assessing a request for urgent payment, Service Officers need to
explore other assistance options with the customer.

Effect of an urgent payment on Income Management

When an Income Management customer is granted an urgent payment, a
portion of the payment is credited into their Income Management account
and is available for immediate use. Customers can choose to use these
funds immediately by:

-   transferring funds to their BasicsCard
-   requesting a one-off payment to an authorised third party
    organisation, or
-   leaving the funds in their Income Management account for future
    expenses

Granting an urgent payment will result in the amount of a customer's
next regular payment being reduced. Therefore, the customer's income
managed funds will also be reduced, which may result in their regular
expenses not being paid due to insufficient funds.

Child Protection and Supporting People at Risk measures

Under these measures, 70% of a customer's income support payment is
income managed. If an urgent payment is granted, 70% will be credited
into the customer's Income Management account and 30% is issued to the
customer as discretionary funds.

Cape York Initiative

A Cape York Initiative customer may have 60%, 75% or 90% of their income
support payment income managed. If an urgent payment is granted, the
applicable percentage (60%, 75% or 90%) will be credited to the
customer's Income Management account. The balance of the urgent payment
(40%, 25% or 10%) is issued to the customer as discretionary funds.

Other Income Management measures

Under the following Income Management measures, 50% of a customer's
income support payment is income managed and 50% is issued to the
customer as discretionary funds:

-   Disengaged Youth
-   Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients
-   Voluntary Income Management
-   Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients

Delegations for urgent payments

The decision to approve or deny an urgent payment is made by a Service
Officer at the APS4 level or above.

If there is a Managed Service Plan (MSP) in place, the details of the
MSP may influence who the decision maker will be. For example, the
customer would not be transferred to Smart Centre Telephony where there
is a MSP in place that prohibits contact with that channel.

Note: there are some circumstances when it will be appropriate for the
urgent payment request to be assessed at the service centre or by a
processing team.

Limit of 2 urgent payments in 12 months

Customers can generally only receive 2 urgent payments in 12 months,
except for urgent payments due to a funeral, Centrelink delay or holiday
processing.

This is a rolling 12 months, not a calendar 12 months. It will change
depending on the date an urgent payment is granted.

Example

On 1 July 2020, a customer applied and was approved for an urgent
payment.

On 12 December 2020, they apply and are approved again for an urgent
payment.

They are now not eligible for another urgent payment until 1 July 2021.
They have received 2 urgent payments in the 12 months before this date.

If they apply on 30 July 2021 and an urgent payment is approved, they
must now wait until 12 December 2021 to apply again. The 12 months
started with the payment on 12 December 2020.

Extraordinary circumstances for more than 2 urgent payments in 12 months

To protect vulnerable customers, a decision can be made to approve more
than 2 urgent payments to a customer in 12 months if they are in severe
financial hardship and extraordinary circumstances are verified.

See Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances.

The Resources page contains links to Office Locator, contact details for
social worker referrals, Payment and Service Finder and useful websites.

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Immediate payments

Urgent payment requests

Processing urgent payment requests

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
