
Income Management debts 103-01140000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines topics dealing with the raising, waiving and
processing of Income Management debts for the National Business Gateway
Recoveries Team. Information is also provided for staff when receiving
enquires about an Income Management debt.

Reasons for incurring Income Management overpayments

Customers and Third Party Organisations (TPO) can incur an Income
Management overpayment for reasons which include, but are not limited
to:

-   system errors
-   administration errors (for example, credit card payment not
    processed correctly)
-   incorrect credit to an Income Management account
-   fraudulent access to a customer's Income Management funds, including
    access via BasicsCard or a TPO
-   a TPO's failure to return funds to Services Australia, or
-   following an immediate re-credit of funds to a customer's Income
    Management account (for example, urgent recovery and funds returned
    were not sufficient to cover the re-credit)

Third Party Organisation (TPO) overpayments

Income Management debts may be incurred by a customer or TPO. Note: a
TPO may also be an individual.

In all cases, the National Business Gateway Recoveries Team will, where
possible, make contact to explain the debt as well as issue the standard
debt notification.

National Business Gateway Recoveries Team (NBGRT) role

The NBGRT is responsible for investigating any Income Management
overpayments, and the raising or waiving of debts. For more information
see Debt recovery general information.

Income Management debts can be recovered using the five methods of
recovering debts:

-   cash repayments
-   withholding repayments from current Centrelink payments
-   garnishees
-   referral to a collection agent
-   legal proceedings (civil recovery)

Note: existing processes must be followed for debts relating to payment
entitlement incurred by income managed customers. These debts must be
referred to the debt management branch Region Code XWA.

Service Officer role

Service Officers who receive enquiries relating to Income Management
debts are to:

-   provide information about how the debt was incurred. Where
    information is not available, customers should be referred to the
    NBGRT
-   discuss debt recovery options, and
-   follow the review and appeals process in cases where the customer
    wishes to have a decision in regards to their debt reviewed

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the Income Management Payments and Contact Team (IMPACT) contact
    details
-   the National Business Gateway and IMPACT intranet pages, and
-   pages on the Services Australia website

Related links

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Debt recovery general information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
