
Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation 103-03150030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reasons a participant may be eligible to end
their CDC participation and provides instructions.

Ending CDC participation

Participants may lose eligibility for the CDC under the following
circumstances:

Permanently moves overseas

Full-time student or apprentice living out of CDC area

Participant has an excluded payment nominee

-   Public Trustee,
-   an organisation, or,
-   an individual who is not subject to CDC or Income Management (IM)

Participant no longer receiving an eligible payment

Participants who reach Age Pension age - Ceduna, East Kimberley and
Goldfields regions CDC areas only

Participants who reach the maximum age of participation - Bundaberg and
Hervey Bay region CDC area only

Participants in Cape York have a notice revoked by the Family
Responsibilities Commission (FRC) or their notice period ends and is not
extended

Participant was only in area temporarily, or address was incorrect

Wellbeing Exemption

Exit Application

Voluntary participants can request to end their participation on the CDC
at any time.

Disbursement of remaining CDC funds and account closure

Participants can use the remaining funds in their CDC account as normal
after quarantining ends.

If a participant contacts the Agency to request a disbursement of
remaining funds, see CDC Exits and Disbursements eligibility table in
Resources to determine if they are eligible. If eligible, Process Table
1 outlines the process.

Once residual funds have been disbursed, the Cashless Debit Card Hotline
or CDC Processing Team can instruct the card issuer to close the account
for eligible participants.

Permanently moves out of a CDC area or overseas

Participants who move outside a CDC declared area or move permanently
overseas and continue to meet all other eligibility criteria continue to
participate on the CDC. Participants can use their CDC at any merchant
that accepts EFTPOS or Visa except for those selling alcohol, gambling
services or online stores that are not pre-approved by the card issuer.

Full-time student or apprentice living and studying out of CDC area

Full-time students or apprentices who live in a CDC declared area but
are studying full-time outside that area are not included in the CDC.

The CDC Processing Team assess eligibility for these participants.

Excluded Payment Nominees

Customers will not be eligible to participate on the CDC program if they
have an excluded payment nominee. An excluded payment nominee is:

-   Public Trustee
-   An organisation, or,
-   An individual who is not subject to CDC or IM

When a payment nominee relationship is started, changed or ended, the
system will perform an eligibility check for CDC and take the
appropriate action automatically.

Note: an excluded payment nominee arrangement must not to be set up
solely to avoid going onto the CDC.

For information on the process for participants who are requesting a
payment nominee, see Nominees.

Participant no longer receiving an eligible payment

If the participant’s trigger payment is cancelled, any other
restrictable payments will not be paid to their CDC.

Participants who reach Age Pension age - Ceduna, East Kimberley and Goldfields regions CDC areas only

Participants who reach age pension age will lose eligibility for the
CDC.

Maximum age of participation - Bundaberg and Hervey Bay region only

Participants in the Bundaberg and Hervey Bay area who reach 36 years of
age will lose their eligibility for the CDC.

Participant was only in area temporarily, or address was incorrect

If participants are only in the area temporarily, they should update
their temporary address to avoid being identified for the CDC in error.

For information on the procedure for participants who update their
address details, see Updating address details.

Updating or deleting a home address details for the purposes of
circumventing the CDC will not automatically end CDC participation.
Address updates done incorrectly in an effort to avoid the CDC may
result in placing the participant at risk of overpayment for additional
payments such as Rent Assistance or Remote Area Allowance.

Service Officers must not update addresses for the purposes of ending
CDC participation without discussing with the CDC Processing Team.

Voluntary Participant requests to end their participation in the CDC

Participants who volunteer for the CDC, can choose to end their CDC
participation at any time by contacting the agency.

Volunteer participants in the NT who request to end their CDC
participation may then become eligible for IM in the NT.

See Cashless Debit Card Volunteers for further information on voluntary
participants.

Referrals to a social worker where a participant presents at risk of suicide, self-harm or harm to others

CDC participants should be referred to a social worker immediately if
they talk about suicide, self-harm or harm to others.

See Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Wellbeing Exemption

For details, see Wellbeing Exemptions from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Wellbeing Exemptions are considered if the CDC program poses a serious
risk to a participant's mental, physical or emotional wellbeing.

If a participant requests to end their participation in the CDC, see
Exit Applications from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC).

CDC Exit Application

For details, see Exit Applications from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Participants can apply to exit the CDC program where they can
demonstrate reasonable and responsible management of their affairs,
including financial affairs. Participants who wish to apply for an exit
under this pathway can visit the Services Australia website to access an
Exit Application Form.

Review of the decision to be placed on CDC

If a participant does not understand or does not agree with a decision
to be placed on the CDC, they can request an explanation or apply for a
formal review of the decision. See Initial contact about a decision and
the review of decision process.

The Resources page contains a link to the CDC intranet page, and links
to the Services Australia, and Indue websites.

Related links

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Participation in Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Cashless Debit Card Vulnerable Participants

Wellbeing Exemptions from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Exit Applications from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Cashless Debit Card Volunteers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
