
This document provides an overview of the obligations of Services
Australia in managing customer's taxation details and tax deductions
(instalments) as per the Australian Taxation Office's rules.

Australian Taxation Office and Services Australia

Certain Centrelink payments delivered by Services Australia must be
reported to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and require a
Centrelink payment summary to be generated where a customer has received
any of these payments within a financial year.

The ATO determines which payment information must be reported for these
customers. Taxable payments are always reportable but the ATO requires
some non-taxable/tax exempt payments (pensions/benefits/allowances) to
be reported, as this information may impact a customer's entitlement to
claim a tax offset (previously referred to as a tax rebate) in their tax
return. For more information about which payments must be reported to
the ATO, see Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for
Centrelink Payment Summary.

Customers in receipt of a taxable payment may elect to have tax
deductions made from their payments each payday. For more information
about which payments can have tax deducted, see Taxable and non-taxable
(tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment Summary.

Managing taxation details

The Centrelink tax system is used to manage taxation matters for
Centrelink customers. The main facility provided by this system is to
create Centrelink payment summaries for customers that have received any
ATO reportable payments. Any amounts of tax deducted from taxable
payments are also included and reported to the ATO on a customer's
payment summary. For more information about other features used to
manage tax deductions, see Managing Australian Tax Office (ATO) tax
deductions.

Centrelink Payment summary

At the close of business, on 30 June each year, Centrelink payment
summaries are calculated and created for all customers who have received
reportable payments within the financial year period (1 July to 30
June). This occurs irrespective of whether tax has been withheld from
benefits/payments/allowances or not. Payment Summary details are then
automatically transmitted to the ATO in the first week of July of the
new financial year (for the financial year just ended).

When the Centrelink payment summaries have been generated, they can be
requested by the customer through a range of self service options. For
more information see Centrelink Payment Summaries.

Contents

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Related links

Centrelink Payment Summaries

General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities

Managing Australian Tax Office (ATO) tax deductions

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
