-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for Income Management
(IM) and enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM) under the Supporting
People at Risk Income Management (SPaR) measure.

The IM program closed to new entrants on 4 September 2023. Customers
that are referred to Services Australia for welfare quarantining or move
between measures on the hierarchy and otherwise meet the eligibility
criteria to participate, must commence enhanced IM.

Since 4 September 2023, SPaR IM customers can choose to move to enhanced
IM. It is important to note that, given the closure of the IM program,
when these customers move from IM to enhanced IM, they will not be able
to return to IM, regardless of reason.

Note: customers currently on SPaR IM who receive a continuation Notice
can remain on the IM program.

Determining eligibility for Supporting People at Risk Measure

When a SPaR referral Notice is lodged by an approved referring
authority, a Services Australia Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO)
will determine if the customer meets the eligibility criteria to remain
on the IM program or commence on enhanced IM.

Where a continuation notice is received for a current SPaR IM customer,
without a gap in the notice and from an approved referring authority,
the customer may remain on IM. Where there is a gap in the notice
period, the customer is on IM or enhanced IM under a measure lower on
the hierarchy or the customer payments are not currently welfare
quarantined, the customer will be placed on enhanced IM.

SPaR IM and SPaReIM are compulsory, however, an approved referring
authority  contact worker can revoke the notice at any time.

The partner of an enhanced IM customer will not automatically commence
enhanced IM. However, the approved SPaR authority may refer both
partners where they believe the customer will benefit from enhanced IM.

SPaR is available for the approved referring authority to refer
customers located in the Northern Territory only.

Duration of SPaR Notice

A SPaR notice can be for a period of 3, 6, 9, 12 or 24 months. The
notice can be extended if the approved referring authority believes this
would benefit the customer.

The approved SPaR authority can request IM or enhanced IM be ceased at
any point in time by sending a Revocation of Income Management or
enhanced Income Management.

Payments income managed under Supporting People at Risk

A customer must be in receipt of an eligible welfare payment to be
eligible for welfare quarantining under the SPaR measure. The customer
or their partner must be in receipt of the following dependant on
whether they are welfare quarantined under IM or enhanced IM:

A customer or their partner must be in receipt of a category H welfare
payment and category I welfare payment (other than instalments of
ABSTUDY) under IM.

A customer or their partner must be in receipt of a Category A under
enhanced IM, customers may also receive a secondary category B payment,
these will also be quarantined at the same percentage as their Category
A payment.

Percentage of payments quarantined

The following payments are income managed under this measure:

-   70% of a customer's regular fortnightly eligible welfare payment is
    quarantined
-   100% ABSTUDY (with Living Allowance or Pensioner Education
    Supplement (PES)) payments
-   100% of lump sum payments are quarantined

There are specific payments that are not quarantined.

Hierarchy of IM and enhanced IM Measures

A customer can be eligible for more than one IM or enhanced IM measure
at the same point in time. In these cases, a hierarchy is used to
determine which measure the customer will be subject to. SPaR is ranked
third on the hierarchy, only behind the Child Protection and Cape York
measures.

Note: an approved referring authority can refer a customer to Services
Australia to discuss Voluntary enhanced IM (VeIM).

SPaR and DVA payments

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) administers payments which are
'Category H' (IM) and ‘Category A’ (enhanced IM) payments and therefore
recipients of these payments may be eligible for SPaR IM, SPaReIM,
Voluntary Income Management (VIM) and VeIM.

The DVA trigger payments are:

-   Service Pension
-   Income Support Supplement
-   Defence Force Income Support allowance (DFISA)
-   Age Pension paid by DVA
-   Veteran Payment

DVA customers are subject to the same IM and enhanced IM rules as
Services Australia customers. The task of providing this service to
these customers is controlled by the Memorandum of Understanding between
DVA and Services Australia.

It will be necessary to confirm that the customer receives one of the
DVA eligible payments and that they reside in an area where the relevant
measure is available. An Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) will
handle all DVA cases.

Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO)

The Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) is responsible for liaising
with an approved referring authority about customers referred to
Services Australia who might benefit from IM or enhanced IM.

Services Australia’s role

-   Action any requests from an approved referring authority.
-   Be the single point of contact to receive any referrals for IM or
    enhanced IM sent by approved referring authorities
-   Once a customer has been identified, determine if the customer meets
    all eligibility criteria under the SPaR measure
-   Explain the purpose of IM or enhanced IM, including how to access
    quarantined funds.
-   For IM customers, manage the customer's IM funds to assist them in
    meeting their and their family's priority needs
-   Provide the customer with enhanced IM program, account and SmartCard
    support whilst they are on enhanced IM, including referring customer
    to internal and external support services
-   Contact the approved referring authority 35 days prior to the end of
    the IM or enhanced IM period to discuss whether IM or enhanced IM
    should be extended or ceased
-   Undertake further reviews/contact during the IM or enhanced IM
    period as appropriate
-   Facilitate the flow of information between Services Australia and
    the approved referring authorities in relation to the referred
    customer, for example, change in address or changes in payment

Referring authority’s role

The approved referring authority will:

-   make a request for Disclosure of Information (DOI) with Services
    Australia. This request for disclosure allows the referring
    authority to gather information to help them decide if a referral
    for IM or enhanced IM is appropriate
-   advise the customer/s they are going to be referred to Services
    Australia for welfare quarantining under the SPaR measure and
    explain what this means, including expected duration
-   provide Services Australia with a Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management for the customer. The
    notice will include contact details and duration of IM or enhanced
    IM
-   provide Services Australia with a Revocation of Income Management or
    enhanced Income Management notice if it is to cease before the end
    of the original period stated in the  Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management
-   advise Services Australia of any changes in the family's
    circumstances that may impact upon IM or enhanced IM

Review and appeal rights

A customer can request a review of the approved referring authority's
decision to refer them to Services Australia for IM or enhanced IM. See
Reviews of Income Management and enhanced Income Management decisions.

In this case, Services Australia will refer the customer back to the
approved referring authority where regular internal review processes
should apply. The approved referring authority will provide customers
with information on their review and appeal rights.

Contents

Disbursement interview for Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income
Management

Related links

Enhanced Income Management

Enhanced Income Management processing for IMCO staff

Actioning Business Hub and Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests

Income Management and BasicsCard Work Items

Managing Income Management funds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
