
Actioning Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests 103-01120010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assist an Income Management
Contact Officer (IMCO) in actioning requests generated by the relevant
State or Territory Child Protection Authority through the Unified
Government Gateway (UGG).

On this Page:

Income Management requests from Child Protection Authorities

Approved State or Territory Child Protection Authorities have the option
of requesting the Australian Government to manage a customer's income
support and family assistance payments, if they believe the customer
will benefit from Income Management. It provides another tool for a
Child Protection Authority to assist with the case management of
families.

Outline of IMCO role

This procedure is for Income Management Contact Officers (IMCO) only.

Most requests received through the UGG are auto-processed by the system
and the relevant information is applied automatically to the customer's
record. However, this procedure assists with the manual processing of
UGG requests which is required when auto processing fails.

The procedure will explain how IMCOs can:

-   locate outstanding requests
-   action (State/Territory Government Authority) Mutual Customer
    searches with a 'no' match result
-   action a Disclosure of Information (DOI)
-   action a Notice to Commence Income Management received
-   action a Revocation of Income Management or Cashless Debit Card
    received
-   view DOIs that have been submitted by the Child Protection
    Authorities through the UGG
-   view Expense allocation requests made by the Child Protection
    Authorities and
-   action a referral for Voluntary Income Management

System screens to access information

The Third Party Information Summary - Organisation (TPISO) screen is
used by Services Australia staff to view all requests/actions completed
through the UGG by a State or Territory Child Protection Authority. At
default, the screen will show both finalised and outstanding requests.
The TPISO screen can be accessed through the organisation record.

The Third Party Information Summary (TPIS) screen exists on the customer
record. This screen will only display completed UGG actions against the
individual customer. The TPISO and TPIS screens can be viewed in
Customer First.

An IMCO will need to check the TPISO screen daily, ensuring they only
process work attached to their area.

The Resource page contains a link to the Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA) contact details page.

Related links

Actioning Business Hub requests

Unified Government Gateway

Exchange of information with Income Management and Cashless Debit Card
referring authorities

Services Australia role in Child Protection Income Management

Eligibility for Child Protection Income Management

Initial Assessment interview for Child Protection Income Management

Disbursement interview for Child Protection Income Management

Coding Child Protection Authority notice and booking Initial Assessment
interview for Child Protection Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
