
Assessing, coding and reviewing weekly payments 103-05010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to assess, code and review weekly payments
for a customer.

Staff roles

Only Service Officers who have completed the training can assess and
process weekly payments. Each service centre should have at least one
staff member trained.

All Service Officers:

-   answer general enquiries about weekly payments and eligibility
    criteria
-   identify customers who may benefit from weekly payments
-   transfer calls to the relevant Urgent Payment queue if the customer
    asks about starting, stopping or reviewing weekly payments

To start, stop or review payment arrangements, Service Officers must be
SO3 or above and have completed the training module. Transfer phone
requests for weekly payments to staff who have completed the training.

Staff do not need to request the WKLUPD - Weekly Payments resources by
the ICT Security Portal (ISP). Access to approve weekly payments is
provided to all staff at the SO3/4 level.

Service Officers may receive a reminder email from ICT ISP informing
them their access is expiring. This message should be ignored, as no
resource request is needed.

Workflows

Access:

-   Weekly payments workflow in Customer First
-   Weekly Payment by the Task Selector in Process Direct

These workflows show details on:

Applying for weekly payments

-   assess if weekly payments are suitable for the customer
-   identify other services in place for the customer
-   set up ongoing contact, reporting and review arrangements
-   start weekly payments

Reviewing weekly payments

-   assess whether or not to continue weekly payments
-   follow up other services that can help the customer manage their
    finances

Service offer

See Weekly payments for information about:

-   the broader service offer to consider
-   customers who may benefit
-   eligibility criteria and eligible payments

The Resources page contains FAQs about weekly payments.

Related links

Frequency of payments

Weekly payments

Calculating weekly payments

Changing Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)

Offsetting Family Tax Benefit, Double Orphan Pension and Carer Allowance

Immediate payments

Special arrangements for customers with budgeting difficulties

Reporting overview

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
