
Nominee Income Management 103-01210000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 17 March 2021, Income Management (IM) customers based in the
Northern Territory (NT) can permanently transition to the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) program. Customers on an income support payment who are
living in the NT and are not currently on IM, will be able to volunteer
for the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) from this date.
For more information on this process or to initiate an IM to CDC
transition, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory, which also contains staff
resources and links to the transition overview Intranet page for
additional information.

This document outlines information on the process to be followed when a
customer becomes eligible or ineligible for Nominee Income Management.

Payment Nominee impact on Income Management

Where a payment nominee's payments are income managed under one of the
below measures of Income Management, the person for whom they are a
payment nominee (the principal) will also have their payments income
managed. This only affects payment nominees, not correspondence
nominees:

-   Cape York (CY) Initiative
-   Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)
-   Supporting People at Risk (SPaR), or
-   Compulsory Income Management (CIM) - Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long
    Term Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR)

A review of the payment nominee arrangement must occur if a payment
nominee is referred to Income Management to ensure they can continue to
act in the best interests of the principal. Further, if at any time
there is concern that the nominee arrangement is not in the best
interests of a customer, the appointment must be reviewed. Payment
nominee arrangements should be cancelled or revoked if not in the best
interests of the principal.

Eligibility for Nominee Income Management

A principal for Income Management purposes will have their payments
income managed under the same measure as their payment nominee, unless
they qualify for a different Income Management measure on their own. The
Resources page contains examples of Income Management hierarchy.
However, when a principal is no longer eligible for Income Management in
their own right, they will automatically be transferred to Nominee
Income Management.

Principals who are income managed under Nominee Income Management are
not required to meet the eligibility criteria of the measure applicable
to their payment nominee. That is, there is:

-   no requirement to be receiving any qualifying payments
-   no requirement to be on an eligible payment for a certain time
    period
-   no partner processing rules
-   no need for a notice/agreement
-   no age restrictions, and
-   no requirement to be living in a certain area

Under 18 year old YA dependent customers

If the parent/guardian that is receiving payments for an under 18 year
old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent customer is income managed, there is
currently no functionality for the YA customer (principal) to be income
managed under Nominee Income Management.

Service Officers should take the opportunity to remind YA customers that
once they turn 18, payments must be directed to an account in their own
name or a formal payment nominee arrangement must be made.

Note: the above restrictions relating to Nominee Income Management does
not affect a YA customer's eligibility for Income Management in their
own right.

Ceasing Nominee Income Management

Principals will cease to be income managed under Nominee Income
Management if:

-   they are recorded as deceased
-   their payment nominee is not subject to Income Management
-   their payment nominee is granted an exemption from Income Management
    (Note: principals are not eligible to apply for an exemption under
    Nominee Income Management - Disengaged Youth or Long Term Welfare
    Payment Recipient)
-   the payment nominee relationship ends, and no new payment nominee is
    appointed

Income Management eligibility when payment nominee arrangement ceases

A principal who no longer has a payment nominee may qualify for a
measure of Income Management in their own right.

Initial Assessment interview

The payment nominee must attend an Initial Assessment interview for
Nominee Income Management, as they are responsible for managing the
principal's funds. Attendance by the principal is preferred but not
compulsory. Discussions at the interview will include, but are not
limited to:

-   how Income Management will affect the person for whom they are a
    payment nominee
-   what the principal's priority needs for Income Management are, for
    example rent, utilities, school, food, medical expenses
-   how income managed funds will be allocated on behalf of the
    principal, and
-   how income managed money is allocated and accessed including the
    issue and use of a BasicsCard

In some circumstances, a principal's payments may be suspended if their
payment nominee does not attend an Initial Assessment interview. The
Resources page contains details of nominee Income Management suspension
rules.

The Resources page contains additional information about Income
Management measures that will apply to a principal with a payment
nominee and manual follow-ups, links to the Income Management helpdesk,
Office Locator and contact details, and details of nominee Income
Management suspension rules and examples of Income Management hierarchy.

Related links

Nominees

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

BasicsCard

Reviewing nominee arrangements

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent
customers

Nominee Income Management (NIM) processing for National Business Gateway
(NBG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
