
Deletion of advance granted on incorrect record or fraudulently claimed 103-05040100

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to delete an advance that has
been granted due to a fraudulent claim, or granted on an incorrect
record. If the advance is not removed it can affect a customer's
eligibility for future advances. This document does not apply to advance
payments for the Home Equity Access Scheme.

Advance due to fraudulent claim

Where an advance has been fraudulently claimed, and it is established
that the customer did not receive the benefit of the advance, the
advance details need to be removed from the customer record to ensure
that the customer's future eligibility is not affected. However, a
record needs to be retained for investigation and debt raising purposes.

The procedure Advance payments obtained fraudulently without customer
consent, contains further information on actions to take when a
potential fraud is reported.

Advance granted on incorrect record due to user error

Where an advance has been granted on the wrong customer's record, the
advance can be deleted if the payment has not been issued to the
customer, that is, before the payment is processed at the end of the
day, or if the customer advises they do not wish to retain the advance
amount.

If an advance payment has been issued to a customer in error, the
customer is to be offered the choice of whether to retain the advance
amount or have the advance cancelled.

Where they choose to retain the advance amount, then it is to be
recovered as per normal processes and will remain on the customer's
record.

If the customer chooses to have the advance cancelled, the amount issued
must be recalled and any amounts already recovered are to be refunded to
the customer before the advance is deleted.

Note: an advance can only be deleted where it has been granted in error
or fraudulently claimed. There is no authority to delete an advance
payment, where the customer has changed their mind.

The Resources page contains links to mySupport.

Related links

Advance payments obtained fraudulently without customer consent

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Advances

Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment

Repaying a debt to obtain a Social Security Advance Payment

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Helping customers to build their financial capability

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
