
Updating or adding business details for Deduction and Confirmation programmes 103-09010070

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the steps needed for updating or adding business
details for businesses approved for one of the following programs,
Centrepay, Centrelink Confirmation eServices, Electronic Verification of
Rent, Rent Deduction Scheme, Income Management or BasicsCard.

Updating business details

A business must notify Services Australia (the agency) of any changes to
the information it previously provided to the agency. Some of the
changes include:

-   ABN or ACN updates
-   new business or trading name
-   bank account details
-   address details
-   adding or changing Authorised/Contact Officers

The CRN Change Scenarios table provides a summary of the required
actions when a business undergoes a change of structure, ownership or
services.

Australian Business Number

All businesses with an Australian Business Number (ABN) must have the
ABN recorded, unless the business is a private landlord.

ABN updates can only be made when the ABN has been coded incorrectly or
if the Program Manager has approved a business to keep its Customer
Reference Number (CRN) when its ABN has changed.

All businesses with a new ABN must complete and submit a new Business
Application.

Business or Trading Name

A business may request to update its business or trading name recorded
on its business record at any time. However, the business name
documented on the business record must match the entity name recorded
for the business on the ABN lookup, unless the business is a trust. To
code a trust, use the name of its trustee, for example Smith PTY LTD ATF
the Smith Family Trust. The trading name is the name under which the
business operates. See Legal entities information for more detail on
correctly coding a Business name.

Bank Account details

A business must provide written notification by an Authorised Officer of
any changes to their bank account and should allow at least 5 business
days for the change to take effect.

If a bank account is closed before the new details are updated on the
business record, a payment may be returned or rejected by the financial
institution. This will cause a delay in the payment being made into the
business' correct bank account. See Returned or Rejected Centrepay
payments.

Authorised Officer and Contact Officers

There are two types of contacts a business can have:

Authorised Officer(s): must have the legal authority to act on behalf of
the entity and enter into a contract with the agency. An Authorised
Officer can only be nominated by an existing Authorised Officer or
through the business application process.

Contact Officer(s): can’t legally bind the business or enter into a
contract with the agency, but can be nominated as a contact for specific
matters, such as system issues or reconciling accounts.

When a business completes a Business Application they will be asked to
provide details for one or more Authorised Officers and if they wish,
additional Contact Officers for any day-to-day general enquiries.

Anyone who is not listed as an Authorised Officer in the position field
will be treated as a Contact Officer and will have limited ability to
request updates to the business record. See Resources for a link to the
Authorised Officer and Contact Officer roles and responsibilities.

See Billing at Source and Billing in Arrears for Centrepay businesses
for details on adding an accounts payable ’Invoice’ contact.

The Resources page has a link to an external website to lookup
information on ABN's and information about the roles and
responsibilities.

Related links

Adding or removing a service reason for a Centrepay Business

Adding, changing or removing a service reason for Income Management or
Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) businesses

Processing a Centrepay Business Application

Returned or rejected Centrepay payments

Legal entities information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
