
Payment destination 103-04030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the requirements that must be satisfied when
determining where a customer's Centrelink payment is to be sent.

On this Page:

Direct credit

The Social Security (Administration) Act requires that, unless an
exemption has been granted, all payments to customers are to be made via
direct credit into the customer's account held at a bank, credit union
or building society. Note: payments are not to be sent to a credit card
as these accounts are not directly administered by the issuing financial
institution.

Customer provides bank details for payment destination

The following issues must be taken into consideration when a customer
supplies details of an account to be used as their payment destination:

-   Payment destination details can only be changed by the customer or a
    person with payment authority for that customer. This can also
    include a faxed request from a bank, on their letterhead and signed
    by the customer
-   The customer must have legal access to the account - it must be in
    their own name, or their name must appear on the joint account
-   Customers who bank with credit unions must provide their account
    number, not their member number, or their payments will reject. This
    applies even where the customer has historically provided their
    member number (to Centrelink or any other third party)
-   Payments can only be made to a child's account if the account is
    held in trust for the child by the customer or if withdrawals can
    only be made by the customer. In these cases it is deemed the
    customer has legal access to the account
-   It is vital the correct information is coded. Once the payment
    destination has been updated confirm the change with the customer
-   If the customer receives more than 1 type of payment, confirm with
    the customer the account details for each payment
-   Is this payment destination used for the receipt of NDIS payments?
    NDIS payments should be in a separate account as NDIS amounts
    received for funded support are income, asset and deeming exempt for
    income support purposes

Exemptions from direct credit of payments to individual customers

There are certain situations where individual customers can be granted
exemptions from the requirement to provide direct credit details.
Examples include:

Payment to parents for Youth Allowance (YA) customers under 18 years:
Under 18 year olds who are dependent on their parents will have their
payments sent directly to the parent (or parents if the parents have a
joint bank account). The parent may give permission for the payment to
go to the customer's account. Once the customer has turned 18 years of
age, the payment must either be paid to an account held by the customer
or a Payment Nominee arrangement must be made

Payments for AIC (Assistance for Isolated Children): As AIC is claimed
by the parent (although paid on the student record) then regardless of
the student’s age, the payment destination is always the choice of the
parent and can be either: the parent, the student or a third party
individual or organisation. If a student contacts to change the payment
destination for AIC, note the details in an ACTDOC and send it to LPT
with keywords of ACTAIC and URGENT to follow up. See Changing Payment
Destination

Payment to parents for ABSTUDY customers under 18 years: For ABSTUDY,
factors such as the type of study and age of the customer will determine
if their own account or the parent’s account can be used as the payment
destination. See the Resources page of Living Allowance for ABSTUDY
Regardless of the student’s age, for ABSTUDY students who are: studying
at Secondary non-school, tertiary, or Masters and Doctorate level; or
undertaking an Australian Apprenticeship; or have Independent status,
payment must go to the student or Australian Apprentice
For ABSTUDY students who are secondary level and have dependent status
and are:

16-18 years old, the payee is one of the following:

-   the parent
-   the private board provider, if requested by the parent
-   the student, if requested by the parent
-   the student, if the student is not benefiting from the allowance
    because the parent uses it for other purposes, for example,
    gambling, alcohol

under 16 years old, the payee is one of the following:

-   the parent
-   the boarding school, if requested by the parent
-   the private board provider, if requested by the parent
-   the boarding hostel which is a signatory to the Standard Hostels
    Agreement, if requested by the parent

Group schedules: This allows Services Australia to send payments to an
organisation (for example, a nursing home). It is commonly used for
customers who are in aged care

Payment nominee: This allows the agency to send payments to a nominee.
It is commonly used for customers who have limited mobility, cannot
budget, are very young, or are in aged care (for example, Protective
Commission, Power of Attorney, Guardian). To be appointed a payment
nominee the customer must complete the Authorising a person or
organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313) form

Customers who are overseas: Customers living long term overseas have a
separate process for payment via an International Citibank process,
depending on the country in which they are living

-   Family assistance payments (for example, Family Tax Benefit) can
    only be deposited into an Australian bank account every 2 weeks
-   If a former family assistance customer is entitled to arrears (for
    example, from reconciliation) but has moved overseas and closed
    their Australian bank account, Centrelink International Services
    (CIS) staff can issue a one-off payment to an overseas address by a
    one-off payment or arrears. A one-off payment can also be used to
    issue payments to overseas estates and for certain other payments
    where no alternative option is available. See Delivery of payments
    to Centrelink customers while outside Australia

Granting a direct credit exemption at new claim stage

Customers are required to provide bank account details as part of their
claim lodgement. Where customers do not have a bank account, a temporary
exemption of 28 days can be considered, whilst they are in the process
of obtaining their bank account details. If the customer has provided
savings investment details which would show the customer has financial
institution accounts, an exemption must not be granted.

During this 28 day period, a direct credit exemption reason may be
coded, but no payment will be issued to the customer as payments by
cheque will no longer be issued. If the customer is in severe financial
hardship, other payment methods must be explored.

-   If the customer has not provided bank account details by the end of
    the 28 day period, and an extension of the temporary exemption has
    not been given, the payment will be suspended with a reason No
    Payment Destination Details (PDD) at the end of the 28 day period
-   If, after the customer's payment is suspended, the customer provides
    the required bank account details within the 13 week period, the
    payment will again become payable to the customer from the day after
    their last payment period end date, where they are still eligible
    for the payment
-   If, after the customer's payment is suspended, the customer provides
    the required bank account details after the 13 week period, the
    payment will again become payable to the customer from the day on
    which the details are provided (assuming no other provision of the
    social security law operates to make the payment not payable to the
    person). However, if the customer's payment has already been
    cancelled, a new claim will be required. Depending on when the
    customer lodges that claim and which start day provision is
    applicable, the new claim may commence as early as the date the
    details are provided
    Note: ABSTUDY payments may be payable from the suspension date as
    there is no closing date for acceptance of additional information.
    See Closing date for ABSTUDY claims

Customer separated but has a joint account

When a customer separates from their partner, Service Officers must
ensure the customer's bank account details are correct and ask if they
wish to have payments made to the same account. In the case where a
customer has payments made to a joint account, the Service Officer is to
advise the customer that if money is paid into the joint account, the
former partner will have access to their payment. Service Officers are
to ask the customer if they have an account just in their own name, as
payment should not continue to be made to the joint account.

Viewing bank account details

[] Customers can view details of their payment destination(s) via their
online account. Dependent YA, ABSTUDY and AIC customers may not have
access to this service for privacy reasons (that is, to avoid display of
parents' bank account details).

Also see Customer requests access to their personal information.

Requesting bank account details

For written requests asking customers to supply bank account details,
the Q286 is an appropriate letter to issue. See Creating an Online
Advice (OLA) including within an existing activity for more details on
how to issue the letter.

Alternatively, Service Officers can use the Request for Information
letter to request bank account details alongside other outstanding
documents.

The Resources page contains a link to the online services page on the
Services Australia website and a link to the form Authorising a person
or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313).

Contents

Changing payment destination

Payment delivery strip times

Payments to third parties

Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers while outside Australia

Replacement payments

Protection of customer payments

Under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer wants to stop
payment going to parents

Creating and updating Organisation records for ABSTUDY purposes

Related links

Accepting and disclosing information

Group payment schedules and payments to organisations

Appointing nominees

Using Centrelink self service

Living Allowance for ABSTUDY

Changing payment destination

Customer requests access to their personal information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
