
Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment 103-05040060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about requests to vary repayments of
advance payments. This document does not apply to Advance payments for
Home Equity Access Scheme loans.

Changes to advance payments

For all advance payments, any requests to suspend, decrease or increase
repayments can be completed in person or via the telephone without the
need for the customer to attend an appointment. However, these
variations to repayments cannot be completed the same day the advance is
granted.

[] Customers can also use their Centrelink online account or Express
Plus mobile app to increase or decrease their regular advance repayment
amounts.

Generally, an advance payment is repaid at a set rate over 13
fortnights.

Where an advance payment has been over-recovered, the excess funds
should be repaid to the customer.

Decreasing or suspending repayments

A request to reduce repayments below the standard rate of recovery, or
suspend repayments can only be approved if the customer has had a
significant change in circumstances that are special and unusual, could
not have been foreseen at the time that they applied for the advance and
they would experience severe financial hardship if the repayment was not
reduced. A reduction in the repayment amount can only be for a specified
period of time. Upon expiry of the specified date the repayments will
automatically be returned to the standard repayment rate. Repayments
cannot be reduced/suspended for more than 3 months at a time.

Note: where a customer with an increased recovery arrangement in place
requests to reduce their repayments to the standard recovery amount, no
assessment is necessary and the recovery rate should be varied without
question.

Prison release customers who meet the financial hardship criteria for
Crisis Payment are eligible to have a suspension or reduction to the
recovery of any existing advance payment for a period of 4 weeks in line
with similar arrangements in place for debt recovery.

FTB customers who have reduced their repayments must be referred to
Financial Management support services. Future applications for an FTB
advance payment will reject if an outstanding advance of any type has a
reduced recovery arrangement in place.

Decreasing repayments online

[] Customers will be able to decrease their repayments using their
Centrelink online account or Express Plus mobile app, but only if the
repayment amount has previously been increased to more than the standard
recovery amount. They will only be able to decrease the amount to an
amount above or equal to the standard rate of recovery.

Example: the customer has taken out a $500 advance payment in June 2017.
Standard recovery amount is $38.50 per fortnight for 13 fortnights. The
customer then decides that they want to pay the advance off faster so
increase the repayments to $50 per fortnight. After 2 repayments at this
new rate they decide to reduce the repayment as they are now having
difficulties meeting their other regular costs. The reduction can be
updated via their online account, but the repayment can only be reduced
to $38.50.

This restriction only applies to customers using the online account.
There is no restriction on the reduction amount if the decrease is
actioned by a Service Officer.

Increasing repayments

A request to increase the rate of repayment can only be approved if the
customer will not experience severe financial hardship. For Special
Employment Advance (SEA) repayments the increased repayment amount
cannot be greater than the amount of money declared by the customer as
available at the end of each fortnight.

If the increased repayment amount would place the customer in hardship,
the request to increase the repayment amount should not be approved. The
Advance Payments workflow will prompt the Service Officer to assess
whether the customer can afford the increased repayment amount and still
meet their usual fortnightly expenses.

In some circumstances, paying an outstanding advance early may not
benefit the customer or enable them to claim another advance earlier.
The arrangements for claiming further advances are different for pension
customers, non-pension customers and FTB customers.

Increasing repayments online

[] Customers will be able to increase their repayment amount using their
Centrelink online account or Express Plus mobile app. The customer will
be limited in the amount of the increase to a maximum of twice the
standard repayment amount.

Example: If the customer is currently repaying $38.50 per fortnight, the
maximum amount they could increase their repayments to would be $77.00
per fortnight.

This restriction only applies to customers using their online account or
Express plus mobile app. There is no restriction on the increased amount
if the increase is actioned by a Service Officer and will not place the
customer in financial hardship.

Reviews of reduced or suspended repayment arrangements

Reduced or suspended repayment arrangements will automatically cease
when the review date is reached.

It may be appropriate to review the reduced or suspended repayment
arrangement at other times, for example if an application for a further
advance payment is being made. Consideration should be given to whether
the financial hardship still applies. If the customer is no longer in
financial hardship, then the recovery rate of the outstanding advance
should be increased to the standard rate of recovery before proceeding
with the new advance application.

If the customer cannot afford to have their repayments increased to the
standard rate of recovery because they are still in financial hardship,
then it is not appropriate to grant a further advance, as this will only
exacerbate the financial hardship. The customer may benefit from a
referral to Financial Management Support Services.

The maximum period for a reduced or suspended repayment arrangement is 3
months.

Over recovered advances

When a customer makes a lump sum payment to finalise the advance, any
delay in this amount being processed may allow further regular
repayments to be deducted from the customer’s fortnightly payment. The
advance balance will need to be adjusted and the excess funds repaid to
the customer.

Repayments that cannot be varied

Repayment rates for Mobility Allowance (MOB) advance payments cannot be
increased or decreased.

Transfers between payments

Where a customer transfers between payments, for example from Carer
Payment (CP) to Youth Allowance (YA), a Manual Follow-up (MFU) will
trigger the recovery of their outstanding advance payment after 3 weeks.
The repayment rate cannot be modified prior to this review maturing.

Delegation

The delegation to vary repayment of an advance payment is at the
Australian Public Service (APS) 3 level.

Related links

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Helping customers to build their financial capability

Advance payment options online

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
