
This document outlines the various payment deductions available to
customers.

Note: Second Account is not yet available to customers. See Saving
Option Instruction.

Government intent

Payment deductions include Centrepay, the Rent Deduction Scheme,
taxation and child support payments.

On this Page:

Centrepay deductions

Centrepay is a voluntary bill-paying service that is free for Centrelink
customers. Customers can authorise Services Australia to deduct regular
amounts from their Centrelink payments to pay their bills to an approved
business. Deductions are made before any balance of the Centrelink
payment is deposited in the customer’s nominated bank account. Centrepay
deductions can only be made from an eligible Centrelink administered
payment.

[] The preferred methods for customers to manage their Centrepay
deductions is via the Services Australia self-service options such as
their Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
account. If a customer makes a request to start a Centrepay deduction
over the phone or in person at a service centre, Service Officers should
process the request via the Centrepay Guided Procedure or Centrepay
workflow.

A customer must provide consent to start, or increase a Centrepay
deduction.

If there is a change in circumstances that will affect a customer's
ability to pay for their Centrepay deduction, it is important to tell
the customer they must make other arrangements to avoid going into
arrears or debt.

Tax deductions

Certain payments made by Centrelink are taxable and require Payment
Summaries to be issued to customers. Customers in receipt of an income
support payment may elect to have tax deductions made from their
payments each fortnight.

Customers can request or cease tax deductions from taxable payments by
self-service [] online, phone or in writing.

Tax deductions from Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP) are set at 15% by default, but customers can nominate a different
tax rate between 0-50% using Online Services or by contacting by phone
or in person. Note: this does not include customers receiving PPL from
their employer; these customers must contact their employer to discuss
their tax rate.

RDS

The Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) allows Centrelink customers to have
their government housing payments such as government rent, arrears
repayments, loan repayments and other housing payments deducted from
their payment from Centrelink each fortnight and sent directly to the
appropriate Housing Authority (HA).

The RDS operates under a formal contract between the agency and the HAs.

Customers in receipt of payments from which RDS deductions can be made
may participate in the scheme. Participation in the RDS is entirely
voluntary.

If there is a change in circumstances that will affect a customer's
ability to pay rent, it is important to tell the customer they must make
other arrangements to avoid going into arrears or being evicted.
Customers should be encouraged to discuss their arrangements and
proposed actions with the relevant HA although it is not compulsory to
do so.

While the RDS has similarities with Centrepay, and both schemes operate
on the Direct Deduction facility, they are two entirely different
businesses. RDS can only be used for government housing payments.
Centrepay cannot be used for government housing payments.

Child support deductions

From 1 July 2008, Child Support is able to recover up to 3 times the
minimum child support liability amount from a customer's income support
payments. Child Support may instruct Centrelink to apply the deduction
in relation to the customer's current child support liability, child
support arrears, or both.

Prior to 1 July 2008, only the minimum child support liability amount
(not arrears) could be deducted from a payer's fortnightly income
support payments.

If a customer does not agree with the amount deducted for child support
or the payments child support is deducted from, they must discuss or
appeal this decision with Child Support.

View/add/change deductions option online

[] Customers can access their online accounts to view or update
deductions.

Eligible customers can view these deductions:

Centrepay

Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

RDS Note: all customer enquiries relating to housing authority
deductions must be referred to the relevant Housing Authority

Child Support Note: all customer enquiries relating to these deductions
must be referred to Child Support

Income managed customers will also be able to view a list of the regular
expense allocations that have been set up from their Income Management
account

-   Customers wishing to change these expenses must contact the Income
    Management line
-   Customers are not able to add, vary or cease a regular Income
    Management expense using this service

Income managed customers, subject to eligibility can:

-   [] make a one off transfer from their available income managed funds
    to their BasicsCard using the transfer income managed funds to
    BasicsCard online service
-   transfer funds from their BasicsCard to their Income Management
    account
-   make a one off payment from their available income managed funds to
    a contracted Third Party Organisation

Deduction Statement

The Deduction Statement is a document detailing the deductions being
made from a customer's regular allowance/s or benefit payment. The
Deduction Statement helps a customer manage their own finances by
providing comprehensive information which shows the customer's next
regular payment they are due to receive, the amounts being deducted from
the payment and the balance remaining.

Customers should be encouraged to request and check their statement
regularly to track their deductions and ensure their financial
arrangements are correct.

[] Customers can also view and update some deductions via their
Centrelink online account.

Related links

Centrepay

Deduction Statement

Deductions options online

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Managing Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Refunding Australian Taxation Office (ATO) excess tax deductions

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deductions

Commencing a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

The Child Support Scheme information for Centrelink

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
