-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the different Income Management (IM) and enhanced
Income Management (enhanced IM) measures, the hierarchy and movement
between IM and enhanced IM measures.

Overview

Income Management is a tool that helps people budget their welfare
payments and ensures they are getting the basic essentials of life, such
as food, housing, electricity and education.

Enhanced Income Management is a tool that helps customers manage their
welfare payments and prioritise spending on essential goods and services
such as food, housing, electricity and education.

Both programs set aside a percentage of a customer’s eligible welfare
payments.

Since 4 September 2023, all new income managed customers commence on
enhanced IM.

Income Management

The percentage directed to a customer’s IM account is allocated for
priority needs such as food, clothing and accommodation. The remaining
percentage of a customer's payment is paid into their nominated bank
account.

Deductions such as child support and government debt repayments are
taken into account before payments are allocated for income management.

For all measures, 100% of ABSTUDY (with Living Allowance or Pensioner
Education Supplement) payments and 100% of lump sum payments are income
managed. There are specific payments not income managed.

Enhanced Income Management

The percentage directed to a customers enhanced IM account is allocated
to prioritise spending on essential goods and services such as food,
housing, electricity and education.

100% of lump sum payments are allocated to their enhanced IM account.

Hierarchy of Income Management and enhanced Income Management measures

Customers may be eligible for multiple measures, however, they may only
be income managed under one measure at any one time. Where a customer
could be eligible for more than one measure, a hierarchy is used to
determine which measure the customer will be subject to. The hierarchy
from highest to lowest measure is:

-   Cape York (CYeIM)
-   Child Protection Income Management (CPIM and CPeIM)
-   Supporting People at Risk (SPaR and SPaReIM)
-   Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR and VWPReIM))
-   Compulsory Income Management (CIM and CeIM) - Disengaged Youth (DEY)
    and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR)
-   Nominee Income management and enhanced Income Management (NIM and
    NeIM)
-   Voluntary enhanced Income Management (VeIM)
    Note: VIM/VeIM is only higher than Nominee Income Management
    (NIM/NeIM) if the customer has a current VIM/VeIM Agreement. See
    Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Each measure can be applied only in the hierarchy order. For example, if
a customer’s payments are quarantined under CIM or CeIM but a Notice to
Commence enhanced Income Management is received from a State or
Territory Child Protection Authority, the customer will be transferred
to CPeIM.

Since 4 September 2023, customers who move up or down the hierarchy will
be required to commence enhanced IM.

For more information see, Resources.

Movement between IM and enhanced IM measures

Customers cannot commence on IM as the program has closed to new
customers, this includes for customers that move measures within the
hierarchy.

Customers may change from one measure to another due to a change in
their circumstances, or they may be referred by an approved Referring
Authority for a different IM measure.

Since 4 September 2023, customers must commence enhanced IM when this
change occurs, regardless of whether they move up or down the hierarchy.
This is called an ‘Initiative Transfer’.

Below are some examples of when customers will move between measures and
therefore move to enhanced IM:

-   They transfer from the Disengaged Youth (DEY) measure to the Long
    Term Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR) measure when they reach 25
    years
-   Their payments are quarantined under Compulsory Income Management
    (CIM), and a recognised Referring Authority refers them for Child
    Protection enhanced IM (CPeIM) or the Supporting People at Risk
    (SPaR) measure
-   They are no longer eligible for any compulsory measures of Income
    Management or enhanced IM but choose to enter into a Voluntary
    enhanced IM (VeIM) Agreement
-   They are no longer eligible for Income Management or enhanced IM on
    their own, but they have a payment nominee who is subject to income
    management (either program) under a certain measure so are
    automatically transferred to Nominee enhanced IM (NeIM)
-   They are on Voluntary Income Management (VIM) and become eligible
    for one of the compulsory measures of Income Management (except
    customers automatically identified for the Vulnerable Welfare
    Payment Recipient (VWPR) measure)

Other times when a customer will commence on enhanced IM without moving
between measures:

-   If a customer is on a Child Protection or SPaR Notice and has a
    Continuation Notice that takes effect at a later date (even if only
    1 day gap), then they would become subject to enhanced IM as a new
    enhanced IM customer. This also applies to an IM customer who loses
    eligibility for their current IM measure, but then regains
    eligibility under the same, or another IM measure at a later date

Examples where a customer will remain on IM:

-   The customer is a current Child Protection (CP), Supporting People
    at Risk (SPaR), or Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient – Notice
    (VWPR) customer who is given a Continuation Notice, and that Notice
    takes effect the day following their original Notice (no gap). The
    customer can remain on IM.
    Note: if a continuation Notice is received for an IM customer from a
    different Referring Authority then the customer will be classified
    as a new customer and must commence on enhanced IM.
-   If the customer is on Voluntary IM and is identified for VWPR Youth
    they will remain on VIM and stay on IM
-   If the customer moves between VWPR Youth and VWPR Notice, the
    customer will change measures but remain on IM

Impact on IM funds when moving between measures

Service Officers must ensure customers are aware of the need to
re-establish payment deductions. This may require further support to
help set up the payments from their new enhanced IM account.

Once a participant commences enhanced IM, the IM account will be closed
and the funds transferred to the enhanced IM account.

Where a customer has ceased Income Management (and do not move to
enhanced IM) the remaining funds in their IM account will be disbursed
to their discretionary account.

Customer Contact and Letters

If a customer becomes eligible under another measure, Services Australia
will attempt to contact the customer, to advise they will end IM and
commence enhanced IM. The customer will be sent a letter explaining
their transfer between measures and commencement under enhanced IM.

The Resources page contains scenarios of a customer transferring between
measures.

Customers move out of an Income Management or enhanced IM area

Customers whose payments are currently quarantined under Income
Management or enhanced Income Management, who move outside of a declared
IM area or enhanced IM location permanently, will continue to have their
eligible payments quarantined for a specific period of time, depending
on their measure.

Customers who have been identified for IM or enhanced IM and move out of
a declared quarantined location before commencing IM or enhanced IM, or
provide a retrospective change of address, may still have their payments
income managed.

For more information see Customer moves out of an Income Management or
enhanced Income Management area or Ending enhanced Income Management.

The Resources page contains a link to further information on declared
Income Management areas and enhanced IM locations.

Related links

Enhanced Income Management

Income Management

Customer moves out of an Income Management or enhanced Income Management
area

Ending enhanced Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
