
Customer moves out of an Income Management area 103-01030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Income Management is impacted when a customer
moves out of an Income Management area.

Relocating outside an Income Management area

Customers who move out of a declared Income Management area may continue
to be eligible for Income Management. Refer to the Process page for more
information.

Customers who disagree with a decision relating to their Income
Management measure may appeal the decision.

Effect on Income Management

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM), Supporting People at Risk
(SPaR)

Income Management will continue until a Revocation of Income Management
or Cashless Debit card is lodged by the approved referring authority or
the notice expires.

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) - social worker assessed

Income Management will continue until a social worker ends the
Vulnerable Notice or the Notice expires.

VWPR - auto triggered youth category

Income Management will continue under the same rules as if they had
remained in the declared Income Management area. The customer can still
apply for an exclusion from Income Management.

Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients
(LTWPR) - Compulsory Income Management

Income Management will continue for 13 weeks from the date the customer
moved outside the Northern Territory. Customers can still apply for an
exemption from Income Management.

Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

Income Management can continue indefinitely, except where customers move
into a Cashless Debit Card area or customers can choose to end their VIM
Agreement any time after completing the mandatory 13 weeks.

Customers who move into a Cashless Debit Card (CDC) area

Customers cannot participate in the CDC while they are income managed.
When a customer moves permanently into a CDC area outside the Northern
Territory, Income Management (excluding Voluntary Income Management)
will continue until it reaches its natural end:

-   the relevant Notice expires or is revoked, or
-   an exemption or exclusion is granted (where eligible), or
-   the customer's portability period ends (where applicable), or
-   the customer no longer meets the eligibility criteria

When a VIM customer moves into a CDC area outside the Northern
Territory, the agency will manually end Income Management, as the
customer no longer meets the eligibility requirements.

When Income Management ends in a CDC area outside the NT, eligible
customers will be placed on the Cashless Debit Card, or they can
volunteer to participate for this measure.

In the Northern Territory, Income Management and CDC programs run
concurrently. Customers can choose to stay on Income Management or
request to transition to the CDC. Once they consent to participate in
the CDC they will not be able to go back to IM. For more information,
see Income Management (IM) to CDC Transition in the Northern Territory.

The Resources page contains links to declared Income Management area
information, branch intranet page, Income Management contact details and
the policy helpdesk.

Related links

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Compulsory Income Management for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term
Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR)

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (WVPR) Income Management

Voluntary Income Management

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC) in the Northern
Territory

Cashless Debit Card under the Cape York Initiative

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Exclusions from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service Officers

Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient
(VWPR) Notices assessed by social workers

Disbursement of funds when Income Management ends

Reviews of Income Management decisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
