
Legal entities information 103-19031344

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines legal entities that Services Australia contracts
with for Income Management, Electronic Verification of Rent (EVoR),
Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS), BasicsCard and Centrepay
programmes.

Legal entities

Before the agency can enter into a contract with a business it should be
confirmed that the business is a legal entity. There are various types
of business entities. Some require follow up to ensure the agency is
entering into a valid contract.

A business can be:

-   a company
-   a sole trader
-   an incorporated association
-   a local, state/territory or Australian Commonwealth government
    organisation
-   a public school and hospital

Entities that require further information

-   other unincorporated entities
-   an unincorporated association
-   a trustee of a trust
-   a partnership
-   other businesses – established under specific legislation/private
    landlords
-   co-operatives
-   self-managed super funds

Business Application (BA)

A BA is a formal document (contract/agreement) between the agency and a
business to participate in or use the various programmes the agency
manages.

A BA can be signed by a director of the company or an Authorised
Officer. A BA should never be approved without checking the legal
entity. The status of the Australian Business Number (ABN) should be
‘Current’. If the ABN is de-registered or cancelled, a new BA needs to
be lodged under the current ABN. If there has been a change in ABN and
the business has multiple programmes, a new BA is required for all
programmes.

Some businesses may not have an ABN and only have an Australian Company
Number (ACN). The ASIC website should be checked to ensure the status of
the ACN is ‘registered’.

If it is determined that the agency is contracted with an incorrect
entity (an entity that requires further information), a Correction of
Registration letter, should be issued and a new BA obtained. This letter
is available on the Third Party Programmes Team 'shared drive'.

For Centrepay it may be more appropriate to issue an Intent to withdraw
letter which provides 10 business days for the business to lodge a new
BA. See Withdrawing a business's approval to use a deduction and
confirmation service.

The entity name on ABN Lookup/ASIC website search should match the
organisation name on our records. The trading name may not be listed on
ABN Lookup or ASIC website. If the business has not provided a trading
name on their BA, this will need to be confirmed directly with the
business. If the trading name is the same as the business name, ensure
this is coded. Note: do not leave the ‘Organisation Name’ field and
‘Trading Name’ field blank.

Ensure ASIC is checked as well as ABN Lookup to confirm a business's
ABN/ACN status (current/de-registered/cancelled). See Resources for a
link to websites.

Companies

A company is a separate legal entity from its owners/operators. This
means the company itself has the same rights as a natural person and can
incur debts, sue, and be sued. When a company is approved for a
contract/agreement with the agency, the company is responsible for
complying with the relevant programme policy and terms.

A company can be incorporated under the:

-   Corporations Act 2001 (Cth), or
-   if owned and controlled by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
    people, the Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act
    2006 (Cth). See References for a link

A company that is controlled by the Commonwealth and incorporated under
the Corporations Act is a Commonwealth company. There are a variety of
company structures, indicated by the ending of its name (‘Pty Ltd’, just
‘Pty’, or just ‘Ltd’, or ‘NL’).

Where a company has both an Australian Business Number (ABN) and an
Australian Company Number (ACN), record both on the Business Record. See
Australian Business Number (ABN) and other entities.

Who signs the Business Application?

The Business Application (BA) can be signed by a director of the company
or an Authorised Officer.

The Second Authorised Officer signature can be left blank only if the
company’s only Director who is also the only company Secretary signed
the BA. Otherwise:

-   a Director or Secretary of the company can sign, or
-   an Authorised Officer can sign
-   the Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    but not a Director or company Secretary. If Second Authorised
    Officer is left blank, Witness for the Second Authorised Officer is
    also to be left blank

Sole traders

A sole trader is a business owned and run by an individual. There is no
legal distinction between the owner and the business. The business owner
is legally responsible for all aspects of the business, which means that
the person can sue and be sued in their name, and will be liable for
debts of the business. Search for a sole trader formally using the
person’s name, for example, John Adam Smith.

Note: a sole trader is required to have an Australian Business Number
(ABN) to be approved for any programme unless its only business is the
supply of residential premises as a private landlord.

Who signs the Business Application?

-   The Business Application is signed by the sole trader
-   The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the sole trader’s business

Incorporated associations

An incorporated association has the same characteristics as a company
but is incorporated under state/territory legislation rather than the
Corporations Act. Like companies, it can sue and be sued in its
corporate name and will survive even if its members die or resign. Local
charities and recreational/cultural groups that only operate within one
state/territory often choose to incorporate this way because it is
simpler.

Where an incorporated association is a charity, it may also be
registered with the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission
(ACNC), see Resources for a link. The ACNC register contains useful
information about registered charities, including its governing
documents and responsible persons.

Australian Business Number (ABN) lookup often labels an incorporated
association as an Other Incorporated Entity. Refer to incorporated
associations formally using their full name and ABN.

Who signs the Business Application?

-   The Business Application (BA) must be signed by a person responsible
    for the association, being the Public Officer or Secretary of the
    incorporated association, or an Authorised Officer. If it is a
    charity registered with the ACNC, a person listed on the ACNC
    register as a responsible person is acceptable. A manager in the
    relevant part of the business is also generally acceptable as an
    Authorised Officer
-   The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the business, but not an office holder

Co-operatives

What is a Co-operative

A Co-operative is:

-   a democratic organisation, owned and controlled by its members for a
    common benefit
-   governed by the Co-operatives National law and are
    registered/established under state/territory legislation. Given that
    Co-operatives are established under a national law, they have the
    capacity to enter into contracts and undertake business activities
    across Australia
-   able to sue and be sued in its corporate name and has legal capacity
    as an individual.

When incorporated, a co-operative is required to be registered with the
regulator in its relevant state or territory, as applicable, and will be
issued with a certificate of registration. The relevant regulator will
have a record of all registered Co-operatives. For example, Consumer
Affairs Victoria maintains a public register of Co-operatives and
limited partnerships.

The registered name of a co-operative always includes the word
'Co-operative', ‘Co-op’ or 'Coop’ and ends with ‘Limited’ or ‘Ltd’.

ABN LookUp often:

-   labels an incorporated association as an ‘Other Incorporated Entity’
-   refers to co-operatives formally using its full name

In addition an ASIC search will:

-   record them as 'Associations'
-   demonstrate whether the co-operative is registered and who the
    regulator is that governs their activities.

Where a co-operative has more than one officer, execution of documents
on behalf of a co-operative may be completed by:

-   two directors, or
-   one director and company secretary, or
-   by an authorised agent of the co-operative. An authorised agent will
    be treated as an authorised person for the purposes of the form.

In addition, a cooperative may also execute contracts by affixing its
common seal. When a co-operative is approved for a program, it is
responsible for complying with the relevant program policy and terms.

How should a co-operative sign a BA

Authorised officer can be signed by:

-   a director and secretary of the co-operative, or
-   an ‘authorised agent’ who will be treated as an ‘Authorised Officer’
    for the purposes of the form (see below for how to decide if a
    person is authorised)

Second authorised officer can be signed by another ‘authorised officer’
of the co-operative (see below for how to decide if a person is
authorised)

Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee of the
business but not an office holder

Who is an authorised officer

An agent:

-   may enter into contract on behalf of a co-operative by exercising an
    express or implied authority to enter into contracts on behalf of a
    co-operative
-   can exercise its power without using a common seal (refer to section
    50 Co-operatives (Adoption of National Law) Act 2012))
-   will be treated as an 'authorised person' for the purposes of the BA

A manager in the relevant part of the co-operative is generally
acceptable as an 'authorised officer' for a BA.

Government organisations

Corporate vs Non-Corporate Commonwealth Entities

A corporate Commonwealth entity (CCE) is a body corporate that is both
legally and financially separate from the Commonwealth, and a
non-corporate Commonwealth entity (NCCE) is not a body corporate because
NCCEs are a part of the Commonwealth, both legally and financially.

The agency is an NCCE. The Australian War Memorial is an example of a
CCE. A full list of Commonwealth entities can be found on the Department
of Finance site, see Resources for a link.

Who signs the Business Application?

-   The Business Application must be signed by an Authorised Officer
-   The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the CCE or NCCE

State or Territories

A State or Territory is a legal entity that acts through its departments
(similar to how the Commonwealth acts through its Non-corporate
Commonwealth entity (NCCEs)). Therefore, refer to a department of a
State or Territory by reference to the State or Territory, for example
the State of Queensland as represented by Smart Service Queensland.

Who signs the Business Application?

-   The Business Application must be signed by an Authorised Officer
-   The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the state or territory entity

Local governments

Local governments are established under legislation as statutory
authorities that are able to enter into contracts in their own name.
However, there is a wide variety of incorporated and unincorporated
entities that may have been established by or in association with local
governments. Refer to local government entities with its full name, for
example, Belconnen Community Council.

Who signs the Business Application?

-   The Business Application must be signed by an Authorised Officer
-   The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank or signed by another
    Authorised Officer depending on the preferences of the local
    government entity
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the local government entity

Public schools and hospitals

Public schools and hospitals are usually a part of the relevant State or
Territory government, although some are incorporated under a specific
piece of legislation (e.g. hospitals incorporated under the Health Care
Act 2008 (SA)).

If the business is incorporated under an Act or specific piece of
legislation, these businesses usually have a body corporate/board of
trustees/board of the agency.

Who signs the Business Application?

-   The Business Application must be signed by a member of the
    board/body corporate , or an Authorised Officer
-   The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank or signed by another
    ‘authorised officer’ depending on the preferences of the public
    school or hospital
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the public school or hospital

Entities which require further information

Unincorporated entities

If a business is not incorporated that does not automatically make it an
unincorporated association, and not all entities marked as Other
Unincorporated Entity on Australian Business Number (ABN) Lookup are
unincorporated associations. Contrary to the ordinary meaning of these
words:

-   unincorporated association
-   an entity that is not incorporated

mean different things. Not all unincorporated entities are
unincorporated associations. See Resources for examples.

Who signs the Business Application?

A signature from the head of the relevant part of the organisation is
generally acceptable as an Authorised Officer for a Business Application
(BA). If you are unsure, ask the organisation for more information about
the person's role in the organisation.

-   The BA must be signed by an Authorised Officer
-   Second Authorised Officer can be left blank or signed by another
    Authorised Officer depending on the preferences of the organisation
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the organisation

Unincorporated Associations

Unincorporated associations are a number of people grouped together by a
common purpose with club-like characteristics, for example, a sporting
club, social club or trade union.

An unincorporated association cannot enter into contracts in its own
name because it is not a legal entity. Instead an individual member
needs to accept personal responsibility and liability for the
association and needs to provide an individual undertaking.

Who signs the Business Application?

Individual Undertaking:

An individual undertaking is required for an unincorporated association
to contract with the agency. The person who signs the individual
undertaking enters into the contract in their personal capacity as a
representative of the business and becomes liable. If this person
changes, a new Business Application (BA) needs to be signed.

The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank or signed by another
Authorised Officer depending on the preferences of the unincorporated
association.

The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee or
volunteer of the business but not an office holder.

Other options available for unincorporated entities where an individual
undertaking may not be obtainable are:

-   For the Third Party Organisation (TPO) to register as an
    incorporated entity
-   If there is an associated trust, a trustee can lodge an application
    on behalf of the trust
-   An unincorporated entity can explore having an overarching legal
    entity take responsibility - such as an umbrella business
-   For Indigenous Businesses check the Office of the Registrar of
    Indigenous Corporations website. See Resources for a link. Some
    Indigenous Businesses may be registered under the Corporations
    (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act (CATSI Act)

Trusts and Self-Managed funds

The agency cannot enter into contracts with Trusts (a trust is not a
legal entity). The Trustee of the Trust needs to be established and can
be an individual or a company. A contract may be entered into with the
trustee on behalf of the trust as long as the trustee is a valid legal
entity itself. A trust may have more than one trustee.

Trustees operate the business on behalf of trusts and are also liable
for debts of the trust. If the trustee incurs liabilities in the proper
exercise of its power, it is entitled to be indemnified out of the
assets of the trust.

A trust may have more than one trustee. Trustees are responsible for
managing the affairs of the trust and they hold property for the benefit
of others (referred to as ‘beneficiaries’ of the trust). For example,
the Salvation Army is incorporated by acts of Parliament and has a board
of trustees. The trustees need to be recorded on a DOA DOC and the
Business Application (BA) should be signed by one of these trustees.

Who signs the Business Application?

The BA must be signed by the trustee (if the trustee is an individual)
or an Authorised Officer of the trustee entity (where the trustee is not
an individual).

A Second Authorised Officer is required unless the trust has only one
individual trustee (who has already signed) or the trust has only one
trustee that is an entity that is able to execute documents with only
one signature (for example a sole company director or partnership). For
these, see Searching and coding legal entity information table.

Otherwise:

-   if the trust has more than one individual trustee, it can be signed
    by another one of the individual trustees
-   if the trust has a trustee that is an entity that normally executes
    documents with more than one Authorised Officer (for example, a
    company with multiple directors), the second person who is
    authorised to sign should sign. See Searching and coding legal
    entity information table
-   if the trust normally executes formal documents with more than two
    authorised officers, there is no need to have a third Authorised
    Officer sign the BA
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the trust or of the trustee

Other Trusts: Self-Managed Superfunds

Self-Managed Superfunds (SMSF) are a way for saving for retirement
whereby the members of the SMSF are also the trustees. A SMSF can be
established in either of the following ways:

-   operated by individuals who are each a trustee of the SMSF (less
    than 5 members in total) or
-   as a body corporate where each member of the SMSF is a director

When reviewing an application by a SMSF, Service Officers will need to
determine whether the SMSF is a group of individuals or a body
corporate. This will determine the manner in which the SMSF is required
to execute the BA.

The deed or constitution setting up the SMSF may have restrictions on
its ability to undertake certain actions. Evidence/confirmation from the
SMSF must be provided to make sure they are able to enter into and apply
to be an approved business for the purposes of Centrepay. This can be an
email from the trustee/director attesting to the business' ability to
make the BA. In addition, the agency may request a copy or confirmation
of the Registerable Superannuation Entity (RSE) Licence.

The agency may deal with a SMSF in the same way that it deals with a
Trust as set out above.

Partnerships

The agency can only enter into a contract with a partner of the
partnership who has the authority to do so (which depends on the nature
of the partner’s partnership). Partners can be individuals, companies or
incorporated associations (such as a body corporate). Generally each
partner is personally liable for actions or debts for the partnership,
however some partners have limited or no authority to act for the
entity.

Who signs the Business Application?

-   Only one partner needs to sign the Business Application (BA)
    regardless of how many partners make up the partnership
-   If the partner leaves the partnership, the contract/agreement
    remains valid as the remaining partners assume all rights and
    obligations under the contract jointly
-   If the partnership dissolves entirely, a new BA is required
-   The Second Authorised Officer can be left blank or signed by another
    partner (for example if that partnership prefers two partners to
    sign)
-   The Witness can be any adult of sound mind, who can be an employee
    of the partnership but not a partner

Other entities

Entities established under specific legislation

Not all entities established by legislation are government entities.

Where this is the case seek advice from the business as to how they
normally sign official documents. Obtain a copy of the relevant
legislation to show who is authorised to sign contracts. Examples of
businesses under this structure could be:

-   Incorporated by Acts of Parliament
-   Constituted by the Aboriginal Lands Rights Act 1983
-   International Organisations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1963
    (Cth)

Aboriginal Land Councils

Each state and territory has its own system of institutions established
under state/territory legislation. For example, in NSW each local
Aboriginal land council and the head body that manages them (the New
South Wales Aboriginal Land Council) are all constituted by the
Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1983 (NSW). However, the former are listed on
Australian Business Number (ABN) Lookup as Unincorporated while the
latter is listed as Incorporated.

Who signs the Business Application?

Their status on ABN Lookup is irrelevant to how they are to sign
documents, however, because section 50 of the Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW) contains special rules about this depending on the land council’s
membership:

-   if it has 2 or more members: signed by the president, chairperson or
    other principal officer or by any member of the staff authorised to
    do so by the president, chairperson or other principal officer
-   if it has only one member: signed by that person or by any member of
    the staff of the corporation authorised to do so by that person
-   if it has no members: signed by the person for the time being
    managing its affairs or by any member of the staff authorised to do
    so by that person

International organisations

Some international organisations are declared under the International
Organisations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1963 (Cth). For example,
the International Organization for Migration is an international
organisation declared under that Act as a body corporate through the
International Organization for Migration (Privileges and Immunities)
Regulations 1991 (Cth). It is exempt from the liability to pay or
collect certain taxes by legislation and therefore excused from having
to have an ABN. It is issued with a Withholding Payer Number by the ATO.
Many international organisations that operate in Australia are declared
under that Act.

Who signs the Business Application?

The Business Application (BA) should be signed in accordance with the
relevant legislation. If the relevant legislation is silent on how the
entity should sign but does declare the entity as a body corporate, or
if the entity is otherwise incorporated, both the Authorised Officer and
Second Authorised Officer can be signed by authorised officers.

If the legislated entity is an unincorporated association, the BA will
need an individual undertaking. Refer to unincorporated associations.

Religious organisations

Religious organisations utilise a wide variety of entity types.
Typically, these include both incorporated and unincorporated entities
(some of which may be established under specific legislation), as well
as a variety of trusts.

Ascertaining the correct entity type may be difficult and additional
information may need to be requested from the applicant.

Who signs the Business Application and how to code

In order to determine how the BA is signed, determine the entity type
and see relevant type in the Searching and coding legal entity
information table.

Private landlords

A private landlord is not a type of legal entity, it is a concept
developed for GST and refers to entities that supply residential
premises for rent. While they are usually individual people, that is not
always the case. If the private landlord only provides residential
premises, it cannot charge or claim for GST and therefore does not need
an Australian Business Number (ABN). If it does other business, then it
may need an ABN. Usually when a private landlord is an individual
person, it does not carry on any other business, that is why most
private landlords approved for Centrepay are individuals/sole traders
and do not have an ABN.

Who signs the Business Application and how to code

In order to determine how the BA is signed, determine the entity type
and see relevant type in the Searching and coding legal entity
information table.

A DOA DOC should be created on the record explaining either what the
entity is or that the Private Landlord does not require an ABN.

The Resources page has links to Australian Business Register, Australian
Securities and Investments Commission, Australian Charities and Not-for
profits Commission, Australian Government Department of Finance, ORIC
website and examples of unincorporated entities.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
