
Identifying customers for Income Management under the Disengaged Youth (DEY) measure 103-01170010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 17 March 2021, Income Management (IM) customers based in the
Northern Territory (NT) can permanently transition to the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) program. Customers on an income support payment who are
living in the NT and are not currently on IM, will be able to volunteer
for the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) from this date.
For more information on this process or to initiate an IM to CDC
transition, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory, which also contains staff
resources and links to the transition overview Intranet page for
additional information.

This document outlines the criteria which identifies a customer for
Income Management under the Disengaged Youth (DEY) measure.

On this Page:

DEY Income Management

A customer will be identified automatically for Income Management under
the DEY measure if they meet all the following criteria:

-   The customer's usual place of residence is within the Northern
    Territory
-   The customer is in receipt of a category E welfare payment
-   The customer has been in receipt of one or more category E welfare
    payments for at least 13 weeks during the past 26 week period. This
    period does not have to be continuous and can be any combination of
    Category E payments (i.e. does not have to be the one payment for 13
    weeks). Periods of current zero rate and periods where payment is
    suspended count towards the 13 weeks. Periods where the payment is
    assessed (such as serving a Liquid Assets Waiting Period) do not
    count towards the total
-   The customer is at least 15 years of age and has not reached 25
    years of age
-   The customer is not already income managed under a measure which is
    above this Compulsory Income Management (CIM) measure on the
    hierarchy of Income Management measures
-   The customer does not have an excluded payment nominee for Income
    Management purposes

Usual place of residence

The usual place of residence will be determined by the system based on
the customer's home or term address.

If the address is updated to indicate that the customer now lives in the
Northern Territory and all other eligibility criteria are met, the
system will identify the customer as eligible for Income Management
under this measure and an Initial Assessment interview will be required.

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

If a customer moves out of the Northern Territory after being identified
for or commencing Income Management under this measure, their payments
may still be income managed. For more information see, Customer moves
out of an Income Management area.

Percentage of payments for Income Management (IM)

Under the Disengaged Youth (DEY) measure, 50% of the customer's regular
fortnightly payments are income managed and 100% of lump sum payments
income managed.

Customer turns 25 years old

The customer may qualify for the Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients
(LTWPR) measure when they turn 25 years of age. In this case, they will
continue under that measure from their 25th birthday. If they do not
qualify for Income Management under the Long Term Welfare Payment
Recipients (LTWPR) measure they will automatically cease Income
Management on their 25th birthday.

Exemption from Income Management

Customers may qualify for an exemption from Income Management under the
Disengaged Youth (DEY) measure. Different exemption criteria apply
depending on whether the customer has dependent children or not.

Exiting from Income Management

Customers cease to be income managed under this measure if:

-   it has been more than 13 weeks since they moved out of the Northern
    Territory on a permanent or indefinite basis
-   they qualify for a measure higher in hierarchy of measures (in which
    case Income Management would continue under that measure)
-   their category E welfare payment is cancelled
-   they are granted an exemption from Income Management
-   they have an excluded payment nominee
-   the customer has passed away

Reviews and Appeals

Customers can request a review of decisions to apply Income Management
to their payments under the Disengaged Youth (DEY) measure at any time.
Normal review and appeal processes apply.

The Resources page contains assessment examples.

Related links

Compulsory Income Management for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term
Welfare Payment Recipients

Initial Assessment interview for Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipients

Identifying customers for Income Management under the Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipients (LTWPR) measure

Priority Needs and Expense Allocations

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Changes to Income Management expenses

Overview and hierarchy of Income Management

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Disbursement interview for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipient (LTWPR) Income Management

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
