
Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving prison 103-01050140

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage Income Management and Cashless
Debit Card (CDC) customers who enter or leave prison.

On this Page:

Income Management

Income Management is a way to help people manage their money to meet
essential household needs. If a customer's payments are income managed,
a percentage of their regular payments are set aside and the rest of
their regular payments are paid to them in the usual way. Advance and
lump sum payments are 100% income managed.

Customers can access their income managed money using the BasicsCard or
setting up regular or one-off direct payments to stores, landlords or
other services providers.

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Cashless Debit Card program aims to reduce the amount of cash in the
community that could be used for gambling or to buy alcohol and drugs.
Participants have up to 80% of their restrictable payment paid to their
CDC account, the remaining 20% will be paid to the customer’s normal
bank account. Lump sum and arrears of restrictable payments are paid to
the CDC account.

Customer enters prison

Income Management

When an income managed customer enters prison, payments are subsequently
suspended as they are no longer entitled to a social security payment
while in prison. If their payments are cancelled, Income Management will
automatically end.

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

When a Cashless Debit Card customer enters prison, and payments are
cancelled, funds will remain on the card and no disbursement will occur.

Customer leaves prison

Income Management

Income Managed customers leaving prison may have Income Management
reinstated if they are granted an eligible payment and continue to meet
the criteria for Income Management.

Prison release customers may be identified for Income Management if they
meet the criteria for Income Management.

Cashless Debit Card

Cashless Debit Card customers leaving prison may be reinstated on the
Cashless Debit Card if their eligible payment is restored or re-granted
and there is no gap in their payment.

Prison release customers may be identified for the Cashless Debit Card
if they meet the criteria for the program.

Exemptions and exclusions

Income Management customers who were granted an exclusion or exemption
from Income Management prior to their period of imprisonment may
continue to be excluded/exempt from Income Management when they are
released from prison. However, Income Management may apply if their
circumstances have changed.

The Resources page contains further information about declared Income
Management areas, links to Locator for customer 13 and 1800 numbers and
National Transfer Numbers and contact details for the Access Support
Centre. It also contains links to the Income Management prison servicing
contacts, Prison Liaison Officers, Centrelink pre-release processes,
State Income Management Coordinators and Income Management Contact
Officers pages on the intranet, and scenarios when a VWPR (Crisis
Payment) Income Management period may be extended.

Related links

Admission process for incarcerated customers

Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers

Effect on Income Management when payment is restored or re-granted

Disbursement of funds when Income Management ends

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Payment of income managed funds to Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) measure

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
