
Cashless Debit Card (CDC) - changing initial waiting periods 103-21112958

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

When commencing on the Cashless Debit Card (CDC), all participants have
an initial waiting period prior to any payments being delivered to the
CDC account. This is to allow adequate time for the participant to
receive their card and relevant instructions from the card issuer. These
waiting periods vary in length depending on CDC program area and may be
reduced at the participant’s request.

Default initial waiting periods

Participants in Ceduna, East Kimberly, Goldfields and Bundaberg and
Hervey Bay CDC program areas will have a default initial waiting period
of 14 days.

Participants in the Northern Territory and Cape York regions have a
default initial waiting period of 28 days. Participants transitioning
from Income Management to the CDC may choose either a zero, 14, 28, 42
or 56 day initial waiting period. Participants should be assisted to
select a start date that suits their circumstances to ensure they will
have access to a card when they reach their CDC start date.

Changing an initial waiting period

Participants may choose to reduce the length of their initial waiting
period, however, they cannot be extended.

If a participant would like a zero-day initial waiting period, they must
have access to an activated temporary card or their personalised card.
See Temporary Cashless Debit Cards (CDC)

Requests to change a CDC initial waiting period are actioned by
contacting the CDC Hotline or attending a service centre in the Northern
Territory.

Start dates

Payments commence delivering to a participant’s CDC account on their
first payment date after an initial waiting period ends. Changing the
length of a waiting period will, in turn, change the participant’s CDC
start date.

Related links

Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Transition in the
Northern Territory

Transitioning Compulsory Income Management (CIM) customers to the
Cashless Debit Card (CDC) in the Northern Territory

Access to Income Management (IM) funds for customers starting on the
Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Cashless Debit Card under the Cape York Initiative

Cashless Debit Card Volunteers

Participation in the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Disbursement of funds when Income Management ends

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
