
Disclosing information to parents of Youth Allowance customers 104-01020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when Services Australia may use implied authority
and disclose some information to parents.

Implied authority would not be used if the question was 'Is my son
claiming Youth Allowance?' or 'Where is my daughter living?'. However,
information can be given for questions such as 'Why has my daughter had
her payments increased?' or 'My son has received a letter saying his
payments have stopped, why has this occurred?'.

On this Page:

Independence

If the young person is assessed as being independent for Youth Allowance
(YA) due to 'unreasonable to live at home' or similar criteria, staff
must not acknowledge to a parent/guardian that their child is receiving
YA or provide details of payment.

Giving authority

Customers can give authority for their parents to enquire on their
behalf:

-   Verbally during a phone call
-   In a letter or statement from the YA customer
-   When completing an online claim for YA
-   When completing the Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001)
-   By completing an Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or
    act on your behalf (SS313) form. Customers can appoint their parent
    as a nominee or person permitted to enquire. When a nominee is
    appointed there is no stipulation over what information they can
    have access to subject to the type of nominee arrangement
    (correspondence and/or payment). For more information, see Nominees.

Information about the parents

Do not provide personal information to the customer about their parents.
This especially relates to parental income details. If the customer's
payment has been cancelled or reduced due to parent's income, the
customer may only be told that their payment has been affected by their
parent's income and to discuss it with them.

When contact is made over the phone, receipt numbers should be issued to
parents of under 18s whose payments go to that parent's account.

The Resources page contains common questions about disclosing
information to parents of Youth Allowance (YA) and a link to the Privacy
intranet page.

Related links

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Disclosing information to third parties

Granting and recording parental permission to enquire

Implied consent regarding third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
