-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure where correspondence containing
personal information (such as letters and faxes) is received by the
wrong person. In this document, the person who received the information
is referred to as the unintended individual.

Privacy obligations

Services Australia (including all officials employed by the Agency and
staff engaged under contract) collects, uses, discloses and stores
significant amounts of personal, sensitive and protected information.
Inappropriate management of this information may be a breach of privacy
law, secrecy provisions or duties of confidentiality, and could have
serious consequences for the affected individual.

Retrieve incorrect mail if recently sent

Staff members who realise correspondence has been sent to the incorrect
person should immediately remove the mail from the outgoing post (if the
documents have not already been sent).

If the correspondence is not in the outgoing post, but was sent in the
last few days, the staff member can contact the Output Management team
and request the correspondence be retrieved from the central printing
facility. The Resources page includes a link to the Output Management
Intranet page.

Response to incidents

It is the policy of Services Australia to respond quickly to incidents
of misdirected correspondence and to ensure the customer and unintended
individual are advised Services Australia takes its responsibilities
seriously.

It is important to retrieve any personal information received by an
unintended individual in a timely manner.

The Resources page contains links to the Privacy Incident Portal and the
Privacy and Secrecy and Output Management Intranet pages.

Related links

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Updating address details

Return mail indicator for Medicare claims

Updating Child Support customer information

Returned mail for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
