
Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Implementing 104-07050030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains the process Centrelink staff use when
implementing a Managed Service Plan (MSP).

Advising customers of MSP decisions

Once an MSP is approved the customer must be advised of the decision to
implement it. Every attempt must be made to contact the customer by
phone to explain the MSP including:

-   the reasons for implementation
-   the duration of the MSP, and
-   the way the customer can interact with Services Australia

In circumstances where telephone contact is unsuccessful, sending an MSP
SMS through desktop messaging should be considered (Centrelink customers
only).

The customer must also be notified of the MSP in writing. In some
serious cases, the letter may be hand delivered by the local police
(where arrangements exist). Where this occurs this must be recorded as a
note in MSP.

There may be exceptional circumstances where it is appropriate to notify
the customer in writing only. In these instances, the reasons must be
recorded as a note in the MSP.

Important information about the end date for MSPs in CIMS

An MSP will end on the end date of the MSP recorded in the Customer
Incident Management System (CIMS). The customer will return to standard
servicing arrangements unless a decision is made to extend or vary the
MSP via a review.

See Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Reviewing.

Request support from Customer Aggression Prevention Team (CAPT)

MSPs for Centrelink customers are recorded in the Customer Incident
Management System (CIMS). Staff can contact the CAT for support and
advice when implementing an MSP. Resources has a link to the CAT
intranet page for contact details.

CIMS processing assistance

For assistance with CIMS processing refer to the task cards on the
Customer Incident Management System page. Resources has a link to this
page.

Suggested task cards relevant to implementing an MSP:

-   Approving a Managed Service Plan (MSP) with Service Channel
    Restrictions
-   Recording Managed Service Plan (MSP)
-   Recording a Provisional Managed Service Plan (MSP)
-   Incident Recording in the Customer Incident Management System (CIMS)

The Resources page contains a link to MSP letter guidelines and a link
to the intranet page for Customer Aggression Prevention Security (CAPS)
team contact details.

Related links

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

Customer aggression - Response

Customer aggression - Recovery

Customer aggression - Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Proposing, recording and approving

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Customer not complying

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Reviewing

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - One-off variation

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Customer service delivered through a One
Main Contact (OMC)

Family and domestic violence

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
