
Authenticating a Centrelink customer 104-04110000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines how to authenticate a customer or authorised
nominee when there is contact between the customer or authorised nominee
and Services Australia. Authentication is an agency fraud control and is
important in preventing potential fraud against the welfare systems and
protecting our customers. Correct authentication is required to align
with the agency’s commitment in protecting the integrity of our programs
and services.

How customers can be authenticated

Staff assisting customers or authorised nominees with enquiries or
processing claims for Centrelink (service delivery brand) payments and
services must:

-   use authentication to ensure the person interacting with the agency
    is the right person and
-   the owner or authorised representative of the record being accessed

If the Service Officer has any concerns about a customer's authority to
enquire, they should request to see photo identification or ask further
Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO) questions until they are satisfied.
Where there is any doubt, the information must not be released until
such time PoRO and authority to enquire is established.

Note: if there is a password on a customer's record, the Service Officer
must ask the customer or authorised nominee to provide it at every
contact. The password does not replace or form part of an authentication
or PoRO check. The password is in addition to authenticating a customer,
see Customer password on a Display on Access DOC.

Customers can authenticate themselves:

-   via the Interactive Voice Response (IVR) process when they telephone
    by entering a valid Customer Access Number (CAN) or Customer
    Reference Number (CRN), and Personal Identification Number (PIN)
-   in person with a Service Officer by providing a current photo
    identity document or by confirming stored information held on their
    record (PoRO)
-   over the phone with a Service Officer by confirming stored
    information held on their record (PoRO)
-   via voice biometrics technology, by entering their CAN or CRN and
    repeating their Common Pass Phrase (CPP)
-   via logging into their Express Plus App
-   via the myGov or Services Australia website and entering their
    CAN/CRN and password on the Log on page

Note: digital driver licences are acceptable for Identity Confirmation,
linkage and authentication purposes. The holder of an Australian driver
licence is required to present a refreshed application view of the date
and time stamp on the digital driver licence in person at:

-   service centres, or
-   agency sites

See Identity Confirmation for more information.

Services Australia Workspace authentication

Case Information window in Services Australia Workspace will display the
customer's authentication status as colours making authentication
identification easier:

-   Green - Fully authenticated (a customer who is successfully
    authenticated via voiceprint, connected via Digital Assistance with
    the Click to Call function within the Express Plus App or CAN/CRN
    and PIN)
-   Amber - Not authenticated (a customer using a CAN/CRN or no CAN/CRN
    entered into IVR, but cannot be authenticated using a PIN or
    voiceprint)
-   Red - Not authenticated (a customer who has attempted and fails to
    authenticate via voiceprint or PIN)

The Process page contains further information about authenticating a
customer.

Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO)

The customer's right to access the record must be established by asking
them to provide personal details that can be crosschecked with the
customer's record. To avoid inadvertent disclosure of personal
information, privacy breaches and to prevent intertwining customer
records/data, it is important to ask the customer to complete PoRO.
Service Officers must ensure the correct record is located prior to
commencing PoRO.

Service Officers must never provide customer information for the
individual to confirm when conducting authentication. Service Officers
should be aware that other people including the customer's friends and
relatives are aware of such simple information as the customer's date of
birth or how many children are in the family. To ensure the protection
of customer information across all channels, it is essential that
Service Officers confirm more than the basic details such as CRN, full
name, address and date of birth. The questions asked must be searching,
but must not be so personal as to be intrusive. It is important to
explain to the customer the questions are being asked to ensure the
security and privacy of the information stored on our records for all of
our customers. The References page contains a link to the Customer
Identity Authentication Policy.

Note: On successful completion of authentication, if there is a password
on a customer's record, the Service Officer must ask the customer to
provide it at every contact. .

Customer's PoRO not established

Where the Service Officer doubts they are speaking to the customer or
their authorised nominee, information must not be released or updates
made to the record. The Service Officer should offer to call the
customer back on a number already recorded in our system or send the
information to the customer's recorded address. If the contact number
provided does not match the number recorded on the system, under no
circumstances should this number be used. Service Officers must never
provide customer information for the individual to confirm.

Note: if the person is suspected of fraudulently attempting to access
another person’s record, the Service Officer must report the suspected
fraud.

How to authenticate a paper claim

A Service Officer must be satisfied the customer record being accessed
belongs to the correct person before assisting with the paper claim.

Authentication is conducted by assessing the information contained
within the claim form against information held on the record.

Service Officers can only proceed with the claim process once they are
satisfied that the person claiming is the owner of the record being
accessed.

Paper Prison Release claims

For customers who have recently been, or will be, released from prison,
confirm prison name, prison ID and other information found within the
paper claim (SU674) to match the record being accessed. For further
processing information, see Centrelink service standards and procedures
for pre-release and post-release prison customers.

The Service Officer must not proceed with the claim if they are unable
to match enough information to be satisfied that the person claiming is
the owner of the record being accessed. The Service Officer must attempt
to contact the customer or record a DOC to advise that customer contact
is required.

Inadvertent Access Register

Privacy and confidentiality provisions administered by Services
Australia must be followed at all times. This includes when staff
accidentally access the record of a person they know. If during the
course of their duties staff inadvertently access the information of a
person in whom they have a personal interest, they must record the
incident on the Inadvertent Access Register.

Call transfers from Child Support

When a warm transfer (announced) is received from Child Support, a full
authentication check is not required. Child Support will provide
necessary customer details to ensure the correct customer record when
transferring the call. Note: if the customer has a password on their
record, the Service Officer must confirm this before proceeding with the
enquiry at every contact. See Customer password on a Display on Access
DOC.

Related links

Customer password on a Display on Access DOC

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Disclosing information to parents of Youth Allowance customers

Access to Centrelink self-service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Disclosing information to third parties

Answering calls in Centrelink

Identity documents A to Z

Disclosing information to a nominee

Commonwealth Ombudsman

Inadvertent access and authorised access

Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982

Identifying a staff member

Searching for a customer on the system

Voiceprints for phone self service

Centrelink Intertwined records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
