
Disclosing personal information and CCTV to police and State and Territory agencies 104-04060030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff delegated to release customer information only.

This document outlines how to disclose information to police and State
and Territory agencies.

Disclosing personal information to police

Services Australia gets requests for personal information from police
agencies relating to investigations. Liaison points with law enforcement
agencies have been set up:

All requests for personal information:

-   come through 1 central point within that agency, and
-   are received by the Information Release Team

Queensland Police is an exception to this rule.

If an officer asks for personal information and they are not from the
Queensland Police, they are told to contact the assigned point of
contact in their agency.

If an officer from the Queensland Police requests personal information
they are referred to the public interest team in the Information Release
Section.

For more details, contact the public interest team in the Information
Release Section.

For release of non-customer information consult with the Privacy Team.

Disclosing information to State and Territory agencies

Services Australia gets requests from various State and Territory
agencies. This can include:

-   Coroner’s Courts
-   Public Guardians
-   State Trustees
-   Medical boards
-   Regulatory agencies

For more details see Disclosing information to child protection
agencies.

Legislation and delegation

Different legislation and guidelines govern the release of personal
information for the Medicare, Centrelink and Child Support programmes. A
rule that applies for 1 programme may not apply for another. These help
a delegated officer decide if it is appropriate to disclose personal
information to an agency or authority.

The delegations determine:

-   who can release information, and
-   in what circumstances

To check if it is appropriate to disclose information, ensure the proper
officer holds delegation to release. Resources has a link to the Program
Delegations and Authorisations Register intranet page.

For formal advice on whether an officer holds delegation to release
personal information, contact the Privacy Team of the Privacy and
Programme Advice Branch.

The Information Release Team can assist with disclosure. They do not
give legal advice about delegations.

The Resources page contains links to the Information Release Section
intranet page, the Privacy intranet homepage and the Delegations
intranet page. There are links to contact details and forms.

Related links

Disclosing information to child protection agencies

Disclosing information to third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
