
Customer aggression - Staff support 104-07040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a staff member is in immediate danger or risk of harm, call 000 for
emergency and tell a manager. To speak to someone for general support
out of hours call Lifeline on 13 11 14.

This document provides information for managers to support staff
following an incident of customer aggression or counterproductive
behaviour.

For more information on preventing and managing customer aggression, see
Customer aggression - Prevention and management.

On this Page:

Manager response and support

The impact of an incident may affect people differently. How a person
deals with an incident may be influenced by:

-   their mental and physical health
-   level of support at the time of the event
-   previous experience and coping skills

Managers and supervisors can support staff impacted by an incident as
follows:

-   providing operational debriefing
-   encouraging time out or alternative work duties
-   providing emotional support and psychological first aid where
    required
-   seeking specialised assistance from the People Advisor Centre (PAC)
    and/or Employee Assistance Program (EAP) via the Services
    Australia’s provider Benestar
-   making recommendations and implementing improvements to mitigate
    future risk and improve staff supports

See Resources Intranet Links for a link to Supporting employees after a
traumatic event. This document provides guidance to managers and team
leaders to respond to and support employees who may be affected by a
traumatic event.

Reporting customer aggression

Managers and team leaders must make sure that all incidents of customer
aggression or counterproductive behaviour are reported and recorded,
using approved systems. By doing this:

-   Services Australia has visibility of incidents
-   steps to address customer behaviour are taken
-   it assists with providing staff with assistance and support

If the staff member is unable to record the details:

-   a manager, team leader or other employee may record the incident,
    and
-   complete the ESSentials report(s) on behalf of the impacted staff
    member

This means the incident is recorded as soon as possible and can minimise
additional stress for the affected staff member.

Critical incidents

A critical workplace incident (also known as a traumatic event) is any
incident that brings out a strong emotional response in a person.

This may be immediately or delayed and can adversely impact an
employee’s psychological health and work performance.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and resources
available to support staff following an incident of customer aggression.

Related links

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

Customer aggression - Response

Customer aggression - Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Family and domestic violence

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Social work services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
