-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Restricted Access and its
application for protection of customer information and the roles of
Restricted Access Service Officers. Restricted Access for Centrelink
customers was formerly known as the Deny Access Facility (DAF).

Government intent

Restricted Access is available for Centrelink customers seeking
additional protection of personal information held by Services
Australia. It is a computer based security system, which denies access
to the customer's Centrelink computer record for the majority of staff.
Only a limited number of the agency’s staff can access the record.
Temporary access may also be authorised for specialist staff. The
purpose of Restricted Access is to protect the customer's location
details. Restricted Access is not a tailored service arrangement for
customers to choose who can service them.

Restricted Access is available to customers:

-   who have genuine fears for their safety
-   have a Security Notice Issued (SNI) by the Attorney General applied
-   where there is a risk that a staff member could endanger the
    customer by accessing the customer's computer record
-   in exceptional circumstances where the customer's record required a
    higher level of protection

Restricted Access should only be used in exceptional circumstances.

Determining eligibility

Customers may be considered eligible for Restricted Access because of,
but not limited to, the following reasons:

-   they are escaping family and domestic violence and the other party
    has links with staff
-   they are under police protection, including witness protection
-   they may have short term needs, where additional protective measures
    against potential breaches of privacy, high media coverage and/or
    fraud are a consideration
-   their details become or remain particularly sensitive because of
    their activities or high community profile
-   they are fleeing involvement in cults or religious sects
-   their privacy or confidentiality has been breached in such a way as
    to endanger the customer

Using the above eligibility criteria as guidelines, each case should be
judged on its merits. In most cases, the Restricted Access manager makes
the final decision to approve or reject the Restricted Access
application. Note: if a customer is under police protection, Restricted
Access must be approved.

Restricted Access is also applied to records of customers whose welfare
payments have been cancelled - Security Notice Issued.

In these cases:

-   customers subjected to a Security Notice must not be provided with
    contact details of the responsible Restricted Access Officer
-   records subject to a Security Notice will be 'Restricted Access' to
    minimise application or re-application for payment. These records
    are managed by a central processing team within Business Integrity
    Division

See also Witness Protection Information and Centrelink customer requests
a new Customer Reference Number (CRN).

Discuss alternate options

As Restricted Access limits the customer's access arrangements with the
agency, it should only be used in the most serious cases. Intermediate
security measures, such as passwords, should be considered as a more
user-friendly option.

Customers engaged in Family Court matters should be made aware that
Restricted Access will not prevent the agency from disclosing their
location to the Family Court when ordered to do so.

Level of protection

Restricted Access only offers protection to a person's electronic
Centrelink record. Their paper file, if one exists, remains in Records
Management Unit (RMU). It is important that customers seeking protection
are made aware of this. Restricted Access does not replace other forms
of protection which are in place for all customers. It is the highest
level of protection the agency offers to customers assessed as requiring
protection above that offered by the 100% logging process and other
security measures.

If the customer who is granted Restricted Access is partnered, both
records must have Restricted Access applied, as the customer's
information may be accessible through the partner's record. If
Restricted Access is not applied to both members of a couple, the link
between the records may cause problems when accessing the records. Other
customers, who reside with the Restricted Access customer, may need to
have Restricted Access applied to protect the customer's whereabouts.
All customers who have Restricted Access applied must be notified of
their servicing arrangement.

Staff with access to Restricted Access records

Only staff holding specific skill tags and security role can access a
Restricted Access record.

All Restricted Access customer records are assigned an ORG unit. The
National Restricted Access Team (NRAT) or Restricted Access Business
Administrators control access to the record. Temporary access for up to
7 days can be provided to other staff for completion of specific tasks.
Access by Irregular and Intermittent (IIE) and Contractor staff to
Restricted Access records is granted only in exceptional circumstances
when non-IIE/Contractor staff are not available.

Access by non-Restricted Access staff for specific tasks

Staff may require access to a Restricted Access record for a specific
task, including (but not limited to):

-   specialist work
-   ICT investigations, and
-   processing work allocated through Workload Manager

If staff without access to the Restricted Access record attempt to enter
the record, a warning displays advising that access to the record is
restricted.

Temporary Access

The NRAT or Restricted Access Manager may approve temporary access for a
period of up to 7 days. Each Restricted Access customer can have a
maximum of one Temporary Officer at any time.

To be granted temporary access to a Restricted Access customer record,
staff must:

-   be an ongoing employee at the APS3 level or above
-   have a business need to access record
-   have the required security roles and skill tags. Note: staff can
    apply for these but it can take up to 24 hours for them to be
    applied

To make a request for temporary access, refer to the National Restricted
Access page.

Role of Service Officers

Restricted Access customers receive telephone service from authorised
Restricted Access Officers in the National Restricted telephony queue.
Some customers elect to receive face-to-face service by a dedicated
Restricted Access Manager in their Service Centre.

All agency staff are responsible for processing activities allocated to
them, which relate to Restricted Access customers. Temporary access can
be granted where required.

If any activity is selected for Quality On Line (QOL) / Quality
Management Application (QMA), checkers will require Temporary Access to
complete.

Role of National Restricted Access Team and Restricted Access Business Administrator

The National Restricted Access Team and Restricted Access Business
Administrators have overall responsibility for administering Restricted
Access, including the following:

Deciding whether a customer should be granted Restricted Access

Applying Restricted Access on the customer's record and, if applicable,
the partner's record; and/or family member's records

Discussing self service options including:

-   Centrelink online services
-   letters online (Centrelink Online Letters or myGov Inbox)
-   Electronic Messaging, and
-   phone self service

Ensuring the Access Officer positions are covered during absences

Arranging temporary access for other staff who require access to the
customer's records

Conducting annual reviews of Restricted Access customers to assess if
there is a continuing need for Restricted Access

Maintaining the Restricted Access Relationships tab by adding or
removing access for Restricted Access managers, officers or temporary
officers

Handling urgent enquiries about Restricted Access

Reporting problems experienced with Restricted Access to the Privacy
Section

Handling enquiries, suggestions for change or complaints about
Restricted Access

Providing policy advice to the network about Restricted Access

Contact details for individual staff in the National Restricted Access
Team are not to be given to customers or external agencies.

The Resources page contains links to the:

-   Skill Tag and Access Request
-   request for temporary access to a Restricted Access record form, and
-   contact details for the National Restricted Access Team

Contents

Administration of Restricted Access

Support, maintenance and FAQs for Restricted Access

Related links

Privacy, sharing and storage of customer information

Centrelink customer requests a new Customer Reference Number (CRN)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
