
Customer aggression - Prevention and management 104-07000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
follow the Risk identification and management of threats to the safety
or welfare of a child process.

If an incident is occurring:
- for Service Australia sites, follow Emergency Response Procedures -
Aggression (ERPAs)
- for agents, follow Emergency Response Procedures - Aggression (ERPAs)
for agents
- for self-harm threats, see Customer talking about suicide or self-harm

This document provides staff with information and resources to guide the
prevention and management of customer aggression and counterproductive
behaviour.

Preventing and managing customer aggression

The Preventing and Managing Customer Aggression Policy establishes the
framework for preventing and managing customer aggression and
counterproductive behaviour. The Resources page contains a link to the
policy.

Services Australia's approach focuses on:

-   providing a physically safe and secure working environment
-   well-prepared and skilled staff
-   staff health, mental health and wellbeing
-   effective management of aggressive customers
-   implementing administration strategies to tailor the way services
    are delivered to customers, including providing internal referrals,
    for example, to social workers and other specialist staff

Managing incidents of customer aggression includes:

in the face-to-face environment, directing aggressive customers to leave
the agency's premises under the Public Order (Protection of Persons and
Property) Act 1971 (Ch). Note: PoPPA delegations differ across
Commonwealth agencies

communicating with police

in the phone environment where a customer persists with aggressive or
counterproductive behaviour:

-   managing the call in line with telephone standards procedure
-   escalating threats of self-harm or threats to others
-   implementing call customisation to divert or block calls from a
    specific inbound number
-   applying emergency response procedures

in the digital and written environment, conducting post-incident
follow-up, including in very limited circumstances, implementing an
email redirection (where the customer’s communicating is persistently
threatening, harassing, or could cause harm or distress to the
recipients)

referral to a social worker when a customer:

-   is extremely distressed, or
-   indicates they are, or
-   have recently contemplated attempting suicide or self-harm, or
-   has a general social worker enquiry

after incidents of aggression, calling the customer to discuss
behavioural expectations and identify any support needed. This may
include issuing a letter to warn the customer of possible service
restrictions where the behaviour reoccurs

implementing Managed Service Plans (MSPs) for customers who place staff
and other customers at risk. MSPs can limit or deny a person’s access to
our offices for a period. Service channel restrictions are considered
agency wide. By restricting access we limit the risk to our staff and
other customers while continuing to support customers to receive access
to their payments. During this period, a one main contact is implemented
to contain the risk, proactively resolve triggers for aggression and
focus on transitioning the customer to mainstream servicing. A One Main
Contact (OMC) can make referrals to Personalised Services, and/or to
social work services and other specialised business areas as needed

where a customer is not complying with the MSP arrangement, conducting
an MSP review

conducting Post Incident Reviews of serious incidents to mitigate the
risk of further incidents

Legal avenues Service Australia can take to minimise the risk to staff
and others include:

-   liaising with police and prosecution regarding criminal charges, and
-   obtaining, or assisting staff to obtain, protection orders that
    protect workplaces (available in the ACT and Tasmania) or individual
    staff (available in all states and territories)

Risk management

A planned and systematic process of managing risk that conforms to
Services Australia’s Security Risk Management Framework and Work Health
and Safety Risk Management guidelines. This includes:

-   identifying any threats/opportunities arising from a person’s
    behaviour or circumstances
-   evaluating the threat
-   implementing risk controls
-   monitoring for any changes in threats/opportunities or a breakdown
    in the mitigation strategy
-   monitoring Services Australia’s external risk environment for any
    changes that may impact the nature or level of risk
-   consulting with workers and their representatives
-   consulting, co-operating and co-ordinating activities with other
    duty holders

Shared Premises with partner agencies, a combined approach

Some Services Australia sites share premises with other service
providers including other Commonwealth departments and agencies, state
government agencies, local government and private sector agencies and
charities.

Each provider has duties under the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 to
ensure workers in shared premises are (as far as is reasonably
practicable), safe. As the leaseholder, Services Australia is
responsible for providing a safe work environment.

The shared premises customer management protocol includes processes for
Services Australia and partner agencies to manage and respond to
incidents of customer aggression for all staff located within Services
Australia service centres.

Aggressive Behaviour Response Model (ABRM)

Services Australia’s approach to the management of customer aggression
based on a zero tolerance for violence and a focus on staff and customer
health, safety and security.

The model includes an approach of:

-   de-escalation when a customer is demonstrating counterproductive
    behaviour by modelling signs of calm behaviour, active listening,
    respect and empathy
-   disengagement if a customer’s behaviour escalates further, or if a
    staff member feels unsafe, by ceasing the interaction and seeking
    immediate support, including phone emergency response
-   Emergency Response if the customer’s behaviour becomes violent,
    including serious threats, by activating the duress alarm, moving to
    safety, calling the police, evacuating as defined in customer facing
    and non-customer facing Emergency Response Procedures Aggression
    etc.

ABRM is Service Australia's approach to the management of customer
aggression. Based on a zero tolerance for violence and a focus on staff
and customer health, safety and security. The ABRM includes a focus on
de-escalation, disengagement when people feel unsafe, and an emergency
response when a customer is violent or staff safety is at risk.

An interaction may move through different stages in a non-linear way and
escalate at any time. By modelling good listening skills, calm
behaviour, active listening, and showing respect and empathy, we can
often return a customer's behaviour to respectful and cooperative.
De-escalation skills are an important part of improving safety. The
model is also clear that if a staff member feels unsafe, they should
disengage, cease the interaction and seek leadership support.

If a customer's behaviour becomes violent, including threatened violence
or a threat of self-harm, this requires an emergency response.

Incidents involving children

There is a zero tolerance of harm to children. If a staff member, in the
course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises concerns about a
child’s safety, immediate action is needed. See Risk identification and
management or threats to safety or welfare of a child.

Contact from customers through non-official digital channels

In situations where a customer contacts a staff member through
non-official digital channels, for example, a staff member's personal
social media account, it is generally open to the staff member to decide
on their response, this includes:

-   Not reply to the customer
-   Reply asking for no further contact
-   Ask Services Australia to assist with possibly responding

The staff member should report such conduct to their manager. A written
record of the conversation between the staff member and the manager
should be kept. This is particularly important if the conduct has made
the staff member feel unsafe.

If the staff member has concerns about their safety and they had a
discussion with their manager about it, the conduct should be recorded
in the relevant system. See Reporting, recording and escalating
incidents of customer aggression.

The Resources page contains links to the Customer Aggression Prevention
intranet page, intranet links, a link to the agency's Service
Commitments on the Services Australia website and frequently asked
questions about customer aggression prevention.

Contents

Customer aggression - Response

Customer aggression - Staff support

Customer aggression - Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Personalised Services

Related links

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Family and domestic violence

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Interpreter Services for customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

Manager customer complaints and feedback

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Social work service referral

Using National Relay Service (NRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
