-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how all Centrelink and Medicare staff manage
Level 1 customer complaints and feedback.

Level 1 Feedback

Feedback refers to a complaint, suggestion or compliment.

Customers, third parties and stakeholders can give feedback:

over the phone via:

-   the Feedback and Complaints phone line, or
-   business phone lines, inbound and outbound calls

face-to-face

online

in writing including:

-   letter
-   fax
-   a printed Tell us what you think form

via external organisations

via Member of Parliament (MP) feedback direct to a MP Contact Officer

Use the Customer Feedback Tool (CFT) to record all:

-   Level 1 feedback, and
-   general enquiries from a Member of Parliament

Feedback management

Consider the circumstances of the person lodging the feedback. Manage
any behavioural issues and/or customer vulnerability before addressing
the complaint issue:

-   Seek immediate assistance if the customer is talking about suicide
    or self-harm
-   Consider referring to a manager or escalate to Level 2 if a
    complaint escalation reason is met

Level 1 feedback is managed at the first point of contact and recorded
in the Customer Feedback Tool (CFT). The details in the CFT are used for
reporting and analysis purposes. Correct coding achieves business
improvement and high quality customer outcomes.

Medicare customer complaints reported in the CFT must also be recorded
as a Sensitive Information Indicator in the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS) with the following:

-   Category: Service
-   Indicator Type: Complaint

An indicator for an open complaint triggers a Sensitive Information
alert, and can be viewed from the Sensitive Information pop up table.

Staff can view amended and end dated indicators in the Sensitive
Information tab in Inquire on Consumer Details.

To record a Sensitive Information Indicator, see the Adding or amending
Service Indicators table.

Timeframe to complete a Level 1 complaint

The agency’s Customer Complaints and Feedback Policy specifies:

-   the agency aims to finalise and respond to complaints within 10
    business days
-   more complex complaints that require significant investigation may
    take longer to finalise

If a complaint is not finalised immediately, manage the customer's
expectations:

explain possible remedies and outcomes

advise the expected timeframe to finalise their matter

if waiting for technical advice, an ICT outcome or action from another
area:

-   tell the customer the matter has been directed to the appropriate
    area
-   provide assurance the matter will be monitored until resolution
-   make the customer aware if additional information is needed, the
    finalisation process will be delayed

Manager role in managing feedback

A manager's role in managing feedback includes:

-   accepting and managing feedback received by their staff when a
    customer wants to speak to a manager
-   monitoring Level 1 feedback being managed within their team to
    ensure they are finalised within 10 business days
-   reviewing and sharing feedback, and acknowledging good work and
    customer compliments
-   providing advice on how to resolve feedback
-   helping to manage customer expectations and remedies sought
-   considering the requirement for referrals, or customer management
    plans, for customers experiencing vulnerability or behaving
    unreasonably
-   helping staff escalate systemic issues
-   reviewing complaints about the behaviour of staff they manage,
    providing feedback and considering training requirements to improve
    staff capability

Contact requirements

When contacting customers to manage complaints, staff in the agency
must:

-   complete Proof of Ownership Record (PoRO) according to agency
    requirements
-   introduce themselves and the reason for the call
-   make the contact attempt in accordance with the customer's contact
    preferences, taking any Restricted Servicing Arrangements into
    consideration

Inbound calls

For consistency when answering calls on the Services Australia Feedback
and Complaints line, use one of the following greetings:

Unauthenticated records

-   ‘Hello, this is [service officer’s name], can I start with your name
    please?’
-   ‘Hi, my name is [service officer’s name], may I start with your
    Centrelink reference number please?’

Authenticated records

-   ‘Hi, this is [service officer’s name]. How can I assist you today?’
-   ‘Hello, my name is [service officer’s name]. How can I help you
    today?’

Outbound calls

If an initial customer contact attempt is unsuccessful, a second attempt
must be made. The main rule is to make 2 outbound attempts, 1 morning
and 1 afternoon/evening within 2 business days.

All phone conversations must be summarised and recorded in the relevant
CFT entry.

Follow agency protocols:

-   Centrelink - Telephone standards and Authenticating a Centrelink
    customer
-   Medicare - Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare
    telephony

Complaints about staff

It is important to recognise the difference between a staff member
complaint and a potential APS Code of Conduct breach. All complaints
about potential APS Code of Conduct breaches, employee fraud or
unauthorised access must be escalated to Level 2 for management, see APS
Code of Conduct.

Where the complaint issue is about staff member, the service officer who
first receives the complaint forwards the feedback to the staff member’s
manager or positional mailbox, see Staff Member (Individual).

Managers are responsible for evaluating staff feedback and working with
staff to develop their skills in service delivery.

Privacy of a staff member

Services Australia Customer Complaints and Feedback Policy advises that
staff will treat complaints about staff or contractors in the strictest
of confidence.

Maintain the privacy of the staff member subject to the complaint at all
times. If the customer requests the name of the service officer, only
give them the staff member’s first name.

The Resources page contains links to resources to support Level 1
complaint management processes.

Contents

Level 1 – Online customer feedback

Related links

Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback Tool

Requesting access to the Customer Feedback Tool

Level 2 complaints

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
