
Administration of Restricted Access 104-06020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes that the National Restricted Access
Team (NRAT) and Restricted Access Manager undertake to manage a
Restricted Access customer and their record.

Authorised officers for Restricted Access

Each Restricted Access customer will have one Restricted Access Manager
and at least one and up to three Restricted Access Officers in the
National Restricted Access Team (NRAT) or at their home service centre
authorised to access their customer record.

Temporary access for a period of up to 7 days may be approved by the
NRAT or Restricted Access Manager to specialist staff who need access
for specific purposes, for example, Authorised Review Officers (ARO),
Compensation, Debt Recovery, Business Integrity Service Officers and
Claims staff. Each Restricted Access customer can have a maximum of one
Temporary Officer at any time. A Temporary Officer is located within the
agency.

Restricted Access customer changes address

Where a Restricted Access customer is managed by their local service
centre and moves to another address that is not within the current
service centre boundary, a change of contacts is required. The Process
page outlines how to process the move.

If the customer is temporarily moving interstate, a change of contacts
is not required. The customer can continue with their existing
Restricted Access arrangements. If required, the Restricted Access
Manager can add a Temporary Officer to the record to assist the customer
at their nearest service centre if required. Note: this Temporary
Officer assistance can only be for a maximum of 7 days.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Restricted Access
page, which has relevant information for Restricted Access.

Related links

Restricted Access and eligibility

Support, maintenance and FAQs for Restricted Access

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
