-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines what protected information can be disclosed to
customers and their authorised representatives under Child Support
legislation in particular situations.

Each request for information disclosure should be considered on its
merits. If unsure whether it is appropriate to disclose information,
staff must speak to a Service Support Officer.

Ensuring customer privacy

Services Australia is responsible for ensuring customer privacy and
personal information is protected at all times.

When handling personal and protected information, in addition to
complying with the Australian Privacy Principles contained in schedule 1
of the Privacy Act 1988, staff must comply with the more stringent
secrecy provisions contained in Child Support legislation (including
sections 16, 16AA, 16AB and 121B of the Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988 and sections 150 and 150AA Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989).

This legislation is explained in the Child Support Guide 6.3 - Privacy,
secrecy and proof of identity, specifically 6.3.3 - Secrecy provisions.

Staff should also be familiar with the privacy guidelines and their
responsibilities for safeguarding privacy. This includes how much
information can be disclosed to customers about collection activities.

If a third party requests information from staff, guidance about when
Child Support will disclose a customer's information to another party is
available in The Child Support Guide 6.3.3.

The Child Support Guide 6.3.6 has additional information about
authorised representatives and persons with power of attorney or other
legal authority.

Identity confirmation checks to confirm the identity of a customer
and/or their representative must be satisfied before staff discuss a
customer's personal or protected information with that customer or
representative.

When a potential privacy incident is identified, it must be managed and
reported as the agency expects. The Privacy intranet page contains
information about how to manage and report privacy incidents, see
Privacy incidents.

The References page contains information about policy and legislation
concerning disclosing protected information under child support law.

Protected information under child support law

Protected information is any information concerning a person gathered
by:

-   Child Support
-   the agency's employees and contractors, and
-   other government agencies

Protected information is gathered for the purposes of administering
Child Support legislation.

Disclosure of protected information

Protected information about a customer can be disclosed to that customer
or to their authorised representative. Unless the disclosure is required
or authorised by or under Child Support legislation, it is an offence to
disclose protected information about a customer to a person other than
that customer.

Different authorisations apply depending on the reason for disclosure
and the legislative provision being relied upon. For more information
see Child Support Services, Delegations and Authorisations.

Disclosure to the other parent

The Child Support Registrar is authorised to disclose personal
information about a parent to the other parent if the disclosure is
required, or is considered appropriate, under the legislation. Before
discussing details with the other parent staff must first determine if
the disclosure is required or appropriate, giving consideration to the
relevant secrecy and privacy obligations.

This includes how much information can be disclosed to customers about
collection activities.

Note: information disclosure that is required or appropriate can be
provided to the customer verbally and/or in writing.

The Resources contains links to Child Support Program Branch contact
details, the Services Australia website and intranet and the Australian
Taxation Office website.

Related links

Issue Resolution

Authenticating a Child Support customer

Customer Management Approach CMA for Child Support

Child Support’s information gathering powers

Disbursements of child support

Disclosing information to third parties

Recovery of debts by customers

Customer requests access to their personal information

Privacy incidents

Payee Account Summary Window Help

Payer Account Summary Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
