
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed when an outside
organisation requests statistical information.

On this Page:

Clearance required for information release

Due to the sensitivity of Services Australia's data, staff should direct
any external organisation who is requesting data on Services Australia
customers, payments and services to the Internal and External Gateway
section within the Information Gateway and Governance Branch via the
statistics@servicesaustralia.gov.au mailbox.

Generally, all requests involving the external release of information to
a third party are firstly assessed against legislation and privacy
principles. Bilateral Agreements with partner policy agencies to
determine if the information can be lawfully disclosed for a secondary
purpose. The Internal and external Gateway (the gateway) has
responsibility for working with our policy departments (Department of
Health and Aged Care, Department of Social Services) around the decision
to release information and also obtaining appropriate approvals and
authorisations.

Templates for request

Templates have been developed to assist with accurately specifying
requirements from external organisations. When a request is received via
the gateway, the team will send a template to the requestor for
completion.

Health Information

External requests for health information are assessed by the 'External
Request Evaluation Committee (EREC)'.

EREC has the responsibility of assessing external information requests
to use health data for:

-   research
-   health service planning or other purposes
-   approving consent studies
-   publications where Medicare data was used
-   the release of statistical information and advising the Department
    of Health and Aged Care (Health) delegate about the release of
    information that might lead to the identification of individuals
    (that is: de-identified unit record requests)

The committee’s membership comprises of either Services Australia and
Health EL2 staff, or their delegates. Under the Information Management
and Release Protocol in place between the Health and Services Australia,
Health must approve the release of all data relating to Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, and other program datasets.

Fees

A fee may be charged for an external request for statistical or other
information. If there is a fee payable the Information Services Branch
will advise the amount payable before extraction occurs.

Submitting requests

Outside organisations should send any requests by email to the Internal
and External Gateway Section at statistics@servicesaustralia.gov.au.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
