
Disclosing information to third parties 104-04060000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

Outlines when personal or protected information can be shared with third
parties. Includes participation in market research and confirming next
payment with a bank.

Information disclosure

Services Australia Centrelink often has strict confidentiality
provisions. These limit the disclosure of protected information.
Australian Privacy Principle (APP) 6 also places limitations on the
disclosure of personal information.

Personal/protected information may only be disclosed to third parties if
certain conditions are met including:

-   the customer has consented to the disclosure, and
-   the disclosure of the information is authorised or required under
    law

Legal authority

The legal authority for certain releases, and lists of positions
authorised to make these releases, are outlined on the Program
Delegations and Authorisations Register intranet page. The Resources
page has a link.

Express Authority

Express Authority is when a customer gives authority for their
information to be released to a nominated third party. This may be via a
formal written arrangement such as a:

Correspondence Nominee

Power of Attorney (POA)

-   Some are for a limited, specified period and subject matter. It may
    not cover access to Services Australia information
-   Check the terms of the POA

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE)

Third party representation to the Minister for Government Services

A customer may complete a consent form that allows a third party to
represent them to the Minister for Government Services through a Member
of Parliament or a Senator. This consent allows the representative to
act on the customer's behalf.

This is a type of express authority. It allows the release of specific
details to the nominated third party, for the purposes of responding to
the representation.

The consent:

-   does not replace a customer's current nominee or permission to
    enquire arrangements, and
-   only relates to the specific instance for which the representation
    is being made

Informal verbal arrangement

A customer may give informal verbal consent to the release of
information to a person acting on their behalf.

Accept this authority when:

-   it is a one-off urgent situation, and
-   it is not feasible for a written authority

For example, a customer needs help from a community organisation and
they call Services Australia. In the call they give their verbal consent
for the community worker to receive information about them.

Implied authority

Services Australia may presume there is an implied authority of the
customer when contacted by third parties who are members of 'helping'
professions, and:

-   there is documentation on the file that authorises the third party
    to deal with the customer's information
-   the documentation is reasonably current
-   the contact is clearly related to the type of service or help those
    professions would provide to the customer, and
-   Services Australia is satisfied the professional is helping the
    customer with their agency business

For more information, see Implied consent regarding third parties.

Public interest

A third party may get information under Public Interest provisions. This
includes where a delegated officer determines there are reasonable
grounds for believing that the disclosure of information about a person
is necessary to prevent or lessen a threat to the life, health or
welfare of a person.

See the Resources page for a link to Public Interest Release of
Information form.

Service Officer obligations

Service Officers must be sure of:

-   the identity of a person claiming to be acting on the customer's
    behalf and
-   the validity of their need for the information

If the person has contacted by phone, use the call back protocols and
excellence in call handling procedures to confirm this.

Often the person or organisation wants to provide information as well as
ask for it. Service Officers must document:

-   their name, and
-   the name of their organisation or agency or company, and
-   a summary of the information provided and/or collected.

Consider faxing personal/protected information to customers or third
parties on a case by case basis.

Information may be exchanged between the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment, Employment Services Providers and Services Australia in
accordance with sections 202 and 204 of the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999 and the Privacy Act 1988.

ABSTUDY

Service Officers can gather details to advise a third party organisation
about:

-   the student's grant of ABSTUDY
-   travel arrangements or outcomes

In line with ABSTUDY policy, these details ensure the effective and
efficient administration of the ABSTUDY scheme. This action is
undertaken under section 351(2)(d) of the Student Assistance Act 1973.

For example, this may include the details the agency required to
determine the student's ABSTUDY claim, which the agency is requesting
the institution to provide.

All arrangements stop when a person dies

All authorised representative arrangements like nominee arrangements,
Powers of Attorney and implied authority stop when a customer dies. When
a customer dies, their information can only be released to the following
people or organisations:

-   the executor as named in the will
-   the Public Trustee
-   a court
-   the administrator of the estate
-   state and territory government departments assessing burial/funeral
    assistance

The information should only be released on request. These requests
should be in writing and preferably made using the
Executor/Administrator request for information form (SS524).

For more information, see Requests for information after someone has
died.

People who were nominee or Power of Attorney do not automatically become
the executor or administrator.

Do not use a Statutory Declaration from a person without an appropriate
authority. The declaration does not give them access to a deceased
customer's information. Tell the person they must seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee.

The Resources page has links to contacts, forms and Services Australia’s
Intranet.

Contents

Accepting information from and disclosing information to a Power of
Attorney

Implied consent regarding third parties

Disclosing personal information and CCTV to police and State and
Territory agencies

Tax agents authority to enquire on behalf of customers

Related links

Requests for information after someone has died

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Release of information to Employment Services Providers

Actioning Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests

Disclosing information to child protection agencies

Customer aggression – Reporting and recording incidents

Customer aggression - Escalating incidents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
