
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the guidelines regarding Services Australia
accepting information from, and providing information to a person
holding Power of Attorney (POA).

What is a POA?

A POA is the:

-   legal authority to act for another person in personal and/or
    financial matters
-   name of the legal documents that names the person(s) who has the
    authority to act, and
-   outlines any conditions of how the person can use the authority

Definitions

Attorney: person named in the POA document who is authorised to act;
there can be more than one

General POA: is valid until the principal becomes incapacitated

Enduring POA: is valid even if the principal is incapacitated

Jointly and severally: the attorneys can make decisions together or
separately

Severally: any one of the attorneys can make decisions independently of
the other attorneys

Jointly: the attorneys must agree on all decisions

Majority: more than half of the attorneys must agree on all decisions

Potential risk factors affecting POA arrangements

When a POA legal document is lodged to the agency, the Service Officer
must consider any potential risks that may affect the attorney’s ability
to:

-   act in the customer's best interests, and
-   handle the customer’s affairs responsibly

The Service Officer should:

-   review DOCs on the customer's record, or verbal interactions with
    either party to identify potential risk factors, including:
-   family and domestic violence (including abuse of older Australians)
-   well-being issues
-   financial management difficulties
-   homelessness
-   considerable caring responsibilities
-   literacy or language barriers, and/or
-   conflict of interest
-   seek assistance from a social worker if the customer's well-being is
    at risk

For Centrelink purposes, an attorney can use the POA to conduct business
on the customer’s behalf within the limitations of the legal document.
Services Australia prefers that the customer set up a nominee, PPE or
PPU arrangement. The attorney can use the legal document used as
supporting evidence.

Accepting information

The agency can accept information from any source about a customer's
circumstances without confirming or disclosing that the person who the
information is about is a customer of the agency. However, before acting
on the information provided, staff must be confident of the caller's
competence to provide accurate information.

For example, a Family Tax Benefit customer's partner advises of an
increase in income. This income is the only income recorded on the
customer record. The partner in this case is the best person to provide
this information.

If any doubt exists about the validity of the information or the
authenticity of the caller, staff must contact the customer or their
nominee by phone or in writing before the change is actioned.

Disclosing information

The agency often receives requests for information from a person holding
a POA.

If the attorney requests information from the agency about a customer,
Service Officers can give them any information within the scope of the
authority of the POA. They must check the terms of the POA arrangement.
Some are for a limited, specified period and subject matter, and may not
cover obtaining agency information. For example, the customer may have
given the attorney authority to assist the customer with their finances.
In this case, the Service Officer should only discuss information
relative to that authority with the attorney. The agency regards a POA
as an express authority, and staff can share information or make updates
in accordance with any limitations set out in the POA.

If an attorney provides the POA document in a service centre, staff
must:

-   photocopy and store it on the customer's record
-   record details of the scope of the POA using the Fast Note POA DOA
    DOC template on the customer's file. See Online Document Recording
    (ODR) and Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast
    Notes and DOA DOCs)

A Service Officer must:

not provide information about another person, for example a partner,
unless they have given express authority for release. All requests for
information about another person must be in writing

contact the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for advice if there are any concerns
about the validity of the POA, that is:

-   incorrect names and/or addresses on the form, or
-   the limitations of the authority

A POA arrangement does not give the attorney online access to the
customer’s Centrelink Online Account or copies of the customer’s
letters. To do this the attorney must be a correspondence nominee.

Nominee arrangements

If a customer wishes the holder of a POA to act as a payment or
correspondence nominee on their behalf, an Authorising a person or
organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313) form must be
completed and lodged with the agency. A person holding a POA does not
automatically become a nominee for Centrelink purposes, as this is
legislated separately under social security and family assistance laws.

For POA authority relating to Medicare, see Power of Attorney,
Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised Representative for
Medicare.

For POA authority relating to Child Support, see Child Support
authorised agent.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website, the
Privacy page and Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online Query form.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
