
Child Support authorised agent 104-17082201

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes for managing representatives with
legal authority to act as an authorised agent for Child Support
customers.

What is a Child Support authorised agent?

A person may have a legal authority to act on a child support parent or
carer's behalf and make decisions as if they are the parent or carer.

A person who has been authorised in this way is referred to as the
parent or carer's authorised agent. Common examples are power of
attorney or guardianship orders. A representative who is an authorised
agent is limited in what they can do for the parent or carer by any
limitations set out in the authorising document. Where the document
covers child support matters, the agent is taken to be the parent or
carer in their dealings with Child Support. This means that their advice
and decisions are taken to be those of the parent or carer.

This document sets out the process for a parent or carer or their agent
to provide evidence of this arrangement, authorising Child Support to
deal with the agent on behalf of the parent or carer. This is a form of
express authority and is usually (but not always) done because the
parent or carer is unable to manage their own affairs.

See Child Support representative with ordinary authority for more
information about representatives who have ordinary authority.

The References page contains a link to Child Support Services,
Delegations and Authorisations.

The Resources page contains a link to Child Support representative
authority form.

Related links

Identity Confirmation for Child Support

Child Support representative with ordinary authority

Customer requests access to their personal information

Accepting information from and disclosing information to power of
attorney

Customer representative Cuba Process Help

Customer Representative Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
