-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assess whether a claimant for
Austudy satisfies the residence requirements necessary to qualify for
payment. The assessment includes whether the customer is residentially
qualified to lodge a legal claim for payment as well as whether they are
required to serve the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP).

Austudy residence requirements

To satisfy the residence criteria for Austudy, the customer must meet
all of the following:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) NARWP

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the visa subclass and grant date of the customer's first permanent
residence visa.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Note: there are exceptions to these requirements.

Customers who are new Australian residents and are claiming Austudy are
required to have been in Australia as an Australian resident for the
duration of the NARWP before Austudy is payable. Alternatively, they may
have an exemption from the NARWP in certain circumstances.

If a claim is rejecting due to the NARWP and the customer lived on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding additional
residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming Austudy are required to have been an Australian resident and
physically in Australia for the required duration of the NARWP, either
in 1 period, or in a number of periods before Austudy is payable.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming Austudy
may have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave Australia temporarily for 3
weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the absence extends the
NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

It is not a requirement that the period of residence required for the
NARWP occurred immediately before claiming.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Immigration Datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

If the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need to
be manually recorded. If the Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to movement
information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

Early Austudy claims prior to overseas study

For a student to be paid for the duration of their overseas study as
part of their approved Australian course, they must be qualified
immediately before the day of departure. If they are not qualified at
that time, overseas study provisions cannot be applied and the claim
should be rejected.

The Resources page contains staff contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Residence and Portability screens

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Austudy qualifications

Student studying outside Australia

Austudy customer going overseas

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
