
Proof of Australian citizenship 106-06020060

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on processes used to prove Australian
citizenship for Australian Residence purposes.

Verifying Australian citizenship

A customer claiming an Australian social security payment, or concession
card must be able to prove their legal residence status, and that of
their partner, if applicable.

Legal residence status is satisfied by the customer/partner being an
Australian citizen, a permanent visa holder or a protected Special
Category Visa (SCV) holder.

If the customer/partner is an Australian citizen, verification may be
required for social security payments and concession cards.

Citizenship is generally verified by an Australian birth certificate,
Australian passport or Australian Citizenship Certificate. An Australian
passport can be current or expired to be considered acceptable
verification.

Australian citizenship may also be verified from details provided by the
Department of Home Affairs through the Immigration Datalink. For example
grants of Australian citizenship generally post 2001 may be uploaded to
the customer's Legal Residence Details (RSLEG) screen. If the customer
travelled on an Australian passport after 1 September 1994, passport
details are uploaded to the customer's Immigration Enquiry (RSIMME)
screen.

The system validates Australian citizenship in most new claim/transfer
activities using identity documents and information coded from the
Immigration Datalink.

If a validation error occurs, Service Officers should follow this
process to determine what proof is required, when it is appropriate not
to code Australian citizenship and when to refer to International
Services.

Australian citizenship rules

The Australian Citizenship Act was introduced on 26 January 1949. The
citizenship rules are:

Generally, any person residing in Australia on 26 January 1949 is
automatically assumed to be an Australian citizen

Generally, any person born in Australia before 20 August 1986 is an
Australian citizen

Any person born in Australia after 20 August 1986 is an Australian
citizen if at least one of their parents is an Australian citizen or
permanent resident of Australia at the time of the person's birth. An
official Norfolk Island resident before 1 July 2016 was a permanent
resident of Australia for Australian citizenship purposes

Any person born in Australia to New Zealand citizen parents is an
Australian citizen if they:

-   are born between 20 August 1986 and 31 August 1994 and have
    continuously resided in Australia until their tenth birthday; or
-   are born between 1 September 1994 and 26 February 2001 and one of
    their parents is a Special Category Visa (SCV) holder; or
-   are born after 27 February 2001 and one of their parents is a
    protected SCV holder

If neither parent is an Australian citizen, permanent visa holder or
protected SCV holder (or protected SCV holder after 27 February 2001), a
person born in Australia after 20 August 1986 who continues to reside in
Australia until their tenth birthday when they will automatically
acquire citizenship. Note: this includes where the parent is the holder
of a non-protected SCV or any type of temporary visa

Any person born outside Australia is an Australian citizen if they:

-   are born to Australian citizen parent/s who register the child as an
    Australian citizen at an embassy (citizen by descent), or
-   acquire Australian citizenship by grant (formally called
    'naturalisation')

Norfolk Island has been covered by the Australian citizenship
legislation since it was introduced on 26 January 1949. There is no such
thing as a Norfolk Island citizen and this should not be recorded.

Australian citizens born outside Australia must provide an Australian
passport or Australian Citizenship Certificate, unless they were born in
Papua New Guinea (PNG) prior to 16 September 1975 in which case a PNG
birth certificate or Australian birth certificate is adequate evidence
of Australian citizenship.

Related links

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Residence and Portability screens

Recording legal residence status

Residence requirements

Australian residence requirements for payment

Updating residence screens (CLK)

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
