
Calculating the start day for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices claims 106-05010150

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for calculating the start day for
Austudy or YA claims lodged by students and Australian Apprentices.

Start day criteria

The start day for Austudy and YA (student or Australian Apprentice)
depends on the customer meeting the payability and qualification
requirements for payment at the time of the claim. This includes meeting
the activity test for students.

Before payment can be made, Australian Apprentice customers:

-   do not have to satisfy the activity test
-   must have a current Commonwealth Registration Number

Generally, customers only receive payments or concession cards from the
date they actually submit a claim.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances; see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Students

The start day to be paid as a student is:

the date of claim, if on that day the customer:

-   satisfied the activity test for YA students, or
-   the activity test for Austudy, and
-   satisfied all of the date of claim conditions
-   is payable, apart from the application of an Income Maintenance
    Period or waiting period

the student start date, if the customer:

-   was not a student before claiming, and
-   is payable, apart from the application of an Income Maintenance
    Period or waiting period
-   their student start date is after the date of receipt of the claim
    (as this is the date the customer first satisfies the activity test
    as a student for Austudy or YA), or

the transfer date, if the customer is transferring to Austudy or YA
(Student) from another payment

Note: if a customer starts their course late but before the end of the
second week, they are deemed to have started on their course start date.
See Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES), Austudy, PES, and YA.

The Resources page contains information and scenarios for determining
the first day of a course.

Australian Apprentice

An Australian Apprentice is a person who has a current Commonwealth
Registration Number in relation to a full-time:

-   apprenticeship
-   traineeship, or
-   trainee apprenticeship

This does not include those:

-   undertaking a part-time or school-based apprenticeship, or
-   whose Commonwealth Registration Number is suspended or cancelled

The start date for an Australian Apprentice is the latter of the:

-   date of claim, or
-   the Commonwealth Registration Number start date

Note: do not consider a claim submitted until it is fully completed and
the customer has supplied all supporting documentation.

Payability due to income

Student and Australian apprentice customers provide information in their
claims about their, and/or their partner's current and future employment
income circumstance.

Use this information to determine:

-   if the start date of their payment needs to be manually changed to a
    day the customer is both eligible and payable, or
-   if their claim should be rejected because employment income will
    preclude them from payment in the 13 weeks after claim lodgement

If the online claim shows the customer and/or their partner are working
and there is no indication their employment income will preclude
payment, continue to assess the claim.

Place the customer onto two weekly reporting if the customer and/or
their partner has employment income.

Manual Start Date

The system will apply a Manual Start Date on the Date of Commencement
(NDC) screen when the customer lodges a claim for YA (student) and:

-   they are under 22 years of age
-   not a continuing or intending student, and
-   Student Start Date is later than the claim submission date

This will ensure the customer is paid from the date they meet study
requirements.

The Resources page contains information on and scenarios for determining
the first day of a course.

Related links

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Satisfying the activity test for customers who are intending to study
for Austudy

Satisfying the activity test for customers who are intending to study
for Youth Allowance (YA)

Coding new study details

Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES), Austudy, PES, and Youth Allowance (YA)

Calculating the start day general rule

Calculating the start day for a transferee

Early claims

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Calculating the deemed date of claim manually

Reporting requirements for students and Australian Apprentices

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
