
New Zealand 10 year residence exemption 106-06010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess if a New Zealand non-protected SCV
holder qualifies for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
under the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption.

Non-protected special category visa (SCV) holders

A non-protected SCV holder who has lived continuously in Australia for a
single period of at least 10 years immediately before claiming may
qualify for JSP or YA (includes job seekers, students and apprentices
but does not apply to JSP or YA provisional) for a single continuous
period of up to 6 months (182 days). Time spent in Australia before 27
February 2001 cannot count towards these 10 years.

To qualify for this residence exemption, a person must meet all of the
following:

-   have arrived in Australia on a New Zealand passport
-   currently hold a Special Category Visa (SCV) subclass 444
-   have lived continuously in Australia for at least 10 years
    immediately before claiming (time spent in Australia before 27
    February 2001 does not count towards this period)
-   have not previously received payment of JSP, NSA, YA or SA under
    this residence exemption

A person who qualifies for payment under this exemption does not need to
serve the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP).

The 10 years must be a single period of residence in Australia - 2 or
more periods of residence in Australia cannot be combined to make up the
10 years. The 10 years must occur immediately before the person claims.
A temporary absence such as a holiday can be included in the 10 years,
but any break during which the person ceases to reside in Australia will
start the 10 years clock again

A person can only receive a payment once under this exemption, even if
they live in Australia for a second continuous period of 10 years.

Note: from 1 July 2016, non-protected SCV holders who have lived in
Australia and/or Norfolk Island for 10 years continuously immediately
before claiming may be eligible to access this exemption.

Identifying these customers

The JSP and YA online claim process will identify customers who may be
eligible for this exemption, based on the information provided by the
customer in the online claim. A keyword of NZ10YR will be added to the
identified online claim activity or Manual Follow-up (MFU).

The First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow will also identify
customers who may be entitled to this exemption from the information
already on the customer's record, their immigration record and from the
customer's responses to questions asked during FCSO.

Rules specific to the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

-   Once a payment granted under this exemption has cancelled, there can
    be no further grant under the same exemption. If the customer does
    lodge a subsequent claim under this exemption the claim will be
    automatically rejected
-   The 6 month period does not start until any relevant waiting and/or
    preclusion/exclusion periods have been served and payability
    commences. Only when a customer receives a payment are they
    considered to have used this exemption
-   A customer's payments can be restored from a suspension or
    cancellation during the 6 month period as long as the restoration is
    from date paid to + 1 (if there is any gap between the date of
    suspension/cancellation and the date of restoration, payments cannot
    be restored). As this exemption can only be used once, if payment
    cannot be restored following a break in entitlement, the customer
    cannot be re-granted under this exemption
-   If a customer's payment is suspended due to leaving Australia, the
    payment can only be restored if it is portable for the duration of
    the absence under Approved reason for travel rules, i.e. there is no
    gap between the date of suspension/cancellation and the date of
    restoration
-   When a customer is precluded from receiving payment as a result of
    an employment income nil rate period or a compliance penalty period
    they are considered to be in continuous receipt of payment and can
    come back onto payment if the 6 month limit has not been reached
-   A customer whose payment is granted under this exemption cannot
    transfer between payments during the maximum 6 month payment period
    unless transfer is between YA-Jobseeker and YA-Student
-   If the customer is granted another visa or Australian citizenship,
    their payment will be cancelled as they will no longer be entitled
    to payment under these conditions. They can reclaim to see if they
    meet the normal eligibility for JSP or YA. However, if granted a
    permanent resident visa, they may be subject to a Newly Arrived
    Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)
-   If the customer qualifies for payment immediately after cancellation
    (as they either have served or are exempt from the NARWP), a staff
    assisted claim can be completed. This is in order to get the
    customer back on payment without them having to lodge a claim

JSP and YA (Provisional)

This residence exemption does not apply to JSP and YA (Provisional)
pending DSP claim.

If an AEX exemption of DSP claim is recorded in the JSP or YA new claim
for one of these customers, the claim will auto reject NSV. Consider
granting the customer a different AEX exemption such as temporary
incapacity if they qualify for it.

If a customer does not qualify for this exemption, the DSP claim should
still proceed and the customer will still have mutual obligation
requirements. However, consider reducing the job search requirements in
their Job Plan.

Entitlement to concession cards, add-ons and advance or crisis payments

A customer granted under the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption
will be entitled to add-ons such as Pharmaceutical Allowance and Rent
Assistance if qualified while in receipt of JSP or YA.

Both protected and non-protected SCV holders are currently entitled to
receive Low Income (LIC) and Health Care Cards (HCC) once they have
served or are exempt from the NARWP. To qualify for an Ex-Carer
Allowance Health Care Card (EHC) and serve the NARWP, an SCV holder must
be protected.

However, qualification for a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) has
different residence rules. Non-protected SCV holders do not meet the
definition of an Australian resident for a PCC and therefore will not be
entitled to a PCC if granted under this exemption even if they are a
principal carer or have a partial capacity to work.

They may also qualify for an Advance Payment and/or Crisis Payment if
existing qualification criteria is met.

Access to employment services

Job seekers paid under this NZ 10 year residence exemption will be
registered as Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers and will have
full access to Workforce Australia while in receipt of JSP/YA.

They will also have the same mutual obligations requirements as any
other JSP or YA customer. However, they will not have access to
Disability Employment Services (DES), the New Enterprise Incentive
Scheme (NEIS), Self-Employment Assistance or the Adult Migrant Education
Program (AMEP).

Note: principal carers receiving JSP or YA (job seeker) are subject to
Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers regardless of the
age of their youngest child.

The Resources page contains contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS), an example of assessing the 'lived continuously in
Australia for at least 10 years' criteria for residence exemption,
standard text for Q999 letters, and DOCs.

Related links

Residence assessment for customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and/or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
