
Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and/or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) 106-06020130

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assess whether a claimant for
Youth Allowance (YA) and/or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) satisfies the
residence requirements necessary to lodge a legal claim and qualify for
payment, and whether they are required to serve the Newly Arrived
Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP).

YA and TAP Residence requirements

To satisfy residence criteria for YA and/or TAP, the customer must meet
all of the following:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged, and
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) Newly Arrived
    Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the visa subclass and grant date of the customer's first permanent
residence visa.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP.

Note: there are exceptions to these requirements.

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming:

-   YA are required to have been in Australia as an Australian resident
    for the duration of the NARWP before YA is payable
-   TAP are required to have been in Australia as an Australian resident
    for the duration of the NARWP, and the NARWP has to have ended by
    the first TAP assessment date, to be eligible for TAP

Alternatively, they may have an exemption from the NARWP in certain
circumstances.

If a claim is rejecting due to the NARWP and the customer lived on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding additional
residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Non-protected Special Category visa (SCV) holders

A non-protected SCV holder who has lived continuously in Australia for a
single period of at least 10 years immediately before claiming may
qualify for:

-   YA for a single continuous period of up to 6 months (182 days),
    and/or
-   TAP

For more information, see New Zealand 10 year residence exemption.

Note: students holding a Non-protected Special Category visa (SCV), who
meet the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption, may qualify for TAP
regardless of whether they have received JobSeeker Payment (JSP),
Newstart Allowance (NSA), Youth Allowance (YA) or Sickness Allowance
under this residence exemption previously.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming Youth Allowance (YA) are required to have been an Australian
resident and physically in Australia for the required duration of the
NARWP, either in 1 period, or in a number of periods before Youth
Allowance is payable.

TAP customers must have fully served the NARWP by the first TAP
assessment date to be eligible.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming Youth
Allowance may have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave Australia
temporarily for 3 weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the
absence extends the NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

Generally it is not a requirement that the period of residence required
for the NARWP occurred immediately before claiming. However if a person
is claiming an exemption from the NARWP for the reason that they became
a Lone Principal Carer (applies to Parenting Payment Single (PPS),
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), YA and Farm Household Allowance (FHA) only),
they need to have become a lone parent since the start of the current
period of Australian residence. The Lone Principal Carer NARWP exemption
does not apply to TAP.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need
to be manually recorded. If the Department of Home Affairs has provided
the information, it will take precedence over any conflicting
information provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home
Affairs record is matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to
movement information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

Early YA claims prior to overseas study

In order for a student to be paid for the duration of their overseas
study as part of their approved Australian course, they must be payable
immediately before the day of departure. If they are not payable at that
time, overseas study provisions cannot be applied and the claim should
be rejected. See Youth Allowance customer going overseas for further
information.

The Resources page contains a link to staff contact details for
Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Student studying outside Australia

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Assessing and finalising claims for the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
