
Income Maintenance Period (IMP) 106-05020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how an Income Maintenance Period (IMP) is
calculated and how it may affect a customer's entitlement.

Purpose of an IMP

The IMP encourages a customer to provide for themselves after they cease
employment. It eliminates inconsistencies in the treatment of leave and
redundancy payments. An IMP may be imposed on a customer who is paid
unused leave or redundancy entitlements after ceasing or terminating
employment.

Leave payments made for a current employee/employer relationship where
the person is employed on a continuing basis (such as temporary periods
of leave) are treated as employment income, not a termination payment.
See Leave and termination payments paid by an employer.

Payments affected by an IMP

Payments affected by an IMP are:

-   Austudy
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

All unused leave and redundancy payments that have been paid to the
customer or their partner when their employment has been terminated in
the last 12 months, should be included in IMP calculations. This may
include multiple employers.

Customers affected by a waiting period for an income support payment,
can test their eligibility for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

Note: regardless of whether the customer and/or partner are claiming or
receiving an IMP affected payment, staff must discuss with the customer
whether an update of assets is required to reflect the change in
circumstances, for example: update bank balances, purchase of new
assets.

Redundancy payments

Redundancy payments are included in the calculation of the IMP, and
these amounts are treated as ordinary income. Redundancy payments may
include:

-   payment in lieu of notice
-   gratuities or golden handshakes
-   compensation for loss of job
-   payment because of the employee's invalidity (permanent disability),
    other than compensation for personal injury
-   bona fide redundancy and approved retirement scheme payments in
    excess of the tax free amount
-   certain payments after the death of an employee

Redundancy payments can be treated differently to other leave payments
for the purposes of the IMP calculation. This will depend on how the
employer calculated the redundancy payment.

Under the IMP, unused leave and redundancy payments are treated as
income for a period equal to that for which the leave was paid. Unused
leave and redundancy payments (paid for a period of time), for example,
2 weeks' pay for each year of service, are rounded down to the nearest
day.

Non-time dependent redundancy payments, for example a $20,000 golden
handshake, are divided by the employee's average gross weekly wage and
the calculated amount of weeks is rounded down to the nearest week.

Example 1

A customer has been made redundant from a company and on the day of
leaving, their payment consisted of:

-   5 weeks annual leave
-   10.5 weeks long service leave
-   $25,500 gratuity payment (also known as a 'golden handshake'), and
-   4 weeks payment in lieu of notice

IMP calculated as follows:

-   5 weeks annual leave = 5weeks IMP
-   10.5 weeks long service leave = 10.5 weeks IMP
-   $25,500 / $1,000 (gross weekly income) = 25.5 weeks rounded down to
    25 weeks IMP, and
-   4 weeks payment in lieu of notice = 4weeks IMP

Any part of the redundancy paid for a period of time, for example, the
person received 2 weeks' pay for each year of service, is treated as
income for a period equal to that for which it was paid.

The IMP does not apply to any transitional Employment Termination
Payments (ETPs) that were:

-   made between 1 July 2007 and 30 June 2012 (where the customer was
    entitled to these transitional arrangements under a written contract
    or under the Workplace Relations Act 1996 as at 1 May 2006) and
-   were rolled over into deferred annuities, superannuation bonds,
    superannuation schemes, allocated pensions or approved deposit funds

All other ETPs are subject to the IMP and cannot be rolled over into
superannuation.

An ETP is generally a lump sum payment paid when a person is:

-   made redundant
-   resigns
-   retires or dies

An ETP is limited to invalidity payments, Time-In-Lieu of Notice,
Rostered Days Off, Sick Leave and the portion of the redundancy payment
that is not tax free. The References page provides a link to Policy for
further description of ETPs for IMP purposes.

Income from General Employee Entitlements & Redundancy Scheme (GEERS)/Fair Entitlement Guarantee (FEG)

Payments made in respect of unused leave entitlements upon cessation of
employment (for example, long service, recreation, sick leave and
rostered days off) are treated as ordinary income and the IMP is applied
from the date the GEERS/FEG payment is paid to the customer.

Effect of IMP

Under the IMP where employment has ceased, any termination payments paid
to a person or partner are treated as ordinary income and apportioned
across the period covered by the IMP.

Customers who were paid leave payments prior to claiming payments from
Services Australia are more likely to have no entitlements during an
IMP, than those who receive leave payments whilst on receipt of payment.

Customers are required to declare all other income they are paid while
subject to an IMP, however the income may not affect their payment if
their rate is already zero. The IMP may form part of an employment
income nil rate period if the leave payments along with income from
other employers reduces the customer's payment to zero. All customer
income must be declared as it may also impact the rate of payment for a
partner receiving an income support payment.

Assessment of Hardship of IMP

A Service Officer may decide that an IMP does not apply, in whole or in
part, if Services Australia is satisfied that:

-   the IMP would cause severe financial hardship, and
-   the hardship was caused by unavoidable or reasonable expenditure.
    The expenditure cannot exceed the amount of benefit that would be
    paid if no waiting period was applied

See Assessment of hardship for Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Exception - If the delegate is satisfied, based on the evidence given,
that the person is in severe financial hardship due to the portion of
the person's expenditure that was unavoidable or reasonable, the
delegate may waive the remainder of the person's IMP. For example, the
verified gambling expenditure of a person with a diagnosed gambling
addiction could be considered unavoidable expenditure in some cases.

Exemption of IMP

Recently widowed customers claiming/granted JSP or YA who are within a
bereavement period , will have a Bereavement Waiting Period exemption
and will be auto exempt from serving the entire IMP where:

-   the claim is submitted within 14 weeks of their partner's date of
    death, or
-   if pregnant at the time of their loss, the claim is submitted before
    the birth of the child or end of the pregnancy

Where an auto exemption is applied for this reason, an Exemption
Indicator of 'B' will be displayed against the IMP on the NDC screen.

Effect of IMP on couples

The following information explains the effect of IMP on couples.

If one or both members of a couple are paid a lump sum leave payment on
termination of employment or a redundancy payment and one of the couple
receives an IMP affected payment the lump sum payment should be assessed
under the IMP provisions. The IMP is not included when working out the
rate of:

-   Age Pension
-   Carer Payment or Service Pension
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS), or
-   Veteran Payment

This is regardless of which partner was paid the unused leave and/or
termination payment. It should be recorded to correctly determine any
IMP for the partner.

If a customer is affected by an IMP for an income support payment, they
can test their eligibility for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

If a customer is on nil payment due to an IMP and is going overseas, the
Portability Script - Departures and Returns should be run. When using
the script the following points need to be considered:

-   it may be necessary to tell the script to include the payment in the
    assessment (just follow the script's prompts)
-   the script will assume the payment is current and payable, and any
    letters / documents / messages will be worded accordingly
-   the script should perform the coding. This should be checked
    thoroughly before approving the changes to make sure that it has
    been actioned correctly

If a customer or their partner is paid out unused leave upon ceasing
employment overseas, the IMP is still applied. The customer should
provide details of leave payments that have been paid. Each case should
be assessed to determine the capacity of the customer to get the
information.

The information given by the customer should be accepted if:

-   the customer has tried and is unable to get the information from the
    former employer and
-   it is not possible to get this through other means

A statement should be taken from the customer outlining details of leave
payments that have been paid and reasons for not providing proof from
the employer.

Long Service Leave Portability Payments

Some industries, in particular the mining and building/construction
industry, have introduced long service leave portability funds in which
a person's long service leave entitlements and superannuation funds can
accrue when they move between companies whose work continuity is
volatile.

These funds are assessed under IMP provisions. They usually do not
represent a period of leave in days, so the IMP is calculated based on
the person's gross average weekly wage.

IMP calculation:

Lump sum payment $10,000 divided by $1,500 (gross weekly wage) = 6.66
IMP weeks/6 weeks rounded down/30 IMP days.

The Resources page contains a table of Process Direct employment
separation reason codes, an example of calculating an IMP, and a link to
the Employment Separation Certificate (SU001) online form.

Related links

Assessment of hardship for Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Leave and termination payments paid by an employer

Mutual obligation requirements during an Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Paid leave and redundancy payments (advised before 19 April 2010)

Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)

Income Test for single allowance customers

Income Test for partnered allowance customers

Income Test for single pension customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets test

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income and assets test

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children

For DSP customers with dependent children or over 21 years, see Pensions
income and assets tests.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
