
Completing, assessing and coding the Residence in Australia and other countries Mod O 106-07100090

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers complete the Mod O form and
explain why the information is required. It also outlines how to assess
and code the information obtained.

Residence requirements

Eligibility for most Australian pensions and allowances is based on a
customer's Australian residence and financial circumstances. A customer
must satisfy the residence requirements for the applicable payment
before grant. Once granted, a customer's rate of payment may be affected
by their Australian residence in certain circumstances, and they may
also be required to lodge a claim for a foreign pension.

Residence information is required to determine if the customer:

-   has lodged a valid claim
-   has continuing qualification for most payments
-   can satisfy waiting periods which apply to many payments or has an
    exemption from these, or
-   can satisfy qualifying residence periods, or has an exemption from
    these

Customers who have lived overseas

In any case when a person has lived overseas, a Service Officer must
determine when assessing the claim whether the person:

-   is an Australian resident, and
-   satisfies minimum residence requirements (or has an exemption from
    them)

Lived overseas means when a customer has lived long-term or for a long
period in a country other than Australia. It does not mean holidays or
short trips. Generally, a customer can be outside Australia temporarily
for up to 3 years. Significant periods outside Australia should be
investigated but not coded on the Country of Residence (CRES) screen if
the customer was still residing in Australia. For more information, see
Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident.

Details of all periods of living overseas (from date of birth to the
present) are required, to check whether a customer is entitled to a
comparable foreign payment.

Evidence of living in Australia

The customer may need to provide evidence that they have actually lived
in Australia for specified periods. The following documents are
acceptable as evidence:

-   Certificate of Australian citizenship
-   Document of Identity issued by the Department of Foreign Affairs and
    Trade
-   Overseas passport stamped for entry to Australia
-   Overseas documents, if offered with a passport stamped for entry to
    Australia
-   Australian passport
-   Taxation notices of assessment
-   Australian birth certificate for the customers child/children
-   Any other official documents issued to the customer while they were
    living in Australia. For example, school reports or drivers licence

Immigration Datalink

If there is an active link between a customer’s Customer Reference
Number (CRN) and their Department of Home Affairs record, the
Immigration Datalink will record details of their visa and movement
information from 1 September 1994 and grants of Australian citizenship,
if available.

If the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need to
be manually recorded. Data from the Immigration Datalink takes
precedence over any conflicting information provided by the customer.
Once the Department of Home Affairs record is matched with a customer’s
record, the datalink will record ongoing updates to movement information
and visa changes.

The decision about whether a customer is, or was, residing in Australia
or overseas needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service
Officer. The datalink does not provide this information.

This information can be used to help a Service Officer confirm a
customer's residence in Australia and their amount of Working Life
Residence.

Purpose of the Mod O

The Mod O form is to be completed by customers who have lived or worked
overseas, when required.

The Mod O is used to:

-   assess Australian Working Life Residence (AWLR) to calculate the
    rate of payment a customer may receive if they go overseas
-   see if a customer may be entitled to a pension from another country,
    and
-   assess eligibility and rate of an Australian pension under an
    international agreement

The Mod O may be issued if a customer advises they are travelling
outside Australia and their payment rate will be affected by their
working life residence in Australia.

It may also be used to gather residence information when a customer
lodges an agreement foreign pension claim. Qualifying for these payments
may depend on a person's Australian residence.

When to issue the Mod O

Generally, a Mod O no longer needs to be issued with a claim form. Claim
forms and online claims contain all the necessary residence questions.

The Mod O may need to be issued if there is a need for more information
and a customer's country of birth is outside Australia, or they indicate
they have lived outside Australia.

The Mod O may be issued to gather residence information:

-   if a customer advises they are travelling outside Australia and will
    be affected by their working life residence in Australia
-   when a customer lodges a foreign pension claim. Qualifying for these
    payments may be dependent on a person's Australian residence
-   for a Random Sample review

Survivor or Widow/er Pension from another country

If the Mod O is being completed for a Survivor or Widow/er Pension from
a country other than Australia, the form should be completed using the
deceased partner's details.

The Resources page contains links to the Mod O form and residence
descriptions on the Services Australia website. There is also an
intranet link to the International Programme for more information on
residence, foreign income, assets and payments.

Related links

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Commencement of Identity

Completing modules and forms

Foreign pensions

International Social Security Agreements

Residence requirements

Residence and Portability screens

Working Life Residence (WLR)

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
