
Calculating the start day for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES 106-05010100

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to calculate the start day for PES and
ABSTUDY PES customers.

Start date for PES and ABSTUDY PES

The start date for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES
customers can be either:

-   the first day on which a qualifying income support payment is
    payable, or
-   the first day the customer becomes PES age, or
-   the first day of study
-   in some circumstances, 1 January or 1 July in the year of study

To backdate payments to the right start date, PES and ABSTUDY PES claims
must be made before 31 March (semester 1 starters) or 31 July (semester
2 starters) for full year courses.

Claims made within four weeks of either starting study in a short course
or otherwise qualifying for PES or ABSTUDY PES can have their start day
backdated to the date qualified. An early claim can be lodged for PES up
to 13 weeks prior to the customer qualifying. The start day would then
be the date of qualification.

Students claiming ABSTUDY PES, who received ABSTUDY in the past may not
need to lodge a new claim. These claims follow the same lodgement rules
as all ABSTUDY claims. See Claiming ABSTUDY.

A new claim is not required if a customer receives ABSTUDY and now wants
to claim ABSTUDY PES. This includes Incidentals and part-time students.
The only information required to complete the transfer from ABY to EPA
(ABSTUDY PES) is usually available on their qualifying payment record.

Intent to claim provisions only apply to customers in vulnerable
circumstances.

If the customer is waiting for approval of a pension or payment from
Services Australia or the Department of Veterans' Affairs that is a
requirement for them to qualify for PES or ABSTUDY PES, hold their claim
for PES or ABSTUDY PES until their claim for pension or payment is
granted/rejected.

Backdating provisions for ABSTUDY PES

If a claim for ABSTUDY PES has been rejected, there is no time limit for
reclaiming ABSTUDY PES or providing additional information. Therefore,
the customer can reclaim ABSTUDY PES at any stage, and be backdated,
once their pension or payment has been granted.

Backdating the start day on review is not limited by the 13 week
timeframe that normally applies to customers requesting review of
decisions.

PES start date for customers under 16

If the PES customer has not turned 16 years of age, the start date may
be affected. See Age Requirements for Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

The Resources page contains links to examples of start dates to use with
various scenarios.

Related links

Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, Austudy, Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Age Requirements for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Eligibility periods for full year courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PED) and PES

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
