
Italy Agreement and foreign pension information 106-04019000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines specific information about the Agreement
including the process of making a claim for Australian payment under the
agreement and coding of Italian payments.

On this Page:

Commencement date

The Agreement with Italy commenced on 1 September 1988. The Agreement
was revised on 1 October 2000.

Claiming and benefits covered

The Agreement generally allows customers to lodge a claim for payment
from either country. It also allows customers to add together periods of
residence in Australia and periods of social security coverage in Italy,
to meet the minimum requirements for payment.

Australian payments covered:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) for the severely disabled
-   Carer Payment (CP) for carer partners of Age Pension or DSP
    customers
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)

Note:

-   Only 'widowed persons' can be granted PPS
-   The DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre Processing Team assess and code
    all DOP clams. Re-categorise DOP claims to ZIAM_DOP_NCL. For
    assistance, see Bereavement/Double Orphan Pension Helpdesk

Customers can claim Australian payments under International Agreement by
contacting Services Australia or the Italian authorities.

Italian payments covered:

-   Old Age Pension
-   Invalidity Pension
-   Survivor Pension
-   Social Pension
-   Unemployment Allowance

Customers can claim a foreign pension by contacting Services Australia
or the Italian authorities.

Information for International Agreements

Information on how International Agreements work and general concepts
used in agreements is contained in International Social Security
Agreements.

The Resources page contains CitiBank and Patronato contact details and
links to International Programme, International Services (CIS) and
Services Australia website.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Foreign Pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

Direct embargo recovery from arrears (action for Centrelink
International Services (CIS) staff)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
