-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines specific information about the Agreement
including the process of making a claim for Australian payment under the
Agreement and coding of Portuguese payments.

Commencement date

The Agreement with Portugal started on 1 November 1992 and was fully
revised on 1 October 2002.

Claiming and benefits covered

The Agreement generally allows customers to lodge a claim for payment
from either country. It also allows customers to add together periods of
residence in Australia and periods of social security coverage in
Portugal, to meet the minimum requirements for payment.

Australian payments covered:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) for the severely disabled
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
-   Carer Payment (CP)

Note: only carer partners of Age Pension or DSP customers in Portugal
can be granted CP. Only 'widowed persons' can be granted PPS.

Customers can claim Australian payments under International Agreement by
contacting Services Australia or the Portuguese authorities.

Portuguese payments covered:

-   Old Age Pension
-   Invalidity Pension
-   Survivors Pension
-   Death Grant
-   Funeral Grant
-   Unemployment Benefit
-   Sickness benefits
-   Maternity Benefit
-   Non-contributory benefits

Customers can claim a foreign pension by contacting the Services
Australia or the Portuguese authorities.

Information for International Agreements

Information on how International Agreements work and general concepts
used in Agreements is in International Social Security Agreements.

The Resources page contains links to International Programme homepage,
Centrelink International Services (CIS) and the Services Australia
website.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Foreign pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

Non embargo comparable foreign payment arrears debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
