-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures for the assessment of relationship
details for customers.

Identifying the risk of family and domestic violence

There are a number of signs that a customer may be affected by family
and domestic violence. In all customer interactions, be alert and
responsive to:

-   visual cues
-   conversational cues
-   administrative cues

If staff identify any of the above, this is a cue to ask a Risk
Identification Question. There are a number of updates and referral
options available for customers in need of immediate help or ongoing
support. Refer to the Family and Domestic Violence Support Model and to
Family and domestic violence for more details.

Relationship Status

A customer's relationship status lets Services Australia assess the
current relationship of the customer and support policy requirements
relating to payment entitlements. Some income support payments have
different rates, depending on whether the customer is single or
partnered. Partner income and assets tests may also affect eligibility.

If the customer is updating their relationship status due to separating
from a relationship, there are key steps they should consider to keep
their personal information safe. The sequence of these key steps is
important and all updates need to be made separately for Centrelink,
Medicare and Child Support. See Separating Safely - Protecting personal
details.

Assessing the customer's relationship status makes sure they receive the
correct entitlements. The agency stores and records a customer's
relationship status on the Marital Status (MS) screen. Information on
the MS screen is the primary source for partner linking information and
details the following:

relationship status type:

-   Partnered statuses: de facto (DEF), married (MAR), registered (REG)
-   Single statuses: separated (SEP), single (SIN), widowed (WID),
    divorced (DIV)

if the customer or their partner has permission to enquire (PPE) about
the person they are linked to

any relationship qualifier codes (Qualifier Code) relevant to their
relationship. For example, partner is currently in respite care

periods for which the relationship status/relationship qualifier code
applies

Note: there is no minimum time period required to have elapsed before a
relationship can be considered a de facto. Time period rules apply to
Youth Allowance, ABSTUDY and Disability Support Pension (under 21) to
consider customers independent based on the length of their
relationship. See Resources for further information.

The Resources page contains a list of all possible MS screen codes for
the Marital Status field and Qualifier Code field (relationship
qualifier code).

Partner linking

The system creates a partner link for all relationship status
circumstances where:

-   a customer is partnered, and
-   the partner's Customer Reference Number (CRN) is provided

The partnered generic link does not include a description of the type of
relationship the customer is in. Its existence only indicates that the
customer is partnered. The absence of a partnered generic link indicates
that a customer does not have a partner.

It is also used to record information common to a couple such as address
and accommodation details. This supports the linking process and reduces
re-keying of information on both records. The following information is
required prior to commencing the linking process:

-   a customer's relationship status type
-   confirmation of the relationship by both the customer and the
    partner
-   permission for the customer to enquire about their partner's
    information and vice versa, and
-   the partner's name and date of birth

Note: confirmation of the relationship by both the customer and partner
is required to update and link their records. See Change in relationship
status from single to partnered. Where there is documented family and
domestic violence on the customer or partner's record, see Family and
domestic violence.

Relationship qualifier codes

Service Officers can use relationship qualifier codes to treat customers
differently to their recorded relationship status. The agency records
the codes on the MS screen Qualifier Code field if applicable.

There are single and partnered relationship qualifier codes. The agency
only applies partnered relationship qualifier codes to a partnered
relationship status, while single codes to a single relationship status.
Where a relationship qualifier code is recorded for a partnered
relationship status, a matching relationship qualifier code is applied
to the partner.

When a relationship qualifier code is applied it can sometimes have the
opposite effect, that is, a Service Officer can treat a single status
customer as partnered or vice versa. Some codes may not have any impact
on the rate of payment. The Resources page contains a list of
relationship qualifier codes Service Officers can record for a customer
and their partner.

Reviews

When a customer's record has a relationship qualifier code applied, the
agency does regular reviews to make sure the customer’s circumstances
have not changed. If a warning presents while finalising the
Relationship Qualifier activity on the MS screen, Service Officers must
follow the advice and manually code the review. It is equally important
for Service Officers to action reviews appropriately when they mature to
avoid potential overpayments to the customer and/or their
partner/ex-partner.

-   Section 24 reviews must be done at appropriate timeframes, depending
    on the customer’s circumstances, based on the Section 24 review
    guide.
-   Separated under one roof (SUOR) reviews must be done at appropriate
    timeframes, depending on the customer’s circumstances, based on the
    SUOR review guide.

Roles and responsibilities

This information is to provide an overview of who is responsible for
actions required:

-   to make sure a customer has the correct code recorded on the MS
    screen for their relationship status (Marital Status field), and
-   the relationship qualifier code (Qualifier Code field) is
    applicable.

Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment

Staff must conduct checks at the first touch point to confirm if there
is a need for a MoC or Separated under one Roof (SUOR) assessment if:

-   there is an indication a MoC relationship may exist, or
-   Relationship Details (SS284/SS293) forms have been received

See Confirming the need for a MoC assessment

MoC and SUOR assessments

MoC assessments are completed by specialist MoC processing staff

MoC assessments can also be completed due to:

-   internal data matching and profiling
-   external data matching (e.g. Australia Taxation Officer, Department
    of Defence)
-   information from the public and officer referrals (tip offs/fraud)

When conducting or completing follow-up coding for a MoC or SUOR
assessment, see MoC and SUOR assessments

Retrospective MoC assessments

Undisclosed MoC relationships
If there is evidence of a previously undisclosed MoC relationship that
is recognised by either MoC processing staff or any another Service
Officer:

-   Escalate the assessment using the Report Suspected Fraud and
    Corruption system
-   MoC processing staff must not do the retrospective MoC assessment
-   An Intelligence Analysis Unit, will assess the customer’s past
    entitlement

Disclosed MoC relationships with no FDV identified
If there is a change in circumstances since the initial trigger of the
MoC assessment (form issued), MoC processing staff must:

-   make an assessment, and
-   decide if the customer was in a MoC relationship for a past period

This is to make sure the customer received the correct entitlement. For
example, a customer self-declares they are now partnered to the person
for whom the MoC assessment triggered.
Note: if a customer self-declares they are in a relationship that
started on a date in the past, there is no need to report suspected
fraud or conduct a MoC assessment. Staff must issue a MOD P. See Change
in relationship status from single to partnered

Disclosed relationships with FDV identified
A MoC assessment is not required if the customer:

-   is experiencing FDV
-   does not dispute they are partnered or were previously partnered,
    but did not advise the agency).

It may be appropriate to consider if there is a ‘special reason’ (due to
the presence of FDV), to treat the customer as single under Section 24
of the Social Security Act 1991. This applies in either of the following
circumstances:

-   the customer is still partnered despite the presence of FDV
-   the customer is no longer partnered, but failed to advise the agency
    of their relationship

If a customer who is recorded as single advises they are, or were,
partnered during a claim for CrP, the claim for CrP can be assessed
immediately. The customer’s relationship status does not affect CrP
eligibility.

Whether the CrP is granted or not, an assessment of the customer’s
relationship status is needed for the past period (and ongoing if they
remain partnered) if they:

-   are currently in a relationship not yet disclosed and recorded, or
-   were in an undisclosed relationship for more than 14 days before
    lodging the CrP claim

It is not appropriate to simply issue a Partner Details form (MOD P) or
link the customer to their partner (when they are also a Centrelink
customer). Assess their entire circumstances, including their FDV
situation, first.

The presence of FDV may indicate there is a special reason to treat a
person as not being in a member of a couple relationship. It must be
considered when making a retrospective Section 24 assessment or for
ongoing entitlements if the customer does not separate.

For Section 24 assessments, see Treatment of a partnered person as
single under section 24 new determinations.

SUOR reviews

-   All SUOR reviews must be done at appropriate timeframes, depending
    on the customer’s circumstances, based on the SUOR review guide.
-   Trained MoC processing staff conduct all SUOR reviews
-   See Member of a couple reviews - SUOR

Section 24 assessments

-   A customer may not request a Section 24 assessment, as they may not
    be aware of it. If the customer's circumstances indicate a Section
    24 assessment may be warranted, Service Officers must offer the
    customer to test their entitlement
-   When a customer is requesting an initial Section 24 assessment,
    including new claim processing, if possible, do it first contact. If
    the Service Officer does not have the skill set to do the Section 24
    assessment, a referral may be required
-   If the Section 24 assessment is for a customer who lives overseas,
    Centrelink International Services (CIS) conduct the assessment. If
    the customer lives in Australia but their partner lives overseas,
    the assessment is done through normal channels (not by CIS)
-   See Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
    determinations

Section 24 reviews

-   Section 24 reviews must be done at appropriate timeframes, depending
    on the customer’s circumstances, based on the Section 24 review
    guide
-   These reviews are completed at first touch point if the Service
    Officer has been trained in Section 24 assessments
-   A referral option is available if a staff member has not been
    trained
-   See Member of a couple reviews - Section 24

Customers living overseas

Centrelink International Services (CIS) completes all MoC assessments
(Section 24 (including reviews), MoC or SUOR (including reviews)) for
customers who live overseas. A referral to CIS is needed for:

-   MoC/SUOR assessments, see Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated
    under one roof (SUOR) assessments
-   Section 24 assessments, see Treatment of a partnered person as
    single under section 24 new determinations

Customer advises they are now single. See Change in relationship status
to single for a customer residing outside Australia

Customer advises they are now partnered. See Change in relationship
status from single to partnered

Customer or partner imprisoned or in psychiatric confinement due to criminal offence

-   Assessments of circumstances for these customers or their partners
    should be referred to the relevant State/local Prison Admission team
-   See Prison admission process and claims during incarceration or
    Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison
-   Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are
    in psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

Customer or partner in psychiatric facility (not due to criminal offence)

-   Assessments of separated due to illness and entitlements to rent
    assistance, can be completed by any customer service staff member if
    required evidence is available

Customer’s partner is in immigration detention

-   Being in an Immigration Detention Centre is not the same as in
    prison. The customer is not eligible for the 'Partner in Gaol' rate.
    The Marital Status (MS) screen must not have the Partner in gaol
    (GAP)/In gaol (GAC) relationship qualifier code recorded on the
    customer’s and partner’s record
-   Check if there is a ‘special reason’ to consider Section 24, and if
    it can be applied to treat the customer as not a member of a couple.
    See Section 24 assessments section above for who conducts those
    assessments

Customer or partner separated due to illness or respite care

-   Assessments of separated due to illness and separated due to respite
    care and entitlements to rent assistance, can be completed by any
    customer service staff member if required evidence is available

Customer or partner under the age of consent

-   Assessments can be completed by any customer service staff member,
    with any special processing skill tag requirements outlined by each
    primary payment/entitlement processes
-   Different processing is required for customers that are under the
    age of consent. See Customer or partner under the age of consent
    with dependent child in their care

Customer contacts to have their marital status updated (such as de facto to married)

Any customer service staff member can make these. If a customer contacts
to update their marital status from:

-   de facto to married, see Change in relationship status from single
    to partnered. Note: the Date of Event cannot be the same as the date
    the agency recorded them as de facto (DEF). A separate line is used
    to record MAR with a new Date of Event (date they were legally
    married). The exception is the customer was incorrectly recorded as
    de facto instead of married and the entry needs to be corrected
-   separated/divorced/widowed to single, see Change in relationship
    status from partnered to single

Customers in hardship

When a customer meets eligibility for priority processing, a relevant
referral may be sent to MoC processing staff requesting urgent
processing. Service Officers must first confirm a MoC assessment is
actually required before requesting urgent processing of a MoC
assessment.

-   For priority processing requests due to safety concerns, refer to
    Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment
-   For all other priority processing, refer to Immediate new claim and
    non-new claim priority processing

Reviews and appeals

Explanation of a decision

Whoever makes the determination on the customer's relationship status or
applicable relationship qualifier code usually will provide an
explanation of the decision to the customer. They can do this either by
letter or in person. Relevant Operational Blueprint files contain
information on how to action unfavourable or favourable decisions. See
Request for an explanation or application for a formal review for
information on action to take if a customer contacts to advise they do
not understand or agree with a decision.

Customer or partner/ex-partner provides information after a
determination is made

If the customer/partner/ex-partner provides new information after a MoC
assessment has been finalised, see Initial contact about a decision and
the review of decision process.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to relevant forms
-   information and relevant links related to changes in circumstances
-   referrals to MoC processing staff
-   marital status codes, and
-   relationship qualifier codes

Contents

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment

Interviewing a customer about relationship details

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Customer is separated from their partner due to respite care

Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison

Customer and partner who are under the age of consent with a dependent
child in their care

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered

Relationship Status for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Related links

Member of a couple reviews - Section 24

Member of a couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR)

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Assessing the Partner details (MOD P)

Assessing the Separation details MOD S and online updates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
