
Translation of documents 106-01020030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the types of documents and the process to request
a translation.

Document translation

A document translation is required when a document in a foreign language
needs to be translated into English, and vice-versa.

Services Australia provides free translation of documents that are
needed to assess customers' eligibility for payments and services.

The agency also provides transcription of audio information in language
and the translation of the transcript into English, for internal
purposes.

Types of documents to be translated

-   identity documents
-   overseas income statements
-   legal documents
-   proof of residence
-   medical certificates and reports
-   letters, customers statements or any other document required for the
    agency's business

When to request a translation

A translation request is required when a document received in a foreign
language contains information needed to assess a customer's eligibility
for payments and services.

-   If a customer provides their own translated document for identity
    purposes, the agency's translator must still translate the original
    document. For more information, refer to Coding identity documents
-   Some official documents are bilingual and are written in both a
    foreign and English language. Bilingual documents are not to be
    translated
-   If a customer provides a document that the agency does not require,
    the document must not be translated by the agency's translator

Note: some customers may be eligible for free translation of documents
from the Department of Home Affairs. For more information, customers
should be directed to the Department of Home Affairs website. See
Resources for a link.

Translation Types

There are two types of translation requests: an extract or a complete
(full) translation.

An extract translation is requested when specific information is
required. Only relevant information will be translated. Foreign
documents containing text such as logos, stamps, signatures, websites,
telephone and fax numbers not required, will be removed.

A complete translation will provide a full translation of the entire
document. This may be suitable for legal matters or appeals.

Time frame for translations

Urgent requests are prioritised. If the translation is not finalised
within 10 business days, email Language Services.

The Resources page contains links to the Request for Translation
(SS226A) form, contact details for Language Services, the Information in
your language page on Services Australia website, external websites and
Simple work and Phase Translations.

Related links

Language Services

Interpreter Services

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)

Accessing translated information

Community Language Allowance (CLA)

Coding identity documents

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
