-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the start day is calculated for incapacitated
customers claiming payment.

Backdated start day rules

Incapacitated customers claiming payment may have the start day for
payment backdated in certain circumstances if they have been
incapacitated continuously from the day they became incapacitated for
work to the day they make the claim.

It is the customer's responsibility to make a claim in a timely manner.
It is reasonable to expect them to instruct a friend or relative to
inquire about eligibility for payments or services or to make a claim on
their behalf unless the nature of their incapacity prevents them from
doing so. For example, the customer's ability to manage everyday affairs
is substantially limited by traumatic illness.

Application of backdated start day rules for incapacitated customers
depends on whether the customer claims payment within 5 weeks of
becoming incapacitated for work.

A person claiming payment within 5 weeks of their date of incapacity can
have their payment backdated to the first day they were qualified for
the payment after the day they became incapacitated for work.

A person claiming payment more than 5 weeks after their date of
incapacity can have their payment backdated to the first day they were
qualified within the 4 week period before lodging the claim if their
medical condition was the sole or principal cause of their failure to
make the claim. If there is more than one possible cause for the delay
it is necessary to establish the main cause. It must be considered
whether:

-   the medical condition prevented the customer from lodging a claim,
    and
-   the customer had control of their personal affairs and was capable
    either of making a claim or instructing others to make a claim on
    their behalf

Calculating and recording the start day

The system will calculate and record a provisional start day based on
whether the customer has claimed within 5 weeks of their date of
incapacity.

If a claim has not been made within 5 weeks, the reason for the delay in
claiming must be assessed to determine if the claim can be backdated. If
the start day is to be backdated, it must be manually recorded.

Date of claim

From 1 July 2018, eligible customers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they actually submit a complete claim with all
relevant supporting documentation.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Related links

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Contact in relation to an intended Claim (CLK)

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683)

Calculating the start day general rule

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
