
Rejecting an Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme claim 106-07130040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of rejecting an AIC Scheme claim.
This is for AIC Scheme Smart Centre staff only.

Rejections of AIC claims

An applicant who has lodged a claim for AIC in respect of their student
child may not be eligible for payment because they, or the student, do
not meet the basic qualification, payability or recipient obligation
provisions for payment. Applicants may also withdraw their claims
voluntarily or have lodged an inappropriate or incorrect claim. In all
these circumstances, claims have to be rejected.

Many rejection reasons automatically occur after details have been input
onto the system, while some other rejection reasons have to be coded
manually, e.g. failing to supply documents, failing to reply to
correspondence etc.

Automatic rejections

Most AIC rejections can be made by using the appropriate rejection
reason code, or entering other data (e.g. the distance to school or
transport service) on certain AIC screens. This will generate a letter
to the applicant with the relevant rejection reason. In cases where the
reason provides misleading or inadequate information, AIC Smart Centre
staff will suppress the letter and send the applicant a Q999 letter.

Manual rejections

When manually rejecting a claim, an advice is to be sent to the customer
with the rejection reason(s) and their review and appeal rights.

Claims are processed by AIC Smart Centre staff only. Look up local
Processing Service for: Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC).

Rejection due to Residence

An applicant whose claim is rejected for a residence related reason may
have the claim rejected based on information the applicant has provided,
However, in some cases visa, citizenship and movement information from
the Department of Home Affairs datalink may cause the claim to be
rejected.

If the datalink with Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, generally this will take precedence over any conflicting
information provided by the applicant. If claims are automatically
rejected but this does not meet AIC policy, a manual workaround may be
required to restore or initiate payments.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme qualifications

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
