
Review and appeal procedures for Agreement decisions 106-04005000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the review and appeal rights and processes for
customers who receive an Australian pension under an Agreement or a
foreign pension from an Agreement country.

Review and appeal rights

Australian pensioners all have the same review and appeal rights whether
they receive their payments in or outside Australia, or whether they are
paid under an Agreement or autonomously.

Generally, a customer who gets a pension from an Agreement country has
the same appeal rights as customers of that country.

Review documents and lodgement

For reviews of decisions made by the agency about an Australian pension,
the process is the same as for autonomous customers if the customer is
in Australia or the Agreement country.

The process for reviews of decisions made in relation to foreign
pensions from an Agreement country also applies to customers in
Australia, but processes vary between countries.

Agreements allow documents for a review of a decision in relation to an
Australian or foreign pension from an Agreement country to be lodged in
either country. For example:

-   a customer in Malta can lodge documents for a review of a decision
    about an Australian pension with the pension authorities in Malta
-   a customer in Australia can lodge documents for a review of a
    decision about a Maltese pension with the agency

This means that review requests or documents must be accepted at any
service centre if they relate to a decision about a foreign pension from
an Agreement country.

The date of lodgement of the documents in one country is taken to be the
date of lodgement of the documents in the other country.

Note: this does not apply to documents for a review by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). For AAT reviews, the date of
lodgement will be the date the documents are received by the AAT in
Australia. This is because the AAT is controlled by separate
legislation, not social security law, and that legislation is not
affected by any social security agreements.

Administrative Arrangements

Under Administrative Arrangements, requests for reviews and related
documents are transmitted through the designated Liaison Agencies in
each country using agreed methods in much the same way as claims or
other requests for information.

This means that requests for reviews or documents received in a service
centre must be recorded and sent to International Services (CIS) if they
relate to a review of a decision about a foreign pension from an
Agreement country.

Note: documents in relation to a foreign pension claim or review must
not be scanned to the customer record. They must be sent to CIS via
internal mail.

CIS then sends the request for review or related documents to the
Agreement country via normal liaison.

Related links

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
