
Completing the Partner details (MOD P) 106-07110060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to assisting a customer with
completing a Partner details (MOD P) form. A MOD P is used to obtain
information when the customer has become partnered.

On this Page:

When a customer is considered partnered

Under social security law, a customer is considered to be partnered if
the customer and the person are not living separately and apart on a
permanent or indefinite basis and they are:

-   married
-   in a registered relationship, or
-   in a de facto relationship

Customer advises a change of relationship status

When a single customer who is in receipt of Centrelink payments and
services becomes partnered, they must advise Services Australia of the
change in relationship status. Entitlement to payments and services are
then reassessed for both the customer and their partner.

The customer and/or their partner may need to claim an alternate
payment, or they may no longer qualify for income support payments.

Circumstances when a MOD P may/may not need to be issued

See Change in relationship status from single to partnered for
information about when a MOD P may/may not need to be issued.

Completing the module

-   All relevant questions on the module must be answered. Many
    questions only need a Yes or No response and depending on the
    answers, some questions may be skipped
-   The module must be signed by the customer and their partner
-   Identity Confirmation may be required
-   In some cases, other forms may need to be completed before the
    module can be assessed. The Service Officer will need to issue these
    forms if required. For example, where the partner indicates on the
    MOD P they are involved in a business including if they are
    self-employed, they will need to attach a completed Business details
    (MOD F) form

Payment under Section 24

If it appears a customer may be placed in financial difficulties by
being assessed as partnered, payment under Section 24 provisions may be
considered.

The Resources page contains a link to the Partner details (MOD P) and
other forms that may be required as a part of the MOD P as well as a
link to the Family Assistance contact details.

Related links

Assessing the Partner details MOD P

ABSTUDY customer currently or previously married or in a registered
relationship

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
