
Canada Agreement and foreign pension information 106-04008000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Agreement including the
process of making a claim for Australian payment under the agreement and
coding of Canadian payments.

Commencement date

The Agreement with Canada started on 1 September 1989 and was amended by
protocol in 1990.The Agreement was fully revised on 1 January 2003.

Claiming and benefits covered

The Agreement generally allows customers to lodge a claim for payment
from either country. It also allows customers to add together periods of
residence in Australia and periods of social security coverage in
Canada, to meet the minimum requirements for payment.

Australian payments covered:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)

Note: carer partners of Age Pension or DSP pensioners only.

Customers can claim Australian payments under the Agreement by
contacting Services Australia or the Canadian authorities.

Canadian payments covered:

-   Old Age Security Pension
-   Canada Pension Plan Retirement Benefit
-   Canada Pension Plan Disability Benefits
-   Canada Pension Plan Survivors Pension

Note: customers can be paid Old Age Security Pension and CPP benefits at
the same time.

Customers can claim a foreign pension by contacting Services Australia
or the Canadian authorities.

Information for International Agreements

Information on how International Agreements work and general concepts
used in agreements is contained in International Social Security
Agreements.

The Resources page contains links to International Programme,
International Services (CIS) and the Services Australia website.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Foreign pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

Non embargo comparable foreign payment arrears debt

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
