[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Australian South Sea Islanders.

Definition of Australian South Sea Islander customer

Australian South Sea Islanders are the descendants of South Sea
Islanders brought to Australia as indentured labour around the turn of
the twentieth century and through legislation, identified as a
disadvantaged minority group. The Australian Bureau of Statistics
definition excludes later voluntary migrants from the South Pacific
region.

The Australian Government formally recognised them as a distinct
cultural group in 1994 and the Queensland State Parliament in 2000.

Around three quarters of Australian South Sea Islanders live in
Queensland and northern New South Wales. Many gravitate to coastal towns
such as Mackay, which has the largest Australian South Sea Islander
population in Australia according to the 2021 Census.

Record on Other Contact Details (OCD) screen

The Other Contact Details (OCD) screen asks if the customer identifies
as South Sea Islander. Information about a customer’s South Sea Islander
status helps the government make decisions about policies, funding and
services. Do not ask the customer to provide proof of their South Sea
Islander heritage.

Service Officers must ask if they identify as a South Sea Islander
person when a:

-   new customer registers for Centrelink
-   customer’s South Sea Islander status has not been recorded

Service Officers must advise customers that responding to the South Sea
Islander question is voluntary, and they can update their status at any
time.

Further help

There are no specific payments or programmes tailored for Australian
South Sea Islanders administered by Services Australia. Some state
and/or local services may provide specialised or targeted help.

Contacting a local specialist officer

Specialist officers may be able to provide local knowledge and support
for Australian South Sea Islander customers. Normally, this will be the
local Multicultural Service Officer (MSO). Where Australian South Sea
Islander customers also identify as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait
Islander, the local Indigenous Service Officer (ISO) may be able to
help.

Find the local MSO or ISO on Office Locator:

-   Search service centre in the Office/Town field
-   Scroll to the 'Teams' section
-   Select specialists. The MSO's or ISO’s name and contact number will
    be listed

The Resources page contains links to websites with more details about
Australian South Sea Islanders.

Related links

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

About Initial contact and Identity Confirmation

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

Specialist staff for Indigenous customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
