
Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information to Centrelink International Services (CIS) 106-06020080

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on referring inconsistencies in
overseas departure and arrival information to Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

On this Page:

Immigration Datalink

Information about a customer's residence and their absence/s from
Australia is generally verified automatically, electronically and in
real time directly from the Department of Home Affairs through the
Immigration Datalink. The link can be triggered by new claim activities
as well as residence or portability activities for ongoing Centrelink
customers and is also applied to linked child records.

Although the datalink automatically applies Department of Home Affairs
data to a customer's record in the majority of cases, there is still a
need for manual, specialist action under some circumstances.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates.

Staff should consider applying the alternative dates if:

-   it is reasonable and
-   results in a beneficial outcome for the customer

Centrelink International Services (CIS)

CIS is responsible for following up manual activities arising from
Department of Home Affairs matching. Specialist CIS staff have direct
access to the Department of Home Affairs records.

Appropriate reasons for referral to CIS include:

-   the departure or arrival date missing (common for customers
    travelling on a cruise)
-   the customer is disputing the date of departure or arrival supplied
    by the Immigration Datalink
-   the customer is disputing other details received through the
    Immigration Datalink, including visa or citizenship information

A follow up activity can be generated for these cases. A phone call to
CIS is not needed unless the customer is experiencing hardship on their
return to Australia and an immediate update is needed.

Customers are not generally required to provide evidence of a departure
or return date for a cruise. If further details are required, CIS staff
will contact the customer directly.

MFU activities

A Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity can be generated via the Immigration
Link Details (RSIML) screen and referred to CIS:

-   when a match with a Department of Home Affairs record is expected
    but cannot be made automatically
-   when a match is expected and multiple potentially matching
    Immigration records are found based on the Centrelink data
-   when a customer is identified by the Department of Home Affairs
    datamatch and the datamatch returns a different Immigration record
    than the one held on Centrelink records
-   when a match is expected, but the Immigration reference number
    identified for the customer is already recorded on another
    Centrelink record

MFU activities created by the Immigration Datalink have unique keywords
to identify the source of the activity and the type of risk that
requires investigation.

Disputing Immigration Datalink information

Refer to CIS (who will investigate the issue) when:

-   a customer wants to dispute information or,
-   a Service Officer determines that the Department of Home Affairs
    date is incomplete or incorrect

Under no circumstances is a Service Officer outside CIS to tell a
customer to contact the Department of Home Affairs directly.

The Resources page contains contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
