-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the definition and assessment of a customer whose
partner is in prison.

Payments for a couple separated due to partner in prison

A customer whose partner is in prison maybe eligible to receive the
following extra assistance:

-   A higher rate of payment. Certain allowance and pension customers
    may receive the equivalent of the single rate of payment
-   Single rate of Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA), where applicable
-   Single rate of Pension Supplement, where applicable
-   Single rate of Rent Assistance (RA)

Note: although a customer whose partner is in prison may be paid a
higher rate of payment equivalent to the single rate of payment, the
combined partner income and assets tests still apply.

After entering the appropriate ‘partner in gaol’ relationship qualifier
code on the Marital Status (MS) screen, the records of the customer and
their partner will continue to be linked and correctly display as a
‘member of a couple’ (that is, married, registered or de facto).

Partner released from prison

Once the partner has been released from prison and the date of release
has been confirmed, the relationship qualifier ‘partner in gaol’ must be
removed from the customer’s record on the MS screen. If the partner is
contacting to have a payment restored or wanting to claim after they are
released from prison, see Centrelink service standards and procedures
for pre-release and post-release prison customers.

Customer’s partner in an Immigration Detention Centre

A person detained in an Immigration Detention Centre is not the same as
a person in prison. If the customer's partner is being detained in an
Immigration Detention Centre, the:

-   customer is not eligible for the 'Partner in Gaol' rate
-   Marital Status (MS) screen must not have the GAP/GAC relationship
    qualifier code recorded on the customer's and partner's record

It may however, be appropriate to consider whether there is a 'special
reason' to not treat the customer as a member of a couple under Section
24 of the Social Security Act 1991 due to the cancellation of a
partner's visa. See Treatment of a partnered person as single under
Section 24 new determinations.

Austudy, Youth Allowance (YS) and ABSTUDY customers

There are no provisions within the relevant legislation or policy to pay
an Austudy, YA or ABSTUDY customer a special rate of payment when their
partner is in prison. If the customer still considers themselves to be a
member of a couple, they will continue to receive the partnered rate.

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers

If the customer is the carer of the imprisoned partner, the customer's
qualification for payment may continue and the temporary cessation of
care provisions applied. See:

-   Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment
    (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Care receiver is absent from the caring situation, and
-   Coding a one-off absence for Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP)
    when the care receiver is absent

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payments

Refer the case to the SRSS Level 1 Helpdesk when an SRSS customer:

-   has an imprisoned partner, or
-   their partner is released from prison

The Resources page contains a link to the SRSS Level 1 Helpdesk.

Rent Assistance

The Rent Assistance (RA) thresholds and maximum rate payable will depend
on a customer's circumstances. Customers who are partnered and who have
to live apart due to their partner being in prison (temporarily
separated) may be paid

-   RA the single rate, or
-   RA at the single with child/ren rate when paid with Family Tax
    Benefit (FTB)

Concession Card

The customer's Concession Card entitlement remains the same, except for
the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC). See Commonwealth Senior
Health Card for more information.

The Resources page contains a link to the Centrelink Rates Charts,
contact details for Child Support and a link to the Status Resolution
Support Services (SRSS) Helpdesk.

Related links

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Leave of absence from prison

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in
psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers

Income Test for illness separated or partner in prison customers

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Coding Activity Test details for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Assessment of relationship status – processes, roles and
responsibilities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
