
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines information to increase staff awareness about
individuals who have experienced institutional care as children and to
help staff appropriately service these customers.

Working with individuals who experienced institutional care as children

People who have spent time in institutional care as children can present
in the health and welfare system seeking help for a range of issues
faced as a result of their experiences.

Individuals who experienced institutional care may interact with the
department because of a specific issue such as homelessness, family and
domestic violence or unemployment.

Children in institutional care

It is estimated that more than 500,000 people experienced life in an
orphanage, children's home, institution, prison, training school, adult
psychiatric (asylum) hospital, foster care or other forms of out-of-home
care in the 20th century in Australia (2004 Senate Inquiry).

Adults who were in institutional care as children may identify
themselves as members of the 'Stolen Generation', 'Forgotten
Australians' or 'Former Child Migrants'. Some may also identify
themselves as 'care leavers', 'homies', 'state wards', or
'ex-residents'.

National Redress Scheme overview

The National Redress Scheme was established in response to the
recommendations provided by the Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.

The scheme is a government program that provides support to people who
were sexually abused as children while in the care of an institution. It
is one way the government is working to acknowledge and help people who
experienced child sexual abuse.

The scheme will run for 10 years and is available for survivors of child
sexual abuse in institutional settings, including where the institution
employed children, delivered activities for children, or delivered state
functions in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory
before self-government.

Senate Inquiries and Royal Commission into Australia's treatment of children

Each group of adults has its own unique history and characteristics as a
result of distinct government policies, practices and interventions
shaping their experiences. There have been a number of separate Senate
Inquiries and a Royal Commission Inquiry into Australia’s treatment of
these children. These include:

-   Bringing them Home Report (1997) - report into the Stolen
    Generations, the separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
    children from their families and community. Many Indigenous children
    were removed because of their race and as a consequence, lost
    connection with their culture and land
-   Lost Innocents: Righting the Record Report on child migration - 2001
    report into child migrants. Children who were migrated, primarily
    from the United Kingdom to Australia, in the post-war period without
    their families and often without the knowledge of their parents
-   Forgotten Australians: A report on Australians who experienced
    institutional or out-of-home care as children - 2004 report into
    Australians who experienced institutional care as children and who
    were not covered by the previous 2 inquiries
-   Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual
    Abuse - The royal commission ran from 2013-2017 and inquired into
    and reported upon responses by institutions to instances and
    allegations of child sexual abuse in Australia

National Apologies

On 13 February 2008, on behalf of all Australians, the Australian
Government delivered a formal Apology to the Stolen Generations. This
was followed by a formal Apology to Forgotten Australians and Former
Child Migrants on 16 November 2009.

The apologies acknowledged that many of these children suffered neglect
and were abused physically, emotionally and/or sexually while in care.
For many of the survivors, the effects of institutional care are ongoing
and can have long-lasting impacts felt throughout their adult lives. The
families, partners and children of survivors have also felt the impact
of the trauma, which can then flow through to future generations.

While there have been separate inquiries into these experiences, and
different language and terms used to identify various groups, the
members of these broad groups do share many experiences and
characteristics as a result of being separated from their families,
communities and culture. Many of these children lived together in the
same institutions.

Challenges faced by individuals who were in institutional care as children

Individuals who experienced institutional care as children have
responded differently to the challenges faced. Some survivors have
completed their education and progressed their careers, formed
relationships and raised their own families, and held positions in
various community and social groups.

Others live with a range of health and medical conditions, as well as
financial and social disadvantages that include lower educational
outcomes and literacy levels, unemployment, homelessness, and high rates
of mental illness, which can include symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD).

Some common long-term impacts of institutional care can include:

A lack of trust and security. Resulting from experiences of abandonment,
separation and maltreatment

Loss of identity. Many children who were placed in institutional care
lost connections to their families, communities, culture and identity

Feelings of guilt and shame. Individuals may feel responsible for, or
ashamed by, the abuse they experienced

Mental illness. Includes depression, anxiety, PTSD, dissociation,
phobias, paranoia, confusion and personality disorders. See Providing
services to customers with disabilities

Poor interpersonal and life skills. Individuals may experience
challenges when engaging in some interpersonal and life skills, in
particular social and parenting skills, normally acquired through family
socialisation processes. This can result in:

-   difficulties forming and maintaining stable, loving relationships
-   difficulties with parenting: Many children have grown up without
    parental role models and may experience lesser capacity or knowledge
    to care appropriately for their own children. For some, this may
    lead to involvement with the Child Protection system

Health and aging. Many adults who were in institutional care are now
aged in their late 50s to mid-80s. They often live with a range of
health and medical conditions resulting from their negative experiences
in institutional care. Many are fearful of being re-institutionalised in
aged care facilities or through their interactions with government and
community agencies

Poor educational and employment outcomes. This can include lower
literacy and numeracy skills, difficulties with finding and maintaining
employment, lower levels of income, and a higher representation of
survivors among welfare populations

Engaging in risk-taking behaviours. This can include drug and alcohol
abuse and self-harm

The Process page contains considerations for Service Officers when
working with customers who have experienced institutional care.

The Resources page contains links to National and State support
services, further information on Senate inquiries, external websites,
Services Australia website and the intranet.

Related links

Alternative Identity

How users create a myGov account and link services

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

Referring customers to a social worker

Providing services to customers with disabilities

National Redress Scheme overview

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
