
Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in person 106-09010050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy for customers either temporarily or
permanently unable to attend a service centre or Agent site in person to
complete their identity requirements. In some cases, customers may never
be able to attend a service centre in person. For these customers,
consider an Alternative Identity assessment by phone.

Identity Confirmation

Not all claims require identity confirmation. See Payments and services
that require Identity Confirmation.

For customers claiming Emergency Payments or COVID-19 related payments
see:

-   Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment, or
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

When identity confirmation is required, a customer can:

provide approved identity documents

-   online
-   by phone
-   in person at a service centre or
-   using the Silver Service line if lodging documents with an Agent
    site, and

attend a service centre or Agent site in person to complete linkage

Customers cannot confirm their identity until they complete linkage:

-   at a service centre,
-   at an Agent site, or
-   via a Virtual Service Centre - Video Chat appointment when claiming
    Youth Allowance (YAL STU/JSK) and Jobseeker Payment (JSP)

Linkage cannot be conducted by:

-   a nominee on behalf of a customer
-   an Agent site or via Silver Service using knowledge based questions
    and answers

Customers unable to complete Identity Confirmation must complete an
Alternative identity assessment in person, unless there is a valid
reason a customer is unable to attend in person. For example, customer
has exceptional circumstance.

When a customer is unable to attend in person

In some cases, a customer may:

never be able to attend a service centre in person. For example, if they
are profoundly disabled or incapacitated in a nursing home or other
institution

not be able to attend a service centre before making a claim. For
example, if they are

-   affected or vulnerable to COVID-19 which may require them to isolate
    or comply with COVID-19 restrictions
-   directly affected by a declared disaster that prevents them from
    attending in person, refer to Emergency management events

If there is a valid reason for the customer not attending in person (see
exceptional circumstances), run the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in
Process Direct to:

apply an Identity Review Period by phone after completing
authentication. This allows the customer additional time to attend a
service centre or Agent site to complete

-   their identity requirements and/or
-   linkage

do not apply an Identity review period:

-   without informing the customer of their obligations, or
-   when it is identified the customer cannot provide the required
    identity documents

complete the Alternative Identity assessment workflow in the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct by phone. This will determine
the questions to ask and apply the Alternative Identity category and
review/non-review period based on the customer’s circumstances
Note: If the customer is living outside of Australia, see Claims for
Australian payments under International Agreement and refer to CIS

Staff must be satisfied of a customers’ inability to attend in person.
If not, ask the customer to provide evidence.

An authorised nominee can complete an Alternative Identity assessment
after being authenticated:

-   at the office in the customer’s absence, or
-   by phone when the customer is affected by an exceptional
    circumstances and cannot complete a phone assessment themselves

If unsure that the circumstances are genuine, discuss with Technical
Support Officer.

Lodging documents

Customers who cannot lodge documents in person have other lodgement
options available, depending on the payment or service claimed. These
include lodgement:

-   by a nominee or person with express or implied authority at a
    service centre or Agent site using the Silver Service line
-   [] online, using the Upload document service. For online claims,
    including Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) aligned claims after
    linkage is complete
-   by a Rural Financial Counsellor (RFC). Identity documents can be
    sighted and copied by the RFC. The certified documents can be used
    in the new claim process. This option can only be use when the
    customer is attending a financial counselling appointment
-   by mail. Return original documents to the customer by registered
    post
-   by phone, when coded and verified in the Identity Confirmation
    Dashboard in Process Direct

Identity documents must be original and unaltered.

If the Service Officer suspects the document has been altered and/or
fraudulent, refer to Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption for
instructions.

Coding documents

Code identity documents using the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in
Process Direct at the first point of contact.

-   Do not code certified copies of identity documents. These are used
    to support Alternative Identity assessments only
-   Do not code documents lodged by a third party who is not an
    authorised nominee or a person/organisation with express authority
-   Refer to Coding Identity documents and Identity documents A to Z for
    assistance on coding identity documents

The Resources page contains a link to the COVID-19 intranet page.

Related links

Accepting information from nominees

Alternative Identity

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Disclosing information to third parties

Emergency management events

Identity Confirmation

Identity Confirmation for customers managed by a public trustee

Identity Review Period

Implied consent regarding third parties

Nominees

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Silver Service phone line for Specified Personnel at Agent sites

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
