
Ordinary Waiting Period (OWP) 106-05020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the description of an Ordinary Waiting Period
(OWP) and when it should be applied. The OWP is a waiting period of 1
week that customers in receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting
Payment (Partnered-PPP or Single-PPS), and Youth Allowance (YA)
(Jobseeker) are required to serve without payment unless it can be
waived, or the customer is exempt. The OWP does not apply to any other
payments.

When OWP commences

The OWP generally commences on the customer's start date. If the
customer is subject to another waiting or preclusion period, the OWP
commences after the other waiting or preclusion period has ended, except
the Income Maintenance Period (IMP) in certain circumstances. For more
information regarding the interaction between waiting and exclusion
periods see Interaction between waiting and preclusion periods.

Customers who earn income during an OWP will be required to declare that
income in their first reporting period.

The decision is made at the new claim stage as to whether the customer
meets the requirements for an exemption from the OWP.

Youth Allowance (YA) Customers

If an assessed claim for YA (Student) has a future start date and the
customer requests to transfer to YA (Jobseeker) prior to that start
date, they will be required to serve the OWP before YA (Jobseeker)
payment can commence. Note: YA (Student) is not subject to OWP.

If a YA (Student) in receipt of payment in the last 13 weeks is
transferring or reclaiming YA (Jobseeker) the usual exemption applies
(see below).

Where a YA (Jobseeker) claim is granted with an OWP, but the customer
requests to transfer to YA (Student) and qualifies for YA (Student)
prior to the OWP being fully served, the YA (Jobseeker) claim is to be
rejected and all information transferred to YA (Student). See Youth
Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning to
full-time study.

Exemption from the OWP

A customer may be exempt from an OWP if any one of the following
circumstances exist:

The customer is reclaiming within 13 weeks of last receiving a social
security benefit or allowance, a social security pension, Parental Leave
Pay, Dad and Partner Pay, a Service Pension, Veteran Payment or Income
Support Supplement (ISS). ABSTUDY is not deemed to be a social security
benefit or allowance, a social security pension or service pension under
the current SSAct

The customer is undertaking any of the following at the time of claiming
an income support payment:

-   an activity as part of Stream C servicing, Disability Employment
    Services (DES), or
-   an activity as part of the Community Development Program (CDP) and
    have been assessed via an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or
    Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) as eligible for Stream C servicing or
    DES

Recently widowed customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA within
a bereavement period will have an Bereavement Waiting Period exemption
and will be auto exempt from the OWP where:

-   the claim is submitted within 14 weeks of their partner's date of
    death, or
-   if pregnant at the time of their loss, the claim is submitted before
    the birth of the child/end of the pregnancy

In most cases, eligibility for an exemption will be automatically
identified and granted by the system. The exemption will apply from the
claim start date and does not include any other waiting or preclusion
periods (for example, the start date payment would have commenced if no
other waiting or preclusion periods applied).

If an exemption is not given, the waiting period should be applied,
unless a waiver is being considered.

Customers who return to payment after receiving Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) are not subject to an OWP if there is no
gap in the payment of PPL or DAP and recommencement of income support
payment.

Waiver of the OWP

The waiver reason 'unavoidable or reasonable expenditure' (RUE) will be
used for this circumstance.

The OWP can be waived in full where the customer is experiencing a
personal financial crisis. The waiver will apply from the claim start
date and does not include any other waiting or preclusion periods. This
is the start date payment would have commenced if no other waiting or
preclusion periods applied.

The customer is considered to be experiencing a personal financial
crisis when they:

are in severe financial hardship, and

are experiencing, or have experienced, one of the following
circumstances in the past 4 weeks:

-   has incurred unavoidable or reasonable expenditure
-   the customer was subjected to domestic or family violence
-   was in gaol or psychiatric confinement
-   first entered Australia and was the holder of a qualifying
    humanitarian visa on that entry to Australia, or
-   the customer's principal place of residence was lost or sustained
    major damage as a result of an extreme circumstance. To qualify for
    an OWP waiver, the customer does not need to have left the home, or
    intend to establish a new home

The 'past 4 weeks' refers to the 4 weeks immediately before the
customer's start date and not the claim processing date. For example, a
claim that is subject to backdating provisions is processed on the 20th
of April but will be backdated to a start date of the 9th of April, the
4 week period will be applied from the 12th March to the 9th of April
(the customers start date). For claims with a future start date, a claim
processed on the 30th April with a start date of the 25th of May, the 4
week period will apply from the 27th of April until the 25th of May (the
customer's start date).

If the 4 week period encompasses future dates, it is the customer's
responsibility to inform Services Australia of any change to their
circumstance during this time that could result in the waiver of the
OWP.

For the purpose of this assessment the start date does not include any
other waiting or preclusion periods. The start date is the date the
payment would have commenced if no other waiting or preclusion periods
applied. For example, if there is also a Liquid Assets Waiting Period
(LAWP) to be served, the 4 weeks will be counted back from the claim
start date, not from the LAWP end date.

-   For JSP, Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP), Parenting Payment Single
    (PPS), and YA (Jobseeker) customers - the OWP can be waived at any
    time between the time the claim is lodged and the day the waiting
    period has been served. Evidence is to be obtained before a waiver
    is considered. It is essential that all suitable evidence is scanned
    to the customer record and that the reason for the waiver is
    recorded in the new claim DOC as this is a significant decision
-   For incapacitated JSP, PP, and YAL - these customers may be eligible
    for a 5 week backdating provision. The OWP can be waived at any time
    from the date claim was lodged; or while serving the waiting period.
    If their claim is being backdated the OWP can be waived for a
    previous period within the 5 weeks of initial contact. The Service
    Officer must confirm the customer's financial circumstances back to
    the period in question

Unavoidable or reasonable expenditure

A customer is eligible for a waiver of the OWP if they are in severe
financial hardship because they have incurred unavoidable or reasonable
expenditure in the 4 weeks prior to the customers start date. The intent
of the waiver provision is to ensure that customers in hardship, who may
be vulnerable, are not placed in further hardship through a waiting
period.

The list of unavoidable or reasonable expenditure is not exhaustive.
Other expenses which are considered to be unavoidable or reasonable may
also be included in the assessment.

Unavoidable or reasonable expenditure may include any of the expense
types, either in isolation or in combination. For example, a customer
may qualify for a waiver if they provide sufficient evidence of
reasonable costs of living (receipts for rent, bills or food) in the 4
weeks prior to the customer's start date. The customer does not need to
have spent a specific amount, or up to a certain threshold in the 4
weeks prior to the customer's start date in order to qualify for a
waiver.

For waiver because of unavoidable or reasonable expenditure to be
considered, the customer must provide evidence of the expenditure. This
must have occurred in the 4 weeks prior to the customer's start date and
resulted in them being in severe financial hardship (for example,
receipts). This includes expenses for reasonable costs of living. It is
not sufficient to only provide evidence of severe financial hardship
(for example, bank account balances). The customer must also provide
evidence of available funds at the beginning of the 4 weeks prior to the
customer's start date to prove the funds have reduced.

Subjected to domestic or family violence

The customer does not have to be eligible for Crisis Payment in order to
have the OWP waived. The customer is not required to have left the home
or have the intent to leave the home for the purposes of the OWP waiver
(unlike Crisis Payment). This waiver provision does not apply to
alleged, or actual, perpetrators of domestic violence. See Family and
domestic violence.

Customer in gaol or psychiatric confinement

The waiver reason Personal Financial Crisis- Other (PFO) will be used
for this circumstance.

Customers qualify for an OWP waiver if they are in severe financial
hardship and have been released from prison, a police cell, watch house,
psychiatric confinement or juvenile detention. No minimum period of time
in gaol or psychiatric confinement applies. Psychiatric confinement does
not have to be in relation to committing an offence. Evidence of severe
financial hardship must be provided before a waiver can be considered.

Customer first entered Australia as the holder of a qualifying humanitarian visa

The waiver reason Personal Financial Crisis- Other (PFO) will be used
for this circumstance.

The customer first arrived in Australia with a qualifying visa in the 4
weeks immediately prior to the claim start date. Qualifying visa
subclasses are:

-   200 - Refugee
-   201 - In-country Special Humanitarian Program
-   202 - Global Special Humanitarian Program
-   203 - Emergency Rescue
-   204 - Woman at Risk

Customer's home lost or incurred major damage due to an extreme circumstance

The waiver reason Personal Financial Crisis - Other (PFO) will be used
for this circumstance.

Eligibility for disaster relief has no bearing on their eligibility for
the OWP waiver.

Evidence

The waiver must not be applied unless evidence is obtained to indicate
there is a reasonable possibility the customer satisfies the
circumstances.

Individual situations must be considered on a case-by-case basis. For
example, what may be considered unavoidable or reasonable expenditure
for one person with a particular set of circumstances may not be
applicable in another person's case.

Where the customer is unable to provide evidence due to extenuating
circumstances such as unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) or
homelessness, a written notice from a social worker may be accepted in
lieu of this.

Severe financial hardship

Severe financial hardship occurs when:

-   a single person has liquid assets less than 2 weeks' allowance at
    the maximum payment rate that would be payable to the person if the
    ordinary waiting period did not apply, or
-   a member of a couple have liquid assets less than twice the amount
    of 2 weeks' allowance at the maximum payment rate that would be
    payable to the person if the ordinary waiting period did not apply

If the waiting period is to be waived, then it may be necessary to look
at the option of paying a hardship advance so the customer has
sufficient funds until their next pay period.

Severe financial hardship can be confirmed with the following evidence:

-   Bank statement covering the period from the date ceased work or
    previous circumstances, until the date of claim current at the date
    of claim, and
-   Evidence of other liquid assets if appropriate

The Resources page contains examples of evidence required for waiver
eligibility, scenarios where customers are eligible for a waiver of the
OWP and details on how the OWP was impacted by the coronavirus
(COVID-19).

Related links

Making a decision about a Hardship Advance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
