
Community Language Allowance (CLA) 106-01020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Community Language Allowance (CLA), which may be
paid to Services Australia employees who assist customers in a language
other than English.

CLA

Staff who speak a language other than English may be eligible to receive
CLA when they use their language skills in the course of their work.
This includes Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander languages and
communication for deaf or hearing impaired customers including AUSLAN
and other sign languages.

CLA does not replace existing interpreting services provided by the
agency.

An identified business need for a language skill and proof of language
qualifications must be established before applying for CLA. This can
include recording language usage in the workplace and passing a CLA
Proficiency test.

For queries related to payment of CLA, contact People Advisory Centre
(PAC). For all other queries, contact Language Services.

Role of CLA recipients

CLA recipients can:

-   conduct their normal interviews or customer contacts in another
    language
-   assist other staff with brief customer interactions where a
    sessional or on demand interpreter is not available, e.g. when a
    customer needs to be advised of an appointment involving an
    interpreter or to direct them to the right queue or area
-   be a first point of contact for customers requiring language
    assistance
-   only be used for their bilingual skills and not for translating
    written material

Important notes on CLA recipients

-   CLA recipients are not expected to handle and complete enquiries
    independently in a section unrelated to their own work
-   CLA only covers a person's language skill, not additional workload.
    Any follow up work should be completed by the initial Service
    Officer
-   if demand for a CLA recipient's bilingual skills is excessive and
    affecting their usual duties, the service centre should engage an
    on-demand telephone interpreter

Payment of CLA

An employee can receive CLA when there is an identified business need
for a language skill, have proven their language competency and language
skills are used a minimum of 3 times a month for CLA1 or minimum 8 times
a month for CLA2. Staff must record the use of their language skills in
the workplace by using the recording pro forma. This is not required
where particular language skills are essential for a position.

Proof of language qualification

The following is accepted as proof of language qualification:

-   a pass in the CLA Proficiency Test* conducted by the National
    Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI) on
    behalf of the agency, or
-   NAATI certification at the certified provisional interpreter level
    or higher, or
-   NAATI recognition as a practicing or recognised interpreter (only
    where NAATI testing, or certification is not available for that
    language), or
-   Certificate II in AUSLAN from TAFE or State Deaf Society or
    equivalent by another organisation approved by the agency

The following is accepted as proof of Indigenous language proficiency:

-   a pass in the CLA Proficiency Test conducted by the National
    Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI) on
    behalf of the agency, or
-   confirmation from a senior Indigenous community leader or
    organisation of the applicant's language skills
-   relevant recognised language service, such as TAFE, Language Centre
    or Indigenous Interpreter Service

*Managers can arrange a CLA Proficiency Test for a staff member if they
do not already hold a qualification.

Refer to the Process page for additional information.

Related links

Interpreter Services

Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)

Written material in other languages

Initial contact and identification of services for migrants, refugees
and visitors to Australia

Multilingual Phone Service (MPS)

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
