
Searching for a customer on the system 106-07030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps required when searching for a customer
in Customer First and Process Direct.

Locating the correct customer record

It is important to complete thorough searches to:

-   locate the correct customer record before updating a customer's
    details, or
-   confirm that no record exists before adding a new record for a
    customer

Using a range of searching and questioning techniques is the best way to
locate an existing customer record.

Search initially by completing minimal fields, e.g. customer’s legal
surname and date of birth (DOB). If too many records are returned,
refine the search criteria by including the customer’s first name.

If a match cannot be found check the customer’s details, for example:

-   confirm the spelling of their name(s)
-   confirm their date of birth, or
-   have they been known by any other names

Note: customers may use different variations of their given name. If a
customer’s name is Thomas, search using Tom. In Customer First only, a
search can be done by using the customer’s initial, e.g. ‘T’.

Make sure the correct record has been identified for use before making
any updates. Do this by completing Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO).
Note: some customers have the same name and date of birth.

Checking match results in Customer First

If a match is found, after selecting the most appropriate record use the
Multiple Match List (MML) screen to identify other records which may
belong to the customer. It can be used to ensure the located CRN is the
most appropriate record for the customer’s business.

Checking match results in Process Direct

The search results will provide a match score. This provides a
percentage of probability of a potential matching record. This will
assist in deciding the most appropriate record to use.

Authenticated Online Entry (UEO) record

If there is a need to update a customer's record and a thorough search
identifies only an Unauthenticated Online Entry (UOE) record, create a
new record for the customer.

If a claim has been lodged on a UOE record, the system:

-   converts it to a person (PER) record, or
-   copies information from the claim on the UOE to an existing CRN if
    it locates one

Online claim on incorrect Customer Record

If an online claim is indexed to the incorrect customer record and data
has been uploaded, the record is now intertwined. The record must be
referred straight away to the Data Quality Unit using the Intertwined
Referral form. No further updates should be made.

Only add a new CRN after an exhaustive search fails to find an existing
record. If the details provided by a customer are incomplete, confusing
or conflicting, contact the customer. Obtain correct details before
making any updates or creating a new record.

The Resources page contains links to mySupport, the Data Quality Unit
intranet page, Office Locator and the Intertwined Referral form.

Related links

Adding a customer to the system

Indexing a customer on the system

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Types of Centrelink records

Centrelink Multiple Match List (MML) screen

Intertwined Centrelink records

OLS Search (OLS) facility

Multicultural Guide

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
