
Calculating the start day general rule 106-05010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine the start day of a social
security payment or concession card. The concession cards include a
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC), Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC), Ex-Carer Allowance (Child) Health Care Card (EHC) or Foster Child
Health Care Card (FST).

Start day general rule

If a person makes a claim for a social security payment or concession
card, the person's start day is generally the day they submit a
completed claim.

However, the start day may be:

earlier than the date of claim submission when

-   specific backdating provisions apply to a particular
    payment/concession, or
-   vulnerable circumstances exist, see Intent to claim and vulnerable
    customers

later than the date of submission if:

-   it is an early claim
-   an exclusion period applies, or
-   an administrative decision considers the claim as made from a
    particular point in time

a later start date if the customer:

-   is required to serve a waiting, preclusion or non-payment period
-   is serving time in gaol
-   is in a psychiatric institution
-   For Age Pension - qualifies but is not yet payable, claim held until
    payable, see Assessing Age Pension claims and transfers, or
-   For Youth Allowance (Student and Apprentice) - elects their claim to
    be made from a later date. See Calculating the start date day for
    Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian
    Apprenticeship claims

Reassessment of rejected claims

If a claim is rejected and is later reassessed:

the legislation that applies to the payment or concession card must be
adhered to in regard to the start date, and

the start date will depend on whether:

-   the customer provided the relevant information, and/or
-   whether the customer appealed the decision within 13 weeks from the
    decision date

Start day for ABSTUDY claims

The start date for ABSTUDY is varied depending on the benefit claimed
and the customer's personal circumstances. See Calculating the start
date for ABSTUDY.

Start date for concession card claims

The start date of a CSHC, LIC, FST or EHC is generally the date of claim
submission.

However the start day of a LIC, FST or EHC may be backdated for a
medical service or treatment if continuing eligibility can be
established for the entire period between the date of the service or
treatment and the date of claim submission.

See Claiming LIC , HCC for foster children or EHC.

A system limitation prevents backdating a LIC or foster child HCC claim
more than 13 weeks before the claim processing date. If this is
necessary and the customer is eligible, contact the Concessions Level 2
Policy Helpdesk to request approval for a systems override. The
Resources page contains a link to the online request form.

Start date for job seeker claims

Generally, when a job seeker is exempt from RapidConnect requirements
the start day is the date the claim was submitted with all supporting
documentation if they meet the qualification and eligibility for
payment.

However, a number of factors may affect the start day for job seeker
claims with RapidConnect requirements.

See the Resources page for RapidConnect scenarios and payability start
dates.

Start day for Parenting Payment (PP)

The general rule is that if a person claims PP and is qualified on the
day the claim is made, that day is the start day. However, there are
exceptions to the start day rule. See Start day for PP.

The Resources page contains a link to the Concessions Level 2 Policy
Helpdesk online referral form and examples of start dates.

Related links

Start day (CLK)

Early claims

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

RapidConnect

Calculating the deemed date of claim manually

Calculating the start day soon after a partner's death

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Requesting information (CLK)

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim

Calculating the start date for ABSTUDY

Customer initiated review of decision

Start day for Parenting Payment (PP)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Processes for RapidConnect appointments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
