
Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a Manual Follow-up activity when a multimatch occurs 106-06020090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on actioning a Manual Follow-up (MFU)
activity when a multimatch occurs.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

A datalink with the Department of Home Affairs provides Centrelink with
residence and travel details for customers. In some situations a
customer's details will not be provided as expected due to the
possibility of more than one record matching the customer's details.
This procedure will advise the Service Officer what needs to be done
when this multiple match occurs.

The datalink with the Department of Home Affairs provides customer
details from 1 September 1994 to date. These details include visas,
movement information and Australian citizenship where available, and the
information automatically populates onto the customer's record. The
datalink also automatically updates any change in visa, grant of
Australian citizenship and departure from or return to Australia for any
customer who has already been identified as a mutual customer. The
datalink provides the same information in relation to a customer's
dependent children, caree or carer.

When an update is attempted on a customer's record by a Centrelink
Service Officer, the datalink system will make an assumption based on
certain criteria to decide whether a return of information from the
Department of Home Affairs is expected.

Information held in the datalink

Details from the Department of Home Affairs via the datalink will be
expected if one or more of the following circumstances exists and is
recorded for the customer:

-   an Immigration Reference Number (IRN) exists
-   Australian residence commenced after 1 September 1994
-   movement information
-   a visa was granted after 1 September 1994
-   a change of address after 1 September 1994 from inside to outside
    Australia (and vice versa) is recorded
-   the customer's date of birth is after 1 September 1994 and the
    country of birth is not Australia, or
-   the customer's residence in a foreign country commenced after 1
    September 1994 and the customer resided in Australia immediately
    prior to the overseas residence

New claim processing

When a customer lodges a claim with Centrelink after 8 December 2008, a
question prompts the Service Officer to confirm whether the person has
lived or travelled overseas since 1 September 1994. If the customer has
answered yes to this question, the information held by the Department of
Home Affairs on this customer would be expected to be transferred via
the datalink process. This data would include all travel details held by
the Department of Home Affairs and will populate the relevant Centrelink
screens, including all travel and visa and Australian citizenship
details.

The datalink requires the following information to activate a search for
visa, citizenship or movement information, these include:

-   name
-   date of birth
-   and the country of birth

If an expected exchange is successful, the information obtained from the
Department of Home Affairs will be applied automatically to a customer's
record and the activity or claim can continue. All information sourced
from the Department of Home Affairs is deemed to be verified.

Unsuccessful data transfer

In certain cases where a Department of Home Affairs record is expected,
the data transfer between the Department of Home Affairs and Centrelink
was not successful because there were found to be multiple Department of
Home Affairs records for the Centrelink customer. This is known as a
'multimatch'.

MFU referral and role of CIS

If an exchange of information through the datalink is expected within a
new claim activity but is not successful, a Manual Follow-up (MFU)
activity will be created by the system. This MFU will be automatically
transferred and actioned by the Centrelink International Services (CIS)
Smart Centre. The new claim process can continue while the activity is
being processed. While the MFU does not prevent completion of the new
claim activity, a Service Officer may prefer to wait until the MFU is
completed to ensure that all Department of Home Affairs data is
available before completing the claim. A Service Officer can complete
the claim with customer advised information if they wish to, but full
Department of Home Affairs data will not be available until the MFU is
actioned. The MFU is an integral part of the process and cannot be
cancelled.

If a match is expected in a non-new claim activity and is not confirmed
by the Department of Home Affairs datalink then an MFU will be created
for action by the team in CIS. This MFU will not prevent continued
action on the customer's record by the Service Officer.

The CIS Smart Centre prioritises referrals according to their urgency.
The team will endeavour to locate the correct Department of Home Affairs
record and record the information found regarding visas, citizenship and
travel directly on the customer's record. The CIS Smart Centre will
finalise the MFU as required.

Debts or reviews resulting from datalink

Any debts or reviews resulting from the Department of Home Affairs
datalink information activities are handled by the customer's home
Service Zone Debt Raising Team.

The Resources page contains contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

Related links

CIS Residence Assessment Team - actioning a Manual Follow-up activity
when no match occurs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
