
Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing 106-10010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to refer customers who are vulnerable and/or
have complex needs for priority processing to have their claim or other
business assessed urgently.

Immediate new claim processing

Make a referral for a customer's claim to be assessed (or a rejected
claim reassessed) immediately, if:

-   the customer is vulnerable and/or has complex needs and further
    delay could worsen their situation
-   the customer has been assessed as in hardship and previous
    escalations for urgent processing have not been actioned, or
-   failure by Services Australia to respond quickly and effectively
    will present a significant risk to the customer or the agency

Note: there is no single definition for ‘vulnerability’ or 'complex
needs’. Consider each customer’s individual circumstances when
determining who might benefit from priority referral.

Customer identified as at risk

Make a referral to a Social Worker when a customer:

-   is at risk
-   in crisis
-   vulnerable, or
-   may benefit from social worker involvement

See Social work service referral and Identifying customer vulnerability
and risk issues.

Terminally ill customer claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Escalate DSP claims for terminally ill customers for priority
processing.

See Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally
ill customers.

Customer in financial hardship

Follow existing processes for customers who

-   do not meet the criteria for immediate claim processing, and
-   require urgent assistance to have their claim assessed or reassessed

See Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing
financial hardship.

Contact with the Participation Solutions Team (PST)

Protocols exist for phone contact between managers or Team Leaders in
service centres and PST:

-   to provide alerts, and
-   manage potential customer aggression threats

The Process page contains the escalation protocols for the timely
management of aggressive customers that are in contact with, or need to
contact PST. These includes arrangements for customers who are already
in a Restricted Servicing Arrangement (RSA) and Personalised Services.

Note: do not use this process if a customer has been on the phone for a
long time, or if they advise that the call dropped out. In these cases
the customer will need to call back to have their compliance action
investigated.

Outstanding Member of a Couple (MOC) assessment

If a new claim is pending a MOC assessment and the customer is
identified as requiring immediate claim processing or has safety
concerns, see Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC)
assessment.

Priority processing (non-new claims)

Services Australia must refer a customer's situation for urgent or high
priority attention when a failure to respond quickly and effectively may
present a significant risk to the customer.

Effective referral of customer issues is the responsibility of all
staff.

Apply existing escalation processes for specific risks and situations,
however:

-   quick, initial referral of a high risk situation is preferable to a
    delayed referral that conforms with all the requirements of a
    specific referral/escalation protocol
-   each staff member in the referral chain is responsible for taking
    timely and effective action in relation to the referral/escalation

The Resources page contains links to the Escalation policy, customer
aggression guidelines, Webforms and Office Locator.

Contents

Progress of claim

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Related links

Assessment of hardship for Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Assessment of hardship for Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Assessment of assets hardship

Assets hardship provisions for allowances

Ordinary Waiting Period (OWP)

Assessment of hardship for Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP) for
Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students

Social work service referral

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Immediate payments

Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
