
Alternative Identity 106-07040050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Alternative Identity, which supports
customers having difficulty providing identity documents for selected
payments and services.

Difficulty confirming identity

It is important to establish confidence in a person's identity. The
agency can:

-   help protect customers from identity theft, and
-   prevent other types of identity crime

Most customers are required to confirm their identity with Services
Australia to claim a Centrelink payment or service. Some customers may
not be able to confirm or even establish their identity without staff
assistance.

An Alternative identity assessment can establish a customer's identity,
allowing processing of their payment:

-   while they gather more documents or need more time to attend in
    person
-   while the agency verifies their proof of birth or arrival in
    Australia, or
-   when they do not have identity documents and/or are vulnerable and
    cannot confirm their identity

Note: if a customer is having genuine difficulty confirming their
identity, do not ask them to buy an identity document.

Staff MUST consider exceptional circumstances and refer to Supporting
Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in person.

When a person has a non-reviewable alternative identity their identity
status will display as not confirmed.

Alternative identity processes

Use Alternative Identity processes when customers cannot confirm or
establish their identity.

Complete Alternative Identity assessments and coding of identity
documents using the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.
Make sure this is with the customer and/or nominee, in person or by
phone when applicable. Staff must be satisfied the customer is who they
say they are and must code and verify all available documents within an
Alternative Identity assessment.

Staff must advise the customer:

-   the assessment outcome
-   what actions are required by the customer
-   the consequences of not meeting their obligations

Note: there are special Alternative Identity processes that staff must
apply to Care receivers and Partners who are not required to complete
identity.

Care receivers are not required to complete identity requirements if
they are:

-   an Income Support Payment (ISP) or Health Care Card (LIC) customer
-   a Department of Veteran Affairs (DVA) customer (confirmed via DVAS
    screen), or included in a Child to Adult transfer (CTAT)

Partners of Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) or Health Care Card (LIC)
who are an Income Support Payment (ISP) or Health Care Card (LIC)
customer are not required to complete identity requirements

Care receivers and Partners who are required to complete identity
require a no-linkage identity status:

-   staff must never code KC and must only apply a GD review period when
    a customer cannot meet a no linkage identity status, and it is
    completed with the customer in person or over the phone

The Process page outlines how to code Alternative identity.

Confirmation of Identity - Verification for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people (RA010)

Questions for customers who are unable to confirm their identity, see
Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct for the workflow.

Complete the Alternative Identity workflow at a face to face interview
with the customer and/or their nominee, or by phone where suitable.

The RA010 form is:

-   strictly for customers who identify as Aboriginal or Torres Strait
    Islanders who need extra help to complete their Alternative Identity
    requirements
-   for the customer to take away and have signed by an authorised
    referee, stating the information in the form is complete and
    correct. Staff must not use an RA010 when customers can confirm
    their identity

Verification of customer information

During an Alternative Identity assessment, the Service Officer who is
completing the interview must:

-   authenticate the customer
-   contact referees or representatives provided by the customer
-   request all available identity documents, for example has the
    customer recently travelled overseas but not provided a passport
-   code and verify all identity documents provided by the customer
    using the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct
-   DOC the actions taken on the customer's record (for example, how
    verification was completed)

The Process page outlines how to verify customer information.

Unable to complete the Alternative Identity assessment

Service Officers may be unable to establish a customer's identity if
they cannot:

-   obtain enough information
-   verify the information, or
-   match the details against the customer record

Refer the case to a Subject Matter Expert (SME) for investigation as
soon as possible if:

-   the customer may not be who they are claiming to be, or
-   a document may be fraudulent

Consider any legitimate reasons to explain the customer's circumstances.
For example, house fire or homelessness.

Do not:

-   discuss any doubts about the customer's identity with the customer
-   grant any pending claims

Alternative Identity reviews

Review periods allow payments to be granted, while giving the customer
extra time to get identity documents.

Do not apply an identity review if:

-   the customer is not informed about the review and their obligations,
    or
-   the customer cannot meet the identity review requirements, for
    example the customer does not possess a photo identity document and
    linkage is required
-   you are not satisfied the customer is who they say they are

Identity review process in Process Direct

When completing Alternative Identity assessments, the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard automatically applies a category and review
period based on the customer's circumstances.

The customer will receive a letter asking them to provide the required
identity documents before the review due date:

-   4 weeks before the review period ends, or
-   2 weeks before the Identity Review Period ends

Identity Review Period and Gathering Document (GD) reviews

This option is available to customers who have identity documents, but
need extra time to provide them.

Do not apply an Identity review period without notifying the customer of
their obligations.

Payment will auto cancel 28 or 56 days after the claim processing date
if documents have not been provided.

For more information, see Identity Review Periods.

Identity review in Customer First

Staff must never apply an identity review in Customer First unless
instructed to do so, for example International Services or AGDRP staff.

When applying an Alternative Identity assessment through the POI screen,
the customer is subjected to a review managed in Customer First. This
displays on the Future Activity List (FAL).

The Process page outlines how to code Alternative Identity when claims
are processed outside of Process Direct.

A different process for victims of disasters

Manage and process all emergency payments in the Emergency Recovery
Payment (ERP) system for:

-   victims of disasters, and
-   related events

See Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments.

Related links

Supporting Identity confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Identity Confirmation for customers managed by a public trustee

Authenticating a customer

Alternative Identity reviews

Proof of Australian citizenship

Confirming a customer's identity

Identity Confirmation

Coding identity documents

Identity documents A to Z

Identity Review Period

Commencement of Identity

Verifying and recording Proof of Arrival (POA)

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Translation of documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
