
Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens 106-06010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the residence rules for New Zealand customers in
Australia that came into force on 26 February 2001.

Residence rules for New Zealand citizens

A person arriving in Australia using a New Zealand passport is generally
allocated a Special Category Visa (SCV). An SCV holder can remain
indefinitely in Australia and have access to Australian services similar
to that of a permanent visa holder.

The social security rules relating to SCV holders are in line with those
that apply to all other migrants to Australia. There are special
provisions to ensure that SCV holders who were already residing in
Australia on or around 26 February 2001 are not disadvantaged.

To be entitled to most social security payments, New Zealand customers
who take up residence in Australia after 26 February 2001 need to:

have permanent residence status (a permanent visa), or

have Australian citizenship, or

be a protected Special Category Visa (SCV) holder. To be considered a
protected SCV holder an SCV holder must have been:

-   in Australia on 26 February 2001, or
-   in Australia for at least 12 months in the 2 years immediately prior
    to 26 February 2001, or
-   issued with a 'Certificate of Australian Residence' AUS223 form
    (formerly XOB073) by Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Certificate of Australian Residence

Originally issued to customers between 26 February 2001 and 2004, the
certificate was issued by Services Australia for the purposes of
possible future claims for social security payments and to support
applications for Australian Citizenship. The certificate represents a
residence decision made by Services Australia under section 7(3) of the
Social Security Act that either the customer commenced to reside in
Australia within 3 months of 26 February 2001 or was residing in
Australia on the 26 February 2001 but was temporarily absent from
Australia on the day. The agency only issues the certificate to
customers who have been, or should have been, assessed under
transitional SCV provisions.

CIS can reissue these certificates if required. New assessments may be
considered if the customer made contact with Services Australia within
required timeframes.

The XOB073 letter representing the certificate was replaced by the
AUS223 form in 2018.

Confirming New Zealand residence status

All customers who are New Zealand citizens will need to have a New
Zealand residence status, protected/non-protected, recorded before a
claim for most payments can proceed. If a customer does not already have
a status recorded, the customer's immigration records will be
automatically checked in a new claim activity or when New Zealand
citizenship is recorded. If the immigration records show that the
customer was an SCV holder in Australia on 26 February 2001 or for 12
months in the 2 years immediately prior to 26 February 2001, the
customer will automatically be verified as a protected SCV holder.

If the customer first arrived in Australia after 26 May 2001, the
customer will automatically be recorded as a non-protected SCV holder.
If the system is not able to automatically assess the status (for
example, customers who arrived in Australia between 27 February 2001 and
25 May 2001 inclusive) an automatic activity will be generated and sent
to CIS. Note: the new claim action will not be able to proceed until CIS
has manually recorded the status.

Customers who are correctly assessed as 'Protected' will never lose
their 'Protected' status. These customers will continue to be considered
legal Australian residents unless their visa is cancelled or revoked.
See Step 5 in the Legal residence verification and recording table in
Recording legal residence status.

Note: New Zealand citizens who were present on Norfolk Island on 26
February 2001 or in Australia (including Norfolk Island) for 12 months
in the 2 years immediately prior to that date are considered to have
held an SCV at that time. CIS staff will assess these cases manually.
For more information see Requesting and recording additional residence
data for Norfolk Island claims.

New Zealand residence 'Status active' indicator

The Status active: field displays below the New Zealand residence
status: field on the Legal Residence Details (RSLEG) screen. This field
is display only. It indicates if the New Zealand residence status is
active or not at the system date.

The field will display:

-   Y if the customer has a current 444-visa subclass
-   N if the customer's 444-visa subclass has ended and they have no
    other current 444-visa subclasses, or if the RSLEG screen has been
    manually updated with an entry of NCV (No Current Visa)
-   Blank if the customer has no value recorded in the New Zealand
    residence status: field

Non-protected SCV holders

Non-protected SCV holders generally do not qualify for an income support
payment. They may qualify for parental leave payments, family assistance
and concession cards or for a payment under the Social Security
Agreement between Australia and New Zealand. See New Zealand Agreement
and foreign pension information.

A non-protected SCV holder who has lived in Australia and/or Norfolk
Island, continuously for a period of at least 10 years at the time of
making their claim, may also qualify for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or
Youth Allowance (YA) under the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption.

Note: there was no change to the list of payments and concessions
available to New Zealand non-protected Special Category visa holders due
to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.

The Resources page contains extra information explaining the rules of
Australian residence for New Zealand citizen customers and reissuing
misplaced or lost Residence Certificates and contact details for
Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Residence requirements

Australian residence requirements for payment

New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

Requesting and recording additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
