
Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim 106-07060060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before proceeding staff must read Operational Message – Progress of
Claim enquiries.

This document outlines the processes to follow when documentation is
provided or a customer contacts after their claim is rejected due to not
supplying documentation in time as requested. This procedure applies to
all claims except ABSTUDY, Farm Household Allowance, family assistance
and claims for add-on payments and services. It applies regardless of
how the claim was lodged.

Requesting documentation

Documents or actions needed for claim assessment may be requested in the
following ways:

-   Required Tasks within online claims, see Circumstance Change Monitor
    (CCM)
-   A claim form may specify that a form, document or other attachment
    needs to be provided with the claim form
-   Request for information

If the customer does not supply the requested documents or take
necessary action within the specified timeframe, their claim may be
rejected.

Note: claims must not to be rejected for failing to supply documents
requested as Supplementary Tasks. See Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM).

Rejection (REJ) reasons

This process covers the following rejection reasons only:

-   failed to reply to correspondence (FRC)
-   failed to supply documents (FSD)
-   proof of identity (POI)
-   insufficient/no medical evidence for DSP (IME)

For requests from customers to reopen/reassess claims rejected for other
reasons, for example Income too high (INC), see:

-   Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection reason codes (CLK), or
-   Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Claim lodgement

To receive a payment or concession from Services Australia, a customer
must lodge a completed claim. See Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims.

When a customer claims a payment or concession from Services Australia,
they must provide documentation to verify their circumstances and other
details.

A customer in vulnerable circumstances, who has genuine difficulty
providing documents, can lodge their claim and then provide any
requested documentation. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

If the documentation is not provided, the claim can be rejected.

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) aligned claims

Customers lodging claims aligned under CCM must complete all Required
Tasks (documents or actions) before being able to submit their online
claim, unless it is not reasonable for them to do so. See Claim
submission exceptions.

The customer may also be presented with Supplementary Tasks. These
documents are not essential for a claim to be submitted and assessed,
but help confirm extra assistance, for example, a rent certificate.

Customers will see a message when starting their claim advising them to
submit it as soon as possible to be paid from the earliest possible date
if they are eligible.

Draft claims will remain available for 13 weeks from the start date,
after which they will expire and customers must start another claim.
There are exceptions for vulnerable customers.

Extension to lodge requested documents

The timeframe can be extended if the claim is undetermined and there are
special circumstances preventing the customer from lodging the requested
documents for the claim.

Special circumstances may include:

-   a customer is having practical difficulties in meeting the timeframe
    because they live in a remote area or overseas
-   the customer is required to obtain the documentation from a third
    party, or
-   an emergency interfering with customer's plans to lodge within the
    timeframe. Generally the emergency is unforeseen and for a
    relatively short term. It includes, but is not limited to, medical
    or family emergency and recognised natural disasters

See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Application for a formal review of a decision

A customer may apply for a formal review of the decision to reject their
claim at any time. If they apply more than 13 weeks after the rejection
notice was given, payment or concession may be affected by date of
effect rules. See Customer initiated review of decisions.

There is no need for additional evidence or information before an
application for a formal review can be made.

If a customer applies for a formal review, record the application. See
Request for an explanation or application for a formal review.

The Resources page contains Q999 letter text and a link to Locator.

Related links

Alternative Identity

Assessing and coding claims for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprenticeship claims for
Youth Allowance

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

Calculating the start day general rule

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

Circumstance Change Monitor

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Completing the Claim for Fares Allowance (tertiary students only)
(SY005) for Youth Allowance, Austudy Pensioner Education Supplement

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Coding identity documents

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Date of receipt

Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes (CLK)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Early Claims

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Interaction between waiting and preclusion periods

Process Direct

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Processing Disability Support Pension (DSP) (manifest)

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Progress of claim - Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
