-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how to assess and record details when the
customer receiving entitlements returns a Separation details (MOD S)
form, or advises Services Australia online that they have separated. It
also includes the process for completing the form.

Separating Safely – protecting personal details

There are key steps a customer should consider when separating in order
to protect their personal information. See Separating Safely –
protecting personal details. Customers can also find information on the
Services Australia website by searching ‘Breaking up’.

Customer advises they have separated

If a customer advises they have separated, there are key steps they
should consider to keep their personal information safe. The sequence of
these key steps is important and all updates need to be made separately
for Centrelink, Medicare and Child Support. See Separating Safely -
Protecting personal details.

Current customers can tell the agency they have separated from their
partner, using:

-   a Separation details (MOD S) form, or
-   the Update relationship details online service (if they are
    eligible)

A person is a member of a couple if they are:

legally married

in a registered relationship

in a de facto relationship and

-   not in a prohibited relationship
-   both over the age of consent in the state or territory they live in

not living separately and apart on a permanent or indefinite basis

If a marriage, registered relationship or de facto relationship ceases
to exist, the partners of that relationship are no longer members of a
couple.

Living separately and apart

To be considered to be living separately and apart, it must be
established that:

-   they are living apart either permanently or indefinitely (physical
    separation), and
-   there has been an estrangement or breakdown in their relationship
    (emotional separation)

Living separately and apart does not require the customer to have
physically moved out of shared accommodation. The customer must
establish there is a genuine separation in the relationship and they
have established they are living separate lives.

Generally, Services Australia does not accept living separately and
apart if the couple are living apart because of ill health. Explore all
other options before a determining that a couple are living separately
and apart.

A customer's relationship may break down but they continue to live
together. Additional assessments may be required for these customers.
For information, see Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one
roof (SUOR) assessments.

Determining whether a MOD S needs to be issued

To decide if the agency should issue a MOD S, see Change in relationship
status from partnered to single.

Verifying a separation

When a customer separates, the separation may need to be verified if
they meet certain requirements.

Both the MOD S and Update relationship details online service require
customers to provide details of one suitable referee that knows about
their separation. The MOD S also lets the customer tell the agency why
they cannot provide a suitable referee.

Completing the MOD S form

-   Customers must answer all relevant questions on the form
-   Many questions only need a Yes or No response
-   Depending on the answer, some questions may be skipped
-   The customer must complete declaration requirements (see below)
-   Customers may need to complete other forms before the module can be
    assessed. Service Officers can issue the forms if required. For
    example, a customer indicates on the MOD S their income and assets
    have changed. They need to attach a completed Income and assets (MOD
    iA) form
-   Customers may indicate on the MOD S that they live in the same home
    as their ex-partner. They must complete the Relationship Details -
    Separated under one roof (SS293) form

Helping customers complete the MOD S

Customers may ask for help to complete the form. For information and
standard requirements, see Standards for helping customers complete
claims and forms.

Declaration

MOD S - signature and tick box declaration requirements

Customers are required to complete the tick box declaration in all cases
(i.e. regardless of whether the form is submitted online or returned by
post or in person).

Customers are not required to sign the MOD S when they use the Upload
documents service to return the form. This is because the customer has
been authenticated via the myGov website.

A signature is required when the form is returned via post or in person.

Customers in multiple relationships

A multiple relationship is where a person has more than one member of a
couple relationship at the same time.

Social security law does not recognise multiple relationships. Assess
all other parties to the relationship (outside the central couple) for
entitlements under Section 24 provisions.

If a customer in a multiple relationship separates from one partner,
take care to update the correct partner's details. Consider changing
partner links to another member of the multiple relationship if the
customer links to the partner from who they separated.

The Resources page contains links to forms and letters.

Related links

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Family and domestic violence

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered to Parenting Payment Single

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
