
Alternative Identity reviews 106-07040060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Alternative Identity reviews.
Use Alternative Identity processes when customers experience genuine
difficulty providing identity documents.

Alternative Identity reviews in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard

When completing Alternative Identity assessments, the Dashboard
automatically applies a category and review period based on the
customer's circumstances.

Service officers MUST have a conversation with the customer when doing
the initial Alternative Identity assessment, or a future Alternative
Identity assessment. This gives the customer extra time to provide their
identity documents or satisfy linkage.

The conversation must be done face-to-face or over the phone where
appropriate.

This allows staff to:

-   understand the customer’s circumstances to determine an appropriate
    decision and accurate coding
-   tell customers of their identity obligations and timeframe to
    provide documents and/or to satisfy linkage requirements
-   tell customers of the consequences if they fail to meet their
    obligations, e.g. payment cancellation

The customer will receive a letter asking them to provide the required
identity documents before the review due date ends.

Code any identity documents the customer provides through the Dashboard
in Process Direct.

If the customer can lodge 3 identity documents but cannot complete
linkage, see the Process page in Alternative Identity.

Reasons for reviews

A reviewable Alternative Identity category will automatically create a
future review on the customer’s record. This will need further action by
the due date to prevent possible cancellation of payments.

Alternative Identity review periods:

-   are needed where a customer can lodge identity documents and
    complete linkage in the future
-   vary between 4 to 24 weeks, depending on the outcome of the
    Alternative Identity assessment

Customers are asked to provide further identity documents and complete
linkage to confirm their identity before the end of the review period:

-   through an online task, and
-   by mail

All Alternative Identity reviews must be completed in the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.

Note: Centrelink International staff (CIS) use different Alternative
Identity assessments to grant payments under International Social
Security Agreements. Contact the Identity Policy helpdesk for help.

Review lengths

Review periods vary in length depending on the Alternative Identity
category chosen based on the customer’s circumstances.

Centrelink International Staff (CIS) only

-   Do not use the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct to
    code identity reviews for customers granted under International
    Social Security Agreements
-   Use the Dashboard to verify identity documents
-   Manually apply a Gathering Document (GD) review period of 8 weeks in
    Customer First
-   When the International partner confirms the identity of the
    customer, manually insert GD with OS in Customer First

Alternative Identity reviews in Customer First

When applying an Alternative Identity assessment through the POI screen,
the customer is:

-   subjected to a review managed in Customer First, and
-   will display on the Future Activity List (FAL)

These reviews are distributed through workload manager and needs manual
action.

Service officers MUST NOT place reviews on hold for any reason.

If a customer needs more time to provide identity documents or complete
linkage, another Alternative Identity assessment must be done.

Customers receive a letter 2 weeks before the review expiry asking them
to provide the required identity documents at:

-   a service centre
-   online
-   Agent site
-   by mail, or
-   by phone

If the customer has completed linkage, they can upload the required
documents through Centrelink Online Services.

If a customer has not completed linkage, they must attend in person with
an approved photo identity document.

See Identity documents A to Z for more information.

The Resources page contains links to Identity Confirmation requirements
published on the Services Australia website and forms.

Related links

Alternative Identity

Identity Confirmation

Identity documents A to Z

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
