-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how foreign pension authorities may require their
customers to complete forms or provide information or documents to
ensure they remain entitled, for example, life certificates.
Requirements for maintaining foreign pension vary from country to
country. Services Australia is not authorised to provide advice on
processes or requirements in other countries.

Impact on mailing issues due to coronavirus (COVID-19)

Due to COVID-19, there may be mailing issues for customers outside
Australia and Agreement partners.

Verification of information for foreign pension purposes

The requirements to verify information in another country are not the
same as that for a person in Australia.

Certification of documents by the agency is:

-   acceptable for all foreign pension claims under a social security
    agreement, and
-   may be acceptable for foreign life certificates from agreement
    countries

In many cases the agency will not be able to help.

Justices of the Peace and Commissioners for Declarations are generally
not recognised in other countries. The Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade (DFAT) may provide:

-   an authentication or 'apostille'
-   public notaries

Both of these are rare in Australia and there can be significant costs
to the customer.

Where the customer needs the help of a representative:

-   nominee arrangements for Centrelink purposes do not apply in other
    countries, and
-   registered Power of Attorney may not be acceptable outside Australia

Documents to confirm court appointed arrangements or certification of
medical incapacity should be provided if possible.

Life certificates and other documents requiring certification

Customers, or their representatives, may request assistance with meeting
requirements, including certification of a life certificate.

In most cases, the best option will be for the customer to use the
embassy or consular services for the relevant country.

In all cases, customers, or third parties, should be encouraged to
follow the instructions on the form or letter they have received in the
first instance.

Where further information is required, customers will need to deal
directly with the relevant foreign pension authority in the other
country to establish what is required to maintain their foreign pension.
Failure to meet the requirements may result in cancellation of the
foreign pension. Customers who do not maintain their foreign pension may
be subject to Deprivation rules.

Whenever possible, the agency should help customers to maintain their
entitlement to a foreign pension, including assisting customers to
complete forms, certifying documents (where possible) or sending
correspondence overseas.

Advise customer:

-   the agency will assist but are not the paying authority and,
-   cannot guarantee the outcome

Statement of Pension (SOP) and Non-Receipt of Pension (SOP NOT) letters

Customers, or their representatives, may request a letter confirming
they are in receipt of current entitlement to a current Australian
pension or benefit from Centrelink, or a payment summary for a period
corresponding with a foreign country's financial year.

SOPs are usually requested for:

-   foreign country taxation or medical coverage purposes
-   the continuation of a foreign pension or benefit, or
-   determining entitlement to a foreign pension or benefit

For similar purposes, non-customers may also request a statement (SOP
NOT) from Centrelink confirming that they are not currently in receipt
of a Centrelink pension or benefit. For example, in some countries
pension eligibility may be dependent on the customer not receiving a
host country (Australia) pension or benefit.

SOP and SOP NOT letter requests for foreign pension, taxation or medical
coverage or fiscal purposes are to be actioned by CIS staff only.

Assistance provided by staff

-   Access staff must help customers with queries on maintaining foreign
    pensions, including providing contact details for foreign pension
    authority, referring to International Services (CIS) or directing
    customers to Service Centres
-   Service centre staff must help customers wherever possible, for
    example copying and certifying documents required to maintain
    entitlement
    Note: foreign life certificates must not be scanned but physically
    sent to CIS via internal mail. For contact details, see Centrelink
    International Services (CIS) - contact details for staff
-   CIS staff are responsible for helping customers and Network staff
    with foreign pension queries and sending foreign pension documents
    to the other country. CIS are also responsible for processing all
    Foreign Pension System (FPS) reviews and issuing SOP and SOP NOT
    letters

Information on various countries

Note: details are not available for all countries, so staff may not be
able to help a customer in all cases. In those instances, staff should
advise the customer or third party to contact the foreign pension
authorities directly.

For known information on payments from:

-   Agreement countries, see the individual country file in
    International Social Security Agreements
-   Other significant non-agreement countries, see Eligibility and
    coding of foreign pensions from non-agreement countries

The Resources page contains intranet links to the International Services
(CIS) page for contact details and the International Program page for
sample forms, foreign documents and translations and a link to the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Assisting customers to claim a foreign pension

Processing a foreign pension claim

Foreign Pension System (FPS) status and reviews

Foreign pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
