
106-07040040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Please read the Operational Message Temporary change for Identity
Confirmation escalations for important information.

This document outlines information on the legacy Identity Review Period
(IRP) and on when it is appropriate to grant an IRP to a customer. An
Identity Review Period (IRP) is an additional amount of time (28 days)
that may be given to a customer to provide sufficient identity documents
in limited circumstances and will only be applicable where legacy Proof
of Identity (POI) processes are used

On this Page:

Applying an IRP

Note: some payments or services do not require a customer to confirm
their identity. See the list of payments or services that require
identity confirmation for information on which payments and services use
legacy POI or Identity Confirmation processes.

If the customer is in hardship and is unable to provide sufficient
original identity documents to confirm their identity, a Service Officer
may need to consider applying an IRP when granting a claim when they are
satisfied that:

-   the customer has provided some approved identity documents or the
    Service Officer has established the customer is part of a Families
    record, and
-   the customer is who they say they are, that is, there is nothing
    suspicious about their bona fides/identity, and
-   the customer is unable to provide their identity documents by the
    due date of claim but will be able to provide the additional
    identity documents to confirm their identity within 28 days

If there is any uncertainty about the customer's ability to bring back
the documents, then the Service Officer should consider applying Legacy
Alternative Identity procedures.

The customer may provide the documents requested in the IRP to any
service centre. There is no need to refer the case back to the Service
Officer or Processing Team who made the initial determination. The
receiving Service Officer should update the Identity Confirmation Guided
Procedure with the relevant details.

IRP not applicable or suitable for certain claims

An IRP cannot be applied to claims for a Low Income Health Care Card,
Commonwealth Senior Health Care Card, Deferred Pension Bonus Scheme,
Assurance of Support, Foster Child Health Care Card, Ex-Carer Allowance
(Child) Health Care Card or Pensioner Education Supplement.

Outcome for IRP

There are three possible events that can occur after the grant of an
IRP. The customer:

-   Provides all the outstanding identity documents within the 28 days;
    this allows the Identity Confirmation Guided Procedure to be updated
    to acknowledge the Identity Confirmation and IC manually coded on
    the legacy POI screen to replace the IR coding.
-   Contacts within the 28 days stating they are experiencing
    difficulties in meeting the 28 day deadline; the Service Officer can
    consider changing to an Alternative Identity reason. In this
    situation there must be a verifying document (SS230, Residence
    Verification script or RA010) so that the guided procedure can be
    updated, or
-   Does not provide sufficient identity documents within the 28 days.
    Payment should be cancelled on the 29th day because the IRP has
    expired.

The Resources page contains some frequently asked questions and links to
online forms.

Related links

Identity Confirmation

Coding identity documents

Supporting Identity Confirmation through stepped-up identity

Identity documents A to Z

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Legacy Alternative Identity Confirmation

Contacting the customer prior to the interview

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

New claim coding and assessment for Centrelink payments

Translation of documents

Authenticating a customer

Homelessness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
