
Calculating the start day for a claim made after partner's claim 106-05010040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the start date for a payment to commence when a
customer lodges a claim for a social security payment and their partner
has already lodged a claim for a payment.

Start date

If a customer makes a claim for a social security payment and the
customer is qualified for the payment on the day on which the claim is
made, the customer's start day in relation to the payment is the day on
which the claim is made. In most cases, the start day for the payment
will be determined by the general Start Day rules.

However, in some circumstances, a customer's start day may be earlier
and different rules apply to different circumstances.

If a customer makes a claim within 14 days after their partner claiming
a social security payment, and both claims are granted, the customer's
start day is the first day they are qualified on or after their
partner's start day.

The start day for automatically issued concession cards are always
calculated in conjunction with the commencement date of the pension,
benefit or allowance.

This provision does not apply to concession cards that must be claimed
such as, Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC), Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC), Ex-Carer Allowance (Child) Health Care Card (EHC) or Foster
Child Health Care Card (FST).

Note: start dates may be affected where the customer and/or partner are
subject to RapidConnect requirements. See Calculating the start day
general rule for further information.

Exclusion periods

The start day of a claim will be delayed if the customer is required to
serve a waiting, preclusion, or non-payment period. All these waiting
and non-payment periods are referred to as exclusion periods.

The Resources page contains an example of a customer lodging a claim for
payment after their partner has already lodged a claim for payment.

Related links

Calculating the start day general rule

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

RapidConnect

Start day (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
