-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Agreement including the
process of making a claim for Australian payment under the agreement and
coding of Austrian payments.

Commencement date

The Agreement with Austria started on 1 December 1992. The Agreement was
amended by Protocol on 1 October 2002 and again by Second Protocol on 1
January 2012 and was revised and consolidated on 1 March 2017.

Claiming and benefits covered

The Agreement generally allows customers to lodge a claim for payment
from either country. It also allows customers to add together periods of
residence in Australia and periods of social security coverage in
Austria, to meet the minimum requirements for payment.

Australian payments covered:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Carer Payment (CP) for carer partners of Age Pension or DSP
    customers
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Note:

-   Only ‘widowed persons’ can be granted PPS
-   Only severely disabled customers can be granted DSP outside
    Australia
-   The DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre Processing Team assess and code
    all DOP clams. Re-categorise DOP claims to ZIAM_DOP_NCL. For
    assistance, see Bereavement/Double Orphan Pension Helpdesk

Customers can claim Australian payments under the Agreement by
contacting Services Australia or the Austrian authorities.

Austrian payments covered:

-   Old Age Pension
-   Invalidity Pension
-   Survivors Pension

Customers can claim a foreign pension by contacting Services Australia
or the Austrian authorities.

Information for International Agreements

Information on how International Agreements work and general concepts
used in agreements is contained in International Social Security
Agreements.

The Resources page contains links to the International Programme,
International Services (CIS) and the Services Australia website.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Foreign pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
