
Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment 106-19071608

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a family and domestic violence interaction point. If the
customer is with another person, or on speaker phone, or already
identified with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the
current business conversation. Otherwise, go to the family and domestic
violence procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral
process.

This procedure outlines how to check if there is a need to complete a
MoC assessment for a customer.

Reasons for not completing a MoC assessment

A MoC assessment is not needed if there is no risk the customer is a
member of a couple. This includes where forms have been completed and
returned.

This includes when:

the customer lives with:

-   only an immediate family member, including parent, step-parent,
    legal guardian, sibling, step-sibling, child, adopted child,
    step-child, foster-child, grandparent or grandchild
-   only another family member, such as aunt, uncle, cousin, in-law
-   a person who is in a relationship with someone else
-   a person they have shared with before, or with whom they share a
    bank account just for the purposes of paying rent and/or utilities

the customer lives in boarding style accommodation, or alone in a fully
self-contained area such as a granny flat, caravan or converted garage
on the same property as others. A self contained area is a place with
private or separate sleeping, cooking and bathroom facilities

a recent MoC or Separated Under One Roof (SUOR) assessment was
completed, with no change of circumstances within 13 weeks of the
initial assessment

the customer no longer lives with the sharer/other person, and stopped
sharing within 14 days of starting to share

the customer or the sharer/other person

-   gets Disability Support Pension (DSP) under 21, Youth Allowance
    (YAL) or ABSTUDY (ABY) as a dependent
-   is under the age of consent
-   has passed away since the forms were issued

the claim has been withdrawn

the claim will be rejected for a reason not related to a MoC assessment

the customer and the sharer/other person are not claiming or getting
payments, and a MOC assessment is not needed for a past period

Note: if a customer claims they live with their boyfriend/girlfriend
within the Sharer Details question or on the SS284/SS293 form, this does
not immediately mean they are a MoC. Under social security law, the 5
factors must be assessed to decide if they are in a MoC relationship. If
a customer clearly states they consider their relationship to their
boyfriend/girlfriend to be de facto or 'partnered', they must complete a
Partner Details (MOD P) form.

When to check the need for a MoC assessment

Check if there is a genuine need for a MoC assessment:

-   when a MoC assessment triggers after a change of circumstances or a
    new claim
-   before issuing Relationship Details forms (SS284 or SS293) as part
    of the Living Arrangements (LA) question set. Service Officers can
    override the system and not issue the forms
-   when allocated a Disclosed Relationship - follow up required work
    item
-   after return of SS284 or SS293 forms

If there are multiple sharers, complete a check for each sharer.

If forms are not returned in the requested timeframe, see the relevant
procedure for an SS284/SS293.

If a customer's relationship status is single, but it is suspected they
may be partnered, follow the processes in relation to Reporting
Suspected Fraud. Do not issue Relationship Details forms (SS284/SS293)
if it is suspected that a customer has not disclosed a relationship to
the agency.

The Resources page contains a guide for checking responses to the Living
Arrangement Question set and the MoC assessment survey task card.

Related links

Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Updating address details

Assessment of relationship status - processes, roles and
responsibilities

Member of a couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR)

The Living Arrangements question set

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
