
Completing the Study Details MOD St 106-03070180

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer completes the Study Details (MOD
St) form. The MOD St can be accepted verbally and recorded on the
customer's record.

On this Page:

When to use the form

The paper version of the MOD St is used to obtain information about a
customer's study details when:

-   the details cannot be collected verbally. or
-   a complex allowable time determination is required

This module is not a claim for a payment. If the customer wishes to
claim Austudy, Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement, Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), or JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), they must follow the relevant claim process.

[] Customers may notify changes to their study details by updating their
details online if they are registered for Online Accounts and are
authenticated. However, the MOD St will be required if there are complex
study details that need to be assessed.

Completing the MOD St

All relevant questions on the module should be answered. When taking the
information verbally it is important that answers to all the questions
are recorded on the customer's record.

It is important that the information collected by the module is correct.
If there is reason to doubt the information being given verbally is
acceptable, request that the customer completes the MOD St or provide
verification. If the MOD St is used, the module must be signed by the
customer.

YA customer changes activity to student

A YA customer who is under 22 years of age can continue to qualify for
YA if they change their activity from job search/other activities to
full-time study. There is no need for them to lodge a claim, unless they
intend to transfer to ABSTUDY. Service Officers must ensure that the
customer qualifies for YA as a full-time student if they intend to
remain on YA. The study information can be obtained verbally. Service
Officers should run the SY073/SY075 End of Course Study update script to
process the update.

The Resources page contains a link to the Online MOD St form.

Related links

Assessing and coding the Study Details MOD St

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Study requirements and the activity test

Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study

Returning to study

Effect of end of course on payments for students

Deferring or discontinuing study before the end of the course - ABSTUDY

Deferring or discontinuing study before the end of the course - Youth
Allowance (YA) and Austudy

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
