
Documents required for Centrelink new claims 106-07060000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document is to be used as a guide and outlines the types of
supporting documents that are needed when a customer lodges a claim for
an income support payment or a concession, such as a Low Income Health
Care Card. The supporting documentation required may vary depending on
the circumstance of the customer at the time of claim and the applicable
verification requirements.

Lodgement of claims with supporting documents

A claim should be completed and lodged with all supporting documents as
soon as possible for the customer to be paid from the earliest possible
date.

To receive an income support payment or concession from Services
Australia, a customer or correspondence nominee is to lodge a fully
completed claim with all the required supporting documents. See Claim
lodgement of Centrelink claims.

[] The preferred method is online, however if the customer or nominee is
deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim then staff
should offer to complete an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) with the
customer or nominee if available.

Where ACC is not available or declined, offer a paper claim. Use the
First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow where applicable, to ensure
correct claim forms are issued.

Note:

-   Some ABSTUDY claims cannot be completed online and the preferred
    method for claiming is over the phone. Only ABSTUDY Apprentice and
    ABSTUDY Tertiary Incidentals claims can be lodged online
-   [] A correspondence nominee can submit an online claim on behalf of
    their principal for some Centrelink payments. Nominees who do not
    have access to lodge online claims are to be offered an Assisted
    Customer Claim (ACC) when they want to apply for a payment or
    concession card on behalf of their principal. If they decline ACC
    then a paper-based claim form will need to be lodged

Supporting documentation requirements

A customer may need to provide documents that support the information
declared in their claim for an income support payment or a concession
entitlement.

Documents identified during completion of the claim need to be provided
with the claim, whether submitted online, lodged at a service centre or
via [] Upload documents service, or post or fax.

See the Resources page for examples of supporting documentation.

Acceptance of supporting documents

The determining officer (delegate) must decide whether supporting
documentation/evidence provided is acceptable and/or if further
information should be requested. The information provided in the
Resources page is to be used as a guide in making this determination.

Where the supporting documentation/evidence supplied requires further
explanation as to why it was accepted (or not requested/provided), the
determining staff member must include full details in the decision DOC
to support that decision.

Identity documents

Customers claiming an income support payment, concession or service that
requires Identity Confirmation to be established must provide acceptable
documents. This is to satisfy the Level of Assurance required by
Services Australia to establish their identity.

In some circumstances, the customer's partner will also need to confirm
their identity.

Customer Identity Status is located in the Identity Confirmation
Dashboard or the Snapshot icon in Process Direct (PD). Service Officers
must check that satisfactory identification is provided before accepting
the claim. Customers submitting claims are if extra identity documents
are needed to support their claim.

Identity documents may be provided:

-   in person
-   via a nominee
-   by post
-   online
-   by phone

Record identity documents using the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in
PD. See Identity Confirmation.

Verification of Income and Assets

Income and asset details supplied as part of a new claim may require
verification to ensure that the information provided by the customer is
true and accurate. This is done by checking the details provided are
accurate and supported by documentation.

The requirement to verify income and asset details is determined by the
payment status of the customer and/or their partner.

When the customer and/or partner:

-   are currently receiving an income support payment, supporting
    documentation may be requested to help with coding, even though it
    may not be required for verification purposes
-   are not currently receiving an income support payment, but confirms
    the prepopulated income or assets in the online claim, the online
    claim may not always request this supporting documentation, however
    it may be required and may need to be requested for verification
    purposes

Additional Information for ABSTUDY customers

ABSTUDY customers do not have a closing date for lodgement of additional
information and can have payments restored from date paid to plus 1, if
otherwise eligible.

Exemptions for ABSTUDY have now been removed from the Electronics
Transactions Regulations 2000, and it allows for information or
documents requested under section 343 or notices served in accordance
with subsection 347(1) of the SAA to be provided electronically.

Therefore, information provided in response to a Services Australia
request, for example, modules or additional information requested can
now be accepted by fax.

Note: this does not relate to Identity documents or ABSTUDY new claims.

ABSTUDY customers must also supply a Tax File Number (if they are not
exempt) with their claim form, prior to grant. See Tax File Number (TFN)
for ABSTUDY for further information.

Additional information for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) claims

From 1 May 2017, CP and/or CA medical reports and Care Needs Assessment
(CNA) forms are not accepted as a claim for CP and/or CA.

Prior to 1 May 2017, these medical reports and/or CNA forms were
accepted as a valid claim for CP and/or CA and were used for calculating
the start date.

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Customers commencing an online claim under Circumstance Change Monitor
(CCM) receive messaging, advising the required documents they need to
provide before their claim can be submitted.

[] Customers are able to upload the required documents on their ‘Next
Steps’ page in their online account and via the ‘Task list’ in their
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

For more information, see Circumstance Change Monitor.

The Resources page contains examples of supporting documents for
different circumstances, links to the Australian State and Territory
Registries of Births, Deaths and Marriages, Services Australia's website
and Online forms.

Contents

Identity Confirmation

Helping customers obtain a Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance

Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) override for family assistance
customers experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance

Tax File Number (TFN) for ABSTUDY

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for newly arrived refugee customer

Tax File Number (TFN) for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Related links

Verifying income and assets

Requesting information (CLK)

Foreign income and assets

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Circumstance Change Monitor

Confirming a customer's identity

Identity documents A to Z

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Translation of documents

Identity Review Period

Closing date for ABSTUDY claims

Rent Assistance (RA) verification

Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
