
Poland Agreement and foreign pension information 106-04026000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Agreement including the
process of making a claim for Australian payment under the Agreement and
coding of Polish payments.

Commencement date

The Agreement with the Republic of Poland started on 1 October 2010.

Claiming and benefits covered

The Agreement generally allows customers to lodge a claim for payment
from either country. It also allows customers to add together periods of
residence in Australia and periods of social security coverage in
Poland, to meet the minimum requirements for payment.

Australian payments covered:

-   Age Pension

Customers can claim Australian payments under the Agreement by
contacting Services Australia or the Polish authorities.

Polish payments covered:

-   Old Age Pension
-   Disability Pension
-   Survivors Pension
-   Pensions for work accident or occupational disease
-   Funeral Benefit

Customers can claim a foreign pension by contacting Services Australia
or the Polish authorities.

Information for international agreements

Information on how international agreements work and general concepts
used in agreements is contained in International Social Security
Agreements.

The Agreement generally allows customers to lodge a claim for payment
from either country. It also allows customers to add together periods of
residence in Australia and periods of social security coverage in
Poland, to meet the minimum requirements for payment.

The Resources page contains links to International Services (CIS),
Medicare and Australian Taxation Office (ATO) contact details, the
International Programme homepage and Services Australia website.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Foreign pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICS and exchange of information

Non embargo comparable foreign payment arrears debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
