
About Initial contact and Identity Confirmation 106-01000000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how to direct and guide a customer's enquiry by
providing relevant products and packages to best suit their
circumstances.

Assess customers during initial contact

A customer may make initial contact with Services Australia in writing,
in person, [] online or by phone. When a customer contacts the agency
seeking assistance, they need only present with a knowledge of their
circumstances.

The agency will assess the customer's personal circumstances, so that
the package of products and services best suited to helping the customer
may be offered. Those seeking assistance will be advised of the various
relevant payments and services available, as well as eligibility
criteria, processes for new claims and how the start day of a payment is
determined.

A customer who is not currently entitled to payment, for example, the
customer is still employed, a newly arrived migrant, a tourist etc,
should be advised about the Jobsearch facilities available to all
Australians.

Voluntary Indigenous Identification

The Voluntary Indigenous Identification (VII) question is asked to
identify a customer's Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander status.
Information about a customer’s Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
status assists government to make decisions about policies, funding and
services and helps to ensure that services are delivered where they are
most needed. The agency also uses this data to provide improved and
targeted services for Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
customers. Note: do not ask the customer to provide proof of their
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander status.

Occasionally, ABSTUDY may request proof of heritage. This process is
separate to a customer requesting to identify as an Aboriginal and/or
Torres Strait Islander person through the VII process.

Service Officers must ask customers whether they wish to identify as an
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander person when:

-   a new customer registers for Centrelink or Child Support services or
    enrols in Medicare
-   a customer's Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander status has not
    been recorded

Service Officers must advise customers that:

-   responding to the VII question is voluntary
-   the VII question assists government to make decisions about
    policies, funding and services as well as deliver targeted services
-   their status can be updated at any time. Note: where a customer
    wants to remove their Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
    identifier from their records, Service Officers can update using the
    'Not Stated' option

Record the VII indicator in the Other Contact Detail (OCD) screen in the
customer record in Customer First.

Related links

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Identifying a package of services for a recently separated parent

Identity Confirmation

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

Impaired customers

Timeliness Standards - Claims processing

Start Day and Waiting Periods (CLK)

Residence requirements

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Eligibility for Centrelink Payments

International Social Security Agreements

Foreign pensions

Web and alternative accessibility assistance for customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
