
Calculating the start date for ABSTUDY 106-05010110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for calculating a start date for an
ABSTUDY payment for students and Australian Apprentices.

Australian Apprentice

For Australian Apprentice claims lodged prior to 1 July 2018, the
ABSTUDY claim must be lodged within 14 days of the intent to claim in
order to receive payment (where eligible) from the date of lodgement of
intent to claim

From 1 July 2018, Australian Apprentices will receive payments (where
eligible) from the date they actually submit a complete claim unless
they are a vulnerable customer.

Australian Apprentices may be entitled to an extension of time to lodge
their claim due to a medical condition or special circumstance. See
Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Backdated payments

For an ABSTUDY student's start date to be backdated, a claim must be
lodged by the appropriate closing date, which is:

-   the end of the calendar year of the year of study if applying for a
    full-year course
-   the end of the course if applying for a course of less than 1 year
    (this includes short courses that overlap consecutive calendar
    years)
-   by end of the calendar year in which the course started. For a late
    starting course (a late starting course is a course of 30 weeks or
    more that starts between 1 April and 30 June or between 1 August and
    31 December in the year of study)

A late lodgement concession may be granted if claims are lodged outside
the closing dates due to circumstances beyond the applicant’s control.

The decision to backdate ABSTUDY cannot cover the same period for which
the customer was in receipt of a Social Security payment (for example,
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), or Austudy). There must
be a loss of entitlement for these payments to be cancelled
retrospectively. The backdating of ABSTUDY is not an acceptable reason
for a retrospective cancellation. See

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to full time study.

This does not apply to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the ABSTUDY
payment is clearly more beneficial and/or the FTB customer agrees to a
retrospective cancellation of FTB.

From 1 January 2020, children aged 16-19 years can still be considered
an FTB child if they are:

-   receiving an ABSTUDY payment as a full-time secondary student
-   living away from home, and
-   boarding to study

Note: ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) is aligned with PES
in regards to claim lodgement and entitlement commencement dates

Payment start dates

The start date for payments may be backdated according to the student's
circumstances. The normal start date of Living Allowance entitlement is:

-   1 January - for secondary school students studying for at least 1
    school or academic year
-   1 January - for students that have had a break in full-time or
    concessional study-load study of no greater than 1 semester and the
    first day of their course is between 1 January and 31 March of that
    year
-   1 July - for students that have had a break in full-time or
    concessional study-load study of no greater than 1 semester and the
    first day of the course is between 1 July and 31 July

Open University Australia

Open University Australia students who have had a break of more than 2
study periods are considered to have had a break in full-time or
concessional study-load study of more than 1 semester.

Break in study

Where a student discontinues and then commences full-time or
concessional study-load study, in either the same course or a different
course, they remain entitled to Living Allowance if the period between
is no greater than 28 days.

Tertiary and secondary non-school courses

For tertiary and secondary non-school courses other than those above,
including courses that are not considered 'full-year' in length or a
'short-course' the start date is taken to be the first day of the
course.

Note: some students may be eligible from a date prior to the start if
they were undertaking study in the previous study period. For further
information refer to specific coding requirements for paying ABSTUDY
students over a vacation break in Coding new study details.

For these purposes, the first day of the course is the earlier of the
following:

-   the first day of attendance at classes in the course (not
    orientation week), or
-   for external students, the first day of the enrolment period

A course that lasts for more than 30 weeks and commences between 1 April
and 30 June, or between 1 August and 31 December, is known as a late
starting course. Student entitlements can commence from the beginning of
the course provided the claim is lodged by the appropriate closing date.

A customer's payments may not be backdated when they have been:

-   in receipt of a social security payment prior to study
-   where the student has not commenced their course within 3 weeks of
    classes, or
-   where the student has resumed study after a break greater than 1
    semester

In these cases the start day would normally be either the date they
commenced study, or (where applicable) the date their previous benefit
ceased, whichever was the later.

School Term Allowance

For School Term Allowance, payments are made in four instalments for
students in all states. Payments may be backdated for a previous term(s)
in the year of claim where entitlement has been established on any 1 day
during the term(s).

This requires that:

the student meets the Schooling A Award criteria, and

commenced study in the term(s), and

one of the following applied during the term(s) also:

-   the applicant or the applicant's partner is in receipt of one of the
    prescribed forms of Commonwealth Government assistance, or
-   the applicant or the applicant's partner is taken to be receiving
    their income support payment during an employment income nil rate
    period, or
-   the applicant or the applicant's partner is the holder of a Health
    Care Card (HCC) or a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC), including a
    HCC issued on the basis of receipt of maximum Family Tax Benefit
    (FTB) part A. Note: this does not include a HCC issued in respect of
    a child with a disability under Carer Allowance, or
-   the student would, but for age (that is, under the minimum school
    leaving age), qualify for independent status as an orphan, a student
    whose parents cannot exercise parental responsibilities, or as a
    homeless student, or
-   the student is in State Care, under the minimum school leaving age
    and not eligible for Away from home entitlements

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) to ABSTUDY when turning 16

Some customers who apply for ABSTUDY Living Allowance from their 16th
birthday may lodge their ABSTUDY claim after they turn 16 years of age.
The ABSTUDY Living Allowance can be backdated to their 16th birthday.
However, as FTB may have been paid for the student, this would create an
FTB overpayment.

From 1 January 2020, students aged 16-19 years receiving ABSTUDY Living
Allowance can still be considered an FTB child if they are:

-   a full-time secondary student
-   living away from home, and
-   boarding to study

This means the student can receive ABSTUDY and the parent/guardian can
be paid FTB for the student.

Where the secondary student remains living at home to study, the FTB
customer and the student must decide which payment is most beneficial in
their individual circumstances, before backdating ABSTUDY.

If the FTB customer cannot be contacted, ABSTUDY is only to be granted
from date paid +1 of the FTB (where the secondary student is living at
home), unless it is obvious ABSTUDY is more beneficial. For example,
they are eligible to be backdated living away from home allowances.

The system will automatically cease FTB for the student from the grant
date of the ABSTUDY (where the secondary student is living at home).

Coronavirus Supplement

From 27 April 2020 to 31 March 2021, customers may be eligible for the
Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) when in receipt of ABSTUDY. See Coronavirus
Supplement for more information.

FTB to ABSTUDY at end of secondary studies

Customers in receipt of ABSTUDY for undertaking secondary school
studies, remain eligible for ABSTUDY payments up until 31 December.
Customers who are continuing studies in the next available study period
are eligible for payments from 1 January.

If FTB was paid (instead of ABSTUDY when student living at home) for a
customer to undertake their secondary school studies and they complete
the school year, their FTB entitlement may not always pay up to 31
December.

See Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit children aged 16 years or
over.

Therefore, to ensure there is no gap in payments, the customer can
transfer to ABSTUDY and be paid from date paid to +1, as long as they:

-   are intending to enrol in a full-time or concessional study load, in
    an approved course, in the next available study period
-   lodge a claim for ABSTUDY by the closing date, which is 31 December
    in the year secondary study is completed, and
-   qualify for ABSTUDY

The system will automatically cease FTB for the student from the grant
date of the ABSTUDY if they are 16 years of age or over and living at
home to study. If the secondary student is aged 16 years or over and is
living away from home to study and boarding, FTB can continue in
addition to the ABSTUDY.

The Resources page contains examples of entitlement start dates for
ABSTUDY payment.

Related links

Closing date for ABSTUDY claims

Calculating the start date for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and
ABSTUDY PES

Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, Austudy, Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Eligibility periods for full year courses of study for ABSTUDY and
Pensioner Education Supplement

Claiming ABSTUDY

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
