
Coding identity documents 106-09010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for coding identity document details
through the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.

Identity Confirmation

Not all Centrelink payments and services require Identity Confirmation.
See Payments and services that require Identity Confirmation.

To meet Identity Confirmation requirements and achieve a confirmed
identity status a person must provide acceptable identity documents and
complete linkage. Where a person cannot confirm their identity, refer to
Alternative Identity.

Note: when a person has a non-reviewable alternative identity their
identity status will display as not confirmed.

When a person has a confirmed Services Australia identity status or
Digital Identity, they do not need to provide identity documents again,
unless the documents are required as part of a review or investigation.

For customers claiming Emergency Payments or COVID-19 related payments,
see:

-   Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment, or
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Identity document lodgement

Eligible customers can lodge identity documents online, see [A self
service option is available for customers] Upload documents or by phone
when recorded and verified in the Identity Confirmation dashboard in
Process Direct.

-   Identity documents must be coded through the Identity Confirmation
    Dashboard at the first point of contact, unless they are part of a
    Random Sample Survey (RSS), when they are certified, scanned to the
    record and returned
-   Details from documents certified by other third parties are not
    coded in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard
-   Details from documents certified by a Rural Financial Counsellor
    (RFC) are verified through the Identity Confirmation Dashboard
-   Identity documents in a foreign language are acceptable and require
    translation by Language Services

If the customer cannot provide all of the required identity documents to
confirm their identity at initial contact, staff must:

-   Code the available documents and apply an Identity Review Period
    using the Identity Confirmation Dashboard, and
-   Request the customer to supply the remaining documents by the end of
    the relevant review period, see the Process page

Linkage

Linkage is the process that connects (links) a customer to their claimed
identity. Only the customer can complete linkage.

The preferred option for linkage is comparing the customer's facial
features with the image on an approved photographic identity document,
at the service centre, Agent site or via Video chat. When the person has
a facial covering and needs to complete linkage, see Visual comparison
of a customer who wears a facial covering and their photo
identification.

Knowledge Based Questions & Answers (KBQ&A), via the myGov linking tool,
is the other linkage option and only used when the customer cannot
provide an approved photographic identity document. Note: a customer can
only complete linkage with KBQ&A at a service centre.

Care receivers who need to provide identity documents are not required
to complete linkage at a service centre or Agent site unless they claim
or transfer to a payment that is subjected to Identity Confirmation. See
Payments and services that require Identity Confirmation. Care receivers
or partners who do not need to give identity documents, see Alternative
Identity.

If the Service Officer cannot match the customer’s face to the photo
identity document and there is a suspicion of fraud, follow process to
Report Suspected Fraud.

Linkage and online claims

For online claims, including Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) aligned
claims and when linkage is complete, a person can upload identity
document, via the Upload document service.

Silver Service line

When a person lodges identity documents with Specified Personnel at an
Agent site, the Specified Personnel relays the relevant document details
to a Service Officer on the Silver Service line. The Service Officer
codes the details through the Identity Confirmation Dashboard. See
Silver Service phone line for Specified Personnel at Agent sites for
further details.

If the customer does not have all of the required identity documents,
the available documents must be coded at the initial contact using the
Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct. The Service Officer
must ensure a clear DOC is placed on the customer's record outlining the
advice provided, action taken and when the remaining identity documents
will be returned.

Note: when the Silver Service line is unavailable, the Specified
Personnel must copy and certify the identity document. If an approved
photographic identity document is being used to complete linkage, the
Specified Personnel must add 'Photo ID check completed' to the certified
copy of the document. The Specified Personnel faxes the documents to
Services Australia for scanning to the customer record.

Selecting a linkage option

The Service Officer selects one of the following linkage options, from
the Identity Linkage dropdown box in the Identity Confirmation
Dashboard:

-   Photo Identification, when linkage is completed with an approved
    photographic identity document (this can be completed at a service
    centre, Video chat or Agent site) or
-   Knowledge Based Q&A, when linkage is completed with Knowledge Based
    Questions & Answers via the myGov linking tool (this is only
    completed at a service centre) or
-   No Linkage Required, selected when the person is not required to
    complete linkage, for example partner of a Parenting Payment
    customer, or a care receiver

Note: if evidence supports the customer cannot attend to complete
linkage, see Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to
attend in person for further details.

Document Verification Service (DVS)

The Document Verification Service (DVS) verifies the details entered
through the Identity Confirmation Dashboard against those held by the
authority that issued the document. See Identity documents A to Z for
details on documents verified in the DVS.

A person must give consent to verify document details through the DVS,
unless there is an indicator the person does not have the capacity to
give consent. If consent is not given, identity documents cannot be
coded in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard. The Process page has more
information.

Note: Where an identity document has been uploaded via the Document
Lodgement Service, consent does not need to be captured again, as this
has been obtained when uploaded. Where identity document details have
been provided by phone, staff must obtain consent from the customer
before a document is processed through DVS.

See the Resources page for more information about DVS.

Escalation information

Identity Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) provide support to the network
with identity related issues, for example, unlocking and deleting of
identity documents in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard.

It is the responsibility of the Service Officer to follow the correct
Identity SME escalation process or use their local technical support
network as the first point of contact.

Identity document details obtained by phone which fail DVS verification
can be escalated using the Identity SME escalation process.

Identity SMEs receive their work via the Identity Fast Note in Workload
Manager. If necessary, the Identity SME or technical support staff will
escalate to the DVS Operation Team.

If an Identity SME is unable to verify the document, the document cannot
be escalated to DVS Operations until the customer can upload or provide
the document in person.

See the Process and Resources pages for more information.

Identity Confirmation coded on a Multiple Record

It is essential to update identity documents on the correct customer
record.

When identity confirmation is recorded on a multiple record, the Service
Officer must check whether the Data Quality Unit (DQU) has already
assessed the case, by checking the Document List (DL) screen for a
Display on Access (DOA) DOC by NA8.

If the customer record has not been assessed by the DQU, refer to
Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

if the record has been assessed by the DQU:

-   transfer the identity documents to the primary record
-   if unable to verify an identity document, escalate to the Identity
    Subject Matter Expert (SME) or technical support team for resolution
-   if necessary the identity SME or technical support staff will email
    a request to DVS Operations to have the identity confirmation status
    ceased and identity data replicated on the customer’s primary record

Identity documents that require scanning

-   Commencement of Identity (CoI) and Primary Use in Community (PUiC)
    documents that are not verified by the DVS and need to be escalated
    to the Identity Subject Matter Expert (SME)and then to the DVS
    Operations team.
-   Documents that require translation. Refer to Translation of
    documents
-   Documents the Service Officer believes are suspicious. Follow
    process to Report Suspected Fraud

The Resources page contains links to the Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner, the Document Verification Service (DVS)
website, and Identity SME escalation process.

Related links

Alternative Identity

Identity Confirmation

Identity documents A to Z

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Silver Service phone line for Specified Personnel at Agent sites

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Translation of documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
