
Identity Confirmation 106-09010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete Identity Confirmation processes
for Services Australia.

Identity Confirmation

Establishing confidence in a person’s identity is critical to reducing
identity fraud, security and privacy risks for the customer and for
Services Australia. Identities with a confirmed status provide a higher
level of confidence in the claimed identity.

Customers can achieve Identity Confirmation:

-   by providing the required identity documents and completing a facial
    comparison (linkage) with Services Australia, or
-   when their IP3 Digital Identity is accepted by Centrelink and
    displayed as confirmed in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in
    Process Direct

Digital Identity

Customers can use their IP3 (Strong) Digital Identity to meet their
Identity Confirmation requirements with Services Australia. This allows
customers to link their Centrelink account to their myGov account so
they can claim a payment and undertake other services online.

Customers who use their IP3 Digital Identity:

-   are not required to provide identity documents or complete linkage
    with Centrelink
-   have a confirmed identity displayed in the Identity Confirmation
    dashboard in Process Direct
-   must only be authenticated when interacting with Centrelink in the
    future

Note: if a customer has already linked their Centrelink record to myGov,
they will need to unlink and re-link their record when they share their
Digital Identity with Centrelink.

When to conduct the Identity Confirmation process

If a person does not have a Services Australia confirmed identity status
or a Digital Identity status displayed, they must be subjected to the
Identity Confirmation process when:

-   making a claim or receiving payments and services that require
    Identity Confirmation
-   transferring from one payment to another
-   their record is reviewed for identity purposes
-   their partner is making a claim for Home Equity Access Scheme

Refer to Identity requirements on this page, for care receivers and
partners of Parenting Payment (PP), Low Income Health Care Card (LIC),
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

A person who has not yet had their identity confirmed can confirm their
identity at any time. Encourage and help them to do this during all
contacts.

When a person has a confirmed identity status, they do not need to
provide identity documents again. Unless the documents are required for
another review or investigation.

Identity documents

The Identity Confirmation process requires the customer to provide
acceptable identity documents and complete linkage.

If a person cannot confirm their identity, see Supporting Identity
Confirmation for customers unable to attend in person or Alternative
Identity.

One original document from each category is required, see Identity
documents A to Z for acceptable documents:

Commencement of Identity (CoI)

-   A customer can demonstrate CoI in Australia by providing documents
    that confirm their birth in Australia or proof of arrival in
    Australia. These documents are issued by the Australian Government
-   for more information or when a customer cannot provide a Col
    document, see Commencement of Identity

Primary Use in Community (PUiC)

-   A customer can provide a PUiC document to confirm the use of their
    identity in the community over time. These documents are generally
    government issued and most contain a photograph and security
    features

Secondary Use in Community (SUiC)

-   A customer can provide a SUiC document to confirm the use of their
    identity in the community over time. These documents can be
    government or non-government issued and are not used for linkage
    unless a document from the above categories is used to confirm SUiC,
    such as a drivers licence
    Note: one document from either of the above categories must be an
    approved photographic identity document to complete linkage

A different identity document is required for each identity category,
except for documents where it is acceptable to use the one document to
verify two separate categories:

-   Foreign Passports or Immigration cards may have an Australian Visa
    linked - where an Australian visa is linked, the documents can be
    used as Col and PUiC documents
    Note: the Australian Visa must be coded and verified as Col prior to
    coding the Foreign Passport or Immigration card as PUiC or using it
    to complete linkage

Linkage

Linkage is the process that connects (links) the person to their
identity by comparing the person to an accepted photographic identity
document. This gives confidence the person is the owner of the identity.

Only the customer can present at a Service Centre or Agent site, or
through video chat where applicable.

Only use the Knowledge Based Question & Answer (KBQ&A) via the myGov
linking tool in a Service Centre when the customer does not own an
approved photographic identity document.

Staff need to complete a visual comparison for customers who wear a
facial covering.

Note: if a customer cannot complete linkage in person, look at other
ways to support them.

If the Service Officer cannot match the customer's face to the photo
identity document and there is a suspicion of fraud, follow process to
Report Suspected Fraud.

Accepting documents

Identity documents must be original and unaltered.

Identity documents can be lodged:

-   in person at a service centre or Agent site (remote areas only)
-   via a nominee
-   via video chat
-   [A self service option is available for customers] online via Upload
    documents, or
-   by phone when coded and verified in the Identity Confirmation
    dashboard in Process Direct
-   by post (return documents to customers by registered post)

Refer the customer to the ‘How to prove your identity with Centrelink’
web page for more information. See the Resources page for a link.

Nominees not receiving or claiming a payment will only need to provide a
linkage document, at a Service Centre or Agent site, for visual
comparison.

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) aligned claims:

-   once linkage is complete, the remaining identity documents can be
    uploaded via the Upload document service as a required task
-   the claim cannot be submitted until all the required tasks are
    completed

Online claims that are not CCM aligned:

-   the claim can be submitted once the compulsory questions in the
    claim have been answered
-   linkage is to be completed
-   [A self service option is available for customers]documents can be
    uploaded online outside the claim submission process

Coding identity documents

The Identity Confirmation process uses the Identity Confirmation
Dashboard to verify identity documents.

The Document Verification Service (DVS) verifies the details entered
through the Identity Confirmation Dashboard against those held by the
issuing authority. See Identity documents A to Z for details on
documents verified in the DVS.

A person must give consent to verify document details through the DVS,
unless there is an indicator that the person does not have the capacity
to consent. If consent is not given, do not use the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard. See Coding Identity documents for the process
and email details to the DVS Operations team.

If an identity document has been uploaded online, consent does not need
to be captured again, as this has been obtained when uploaded.

Note: Smart Centre claim processing staff:

-   record identity document details through the Identity Confirmation
    Dashboard when uploaded as part of the online claim process for CCM
    aligned claims once linkage has been completed
-   contact customers by phone to record and code identity documents in
    the Identity Confirmation dashboard when required

For customers claiming Emergency Payments or COVID-19 related payments,
see:

-   Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment, or
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Note: if the Service Officer believes the identity documents are
suspicious, follow process to Report Suspected Fraud

Identity requirements for care receivers

Identity Confirmation is required for care receivers (16 years or over)
when the carer is claiming:

-   Carer Payment (CP), and/or
-   Carer Allowance (CA)

Care receivers are not required to complete identity requirements when
they:

-   Have a confirmed or no linkage identity status, or
-   Are an Income Support Payment (ISP) or Low Income Health Care Card
    customers, or
-   A Department of Veteran Affairs (DVA) customer (confirmed via DVAS
    screen), or
-   Included in a Child to Adult transfer (CTAT)

See Alternative Identity for processing instructions when customer is an
ISP, LIC, DVA or CTAT.

Care receivers who need to complete identity requirements do not need to
complete linkage unless they claim or transfer to a payment that is
subject to identify confirmation.

If a care receiver wants to lodge their identity documents, they will
need the Claim ID number connected with the carer’s online claim. The
Claim ID is on the Next Steps page on the customer’s task list.

If a care receiver needs to meet identity requirements but cannot
provide all the required identity documents, consider an Alternative
Identity assessment.

Identity requirements for partners

A customer and their partner who have an identity status of not
confirmed are required to provide identity documents for the following
claims:

-   Parenting Payment (PP) partnered
-   Low Income Health Card (LIC)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC), and
-   Home Equity Access Scheme

Partners of PPP, LIC and CSHC are not required to complete identity
requirements when they:

-   Have a confirmed or no linkage identity status, or
-   Are on Income Support Payment (ISP), LIC or CSHC customer

See Alternative Identity for the process when customer is an ISP, LIC or
CSHC customer.

Note: all Home Equity Access Scheme partners are required to complete
Identity Confirmation and linkage.

A customer cannot provide consent to code and verify their partner’s
identity document when document details are provided over the phone.

Linkage requirements for partners

The partner of a Parenting Payment or Low Income Card customer is not
required to complete linkage.

A partner will need to complete linkage at a service centre, Agent site
or where applicable through Video chat if they claim a payment that is
subjected to Identity Confirmation.

The partner of a Home Equity Access Scheme customer must complete
linkage.

If the partner cannot provide all the required identity documents,
consider an Alternative Identity assessment.

Other coding opportunities

Identity documents lodged for other reasons could help with the Identity
Confirmation process. An example of other reasons is proof of residence
or proof of age for an Age Pension claim.

Check the record to see if extra identity documents are required. If
appropriate, code the relevant document details through the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard when consent is given.

The Resources page contains a table of payments and services that
require Identity Confirmation, Services Australia website links,
Identity Program contact details and help with Digital Drivers Licences.

Contents

Coding identity documents

Commencement of Identity

Alternative Identity

Verifying and recording Proof of Arrival (POA)

Alternative Identity reviews

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Visual comparison of a customer who wears a facial covering and their
photo identification

Related links

Aliases and other names (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse
customers, cultural considerations etc.)

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Changing the Legal name of customers or their children

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Confirming a customer’s identity

Agents and Access Points

Identity documents A to Z

Identity Confirmation for registration as a Volunteer Job Seeker

Incorrect date of birth recorded

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Silver Service phone line for Specified Personnel at Agent sites

Translation of documents

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Assisted Customer Claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
