
Waiting periods for income support payments 106-05020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures that detail types of waiting
periods a customer may need to serve depending on the type of income
support payment they receive.

Waiting periods

Once a customer qualifies for an income support payment, certain factors
may affect the payability of the payment. Waiting periods may be applied
which delay the commencement of payment or reduce the amount of payment
for a defined period. Waiting and preclusion periods are generally
applied as customers are expected to use their own funds to support
themselves before receiving government support. There are a number of
waiting periods that can be applied to different payments.

If a customer is affected by a waiting period, they can test their
eligibility for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

Referral to Employment Services Providers

Job seekers claiming an income support payment with mutual obligation
requirements are Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers and must
be referred to an Employment Services Provider. Job seekers who are
required to serve waiting periods other than an Ordinary Waiting Period
(OWP), are normally eligible for employment services provider assistance
as a voluntary participant. They should be encouraged to participate
with providers who can help them access self-help facilities,
workforceaustralia.gov.au and other services.

Note: job seekers serving a waiting period and participating voluntarily
do not have a 6 month restriction on access to employment services by
Workforce Australia.

The Resources page contains information on how the waiting periods were
affected by the coronavirus (COVID-19).

Contents

Ordinary Waiting Period (OWP)

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Assessment of hardship for Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Assessment of hardship for Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Assessment of hardship for Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP) for
Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Assessment of hardship for Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Unemployed Due to Industrial Action (UDIA)

Unemployed due to stand down

Interaction between waiting and preclusion periods

Compensation Preclusion Period

Deferment, non-payment period or rate reduction period for Parenting
Payment Partnered (PPP)

Unemployment due to a major business closure or disruption

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Leave and termination payments paid by an employer

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
