
Rejecting a Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) or ABSTUDY PES claim 106-07130230

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of rejecting claims for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES.

On this Page:

Eligibility for payment

An applicant who has lodged a claim for PES or ABSTUDY PES may not be
eligible for payment because they do not meet the basic qualification,
payability, or recipient obligation provisions for payment. Applicants
may have lodged an inappropriate or incorrect claim. In these
circumstances, claims have to be rejected.

Do not reject claims for customers who voluntarily withdraw their claim.

Eligibility for Language Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

Customers who wish to participate in Skills for Education and Employment
(SEE), and do not qualify for PES or ABSTUDY PES, may be eligible for
the LLNS.

LLNS provides financial assistance for job seekers who want to improve
their English language, literacy or numeracy skills as part of their
plan to return to work. This assistance is to enable job seekers
undertaking SEE to meet the additional costs associated with attendance
and provides incentives for them to participate in the program.

Claim rejection reasons

Many rejection reasons automatically occur after details have been input
onto the system and some other rejection reasons have to be coded
manually. For example, failing to supply documents, failing to reply to
correspondence.

Residency related rejections

A claim may reject for a residence related reason due to:

-   information the customer has provided, or
-   visa, citizenship and movement information provided directly from
    the Department of Home Affairs datalink. The datalink takes
    precedence over any conflicting information provided by the customer

Manual rejections

When manually rejecting a claim, notify the customer in writing with the
rejection reason(s) and rights of review and appeal.

PES and ABSTUDY PES rejections

Where a customer's PES or ABSTUDY PES qualifying pension or payment from
Services Australia is not current, their claim for PES or ABSTUDY PES
claim is automatically rejected. Where a customer's qualifying pension
or payment from the Department of Veterans' Affairs is not current,
their PES or ABSTUDY PES claim is manually rejected. A rejection would
also occur where a customer is waiting for approval of a PES or ABSTUDY
PES qualifying pension or payment.

PES processing

If the customer's claim for PES has been rejected, they need to contact
Services Australia within 13 weeks of the rejection to ensure their PES
can be backdated once their qualifying pension or payment has been
granted.

PES processing has been consolidated into Smart Centre Processing
Services nationally. See  Office Locator  >  Student Network - National
PES / AIC  >  Office Messages  >  Office Notes.

ABSTUDY PES processing

If the customer's claim for ABSTUDY PES has been rejected, there is no
time limit for reclaiming ABSTUDY PES or providing additional
information. Therefore, the customer can reclaim ABSTUDY PES at any
stage, and be backdated, once their qualifying pension or payment has
been granted.

ABSTUDY claim processing has been consolidated nationally into Smart
Centre Processing Services for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES. See  Office
Locator  >  ABSTUDY Smart Centre - National Processing  >  Office
Messages  >  Office Notes.

Related links

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Residence assessment for customers claiming Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) PES cancellation, suspension and rejection codes

Withdrawal of claims

Qualifying payments for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY
PES

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

Assessing Claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
