
Reviews of foreign exchange rates 106-08020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for reviewing and manually adjusting
a foreign exchange rate when a customer requests a review of the rate
used by Services Australia in assessing their rate of payment.

Review of exchange rate

Customers who have foreign income or assets may query the exchange rate
used by the agency to convert the foreign currency to Australian
dollars.

Customers may use the free call number for information on current major
exchange rates (that is, Pound Sterling, US Dollar, Canadian Dollar,
Euro, New Zealand Dollar) with the option of speaking to a Service
Officer for other currencies. See the Resources page for a link to the
Services Australia Website, Phone us page.

If a review is requested, the exchange rate used by the agency should be
compared to the exchange rate actually used by the relevant financial
institution to convert the foreign currency to Australian dollars. If
the actual rate used is more than 5% lower, the record should be updated
to reflect the actual exchange rate. Differences of less than 5% are not
reviewable.

Note: customers must provide proof of the actual exchange rate used by
the financial institution, for example, bank statement or official
letter.

Updating the exchange rate

Only the exchange rate for the income source that is proven should be
changed. Any others should be considered individually. For example, a
customer who provides evidence of more than 5% difference for income
paid through one financial institution should not have the exchange rate
applied for income paid through another institution unless evidence of
more than 5% difference is provided from that institution.

Customers are sent an exchange rate statement in February each year
listing the rates used for the previous 12 months. For the purpose of
paying arrears, the date of effect in these reviews is based on the
normal provisions relating to favourable determinations resulting from
review of decision, for example, within 13 weeks of a notice being
issued.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website and
information on how to calculate whether an exchange rate varies by 5% or
more.

Related links

Foreign currency and exchange rates

Cancellation due to foreign exchange processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
