-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assistance in defining a respite care couple so
they receive the correct rate of payment.

Respite care couple

A couple are considered to be members of a respite care couple if:

-   one of the members has entered approved respite care, and
-   the member who has entered the approved respite care has remained,
    or is likely to remain, in that care for at least 14 consecutive
    days

Customers must have an Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT) approval for
government-subsidised residential respite care. The ACAT approval will
specify whether the customer is eligible for low or high level respite
care, depending on the customer's care needs. Customers who are approved
for respite care can have up to 63 days of subsidised respite care in a
financial year. This can be extended by up to 21 days at a time if
approved by an ACAT.

A customer in approved respite care is eligible for the respite care
supplement from the date of entry/admission but not for the date of
discharge from care. Verification is required to confirm the nursing
home/hostel is in receipt of the respite care supplement for the
customer/partner.

Assessment

Respite care couples will be assessed against the single rate of payment
applicable but the assessment will still take into account the combined
income and assets as if they were a member of a couple.

Verification Required

A statement of admission from a nursing home or hostel can be accepted
as verification of the length of admission and the provision of approved
respite care.

All nursing homes and hostels that receive a Commonwealth subsidy for
the provision of respite care are required to issue each customer with a
statement on the day of admission setting out details of the anticipated
length of admission. If a customer does not have a statement from a
nursing home or hostel, it is necessary to verify the date of admission
and discharge and that the nursing home or hostel receives a respite
care supplement.

Rent Assistance (RA)

A respite care couple are not entitled to receive RA for respite fees,
as the fees are not rent within the meaning of the Social Security Law.
Respite care couples are assessed individually for RA.

If a respite care couple are paying rent for their principal home and
receiving RA before one member of the couple entering approved respite
care, the customer in respite care can continue to receive RA for their
principal home for up to 52 days while in respite care.

The Resources page has frequently asked questions about respite care.

Related links

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Carer is absent from caring situation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
