
Determining the Enh1ment End date for the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 106-05010140

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how AIC Scheme Smart Centre Processing staff
assess the entitlement end date for the AIC Scheme.

Entitlement end date

An AIC student is generally eligible to 31 December in a year if they
continue to study to the end of the school year. Short-term boarders are
eligible to the date they cease to board.

Eligibility may change from 31 December if the student ceases study
before the end of the school year. The student would be paid to the date
they last attended class. Students who discontinue on the last day of a
term other than the final term, are paid to the later of:

-   the end of the relevant instalment period, or
-   the last date of the school term

A debt may result even if an applicant notifies within 14 days, as most
AIC payments are made in advance. Make sure that the date of event is
the date from which the debt should be raised. The date of event is the
date from which the change occurred. This is regardless of when the
change was notified. Students are not eligible for AIC from the date
they stop boarding or living in a second home, cease undertaking
distance education or approved home schooling.

Students may continue to be eligible for AIC as a deemed isolated
student under the 'Continuity of schooling concession' if:

they continue to attend the same school (or continue to be enrolled
through the same distance education school or undertake approved home
schooling) and

they either

-   cease to meet an isolation condition or
-   have a special need because of a change of circumstance. For
    example, change of principal family home, travel conditions, health
    conditions, parent's occupation

In this case, they are eligible:

-   from the date of the change of circumstance until the end of the
    year in which the change of circumstance occurred; or
-   for a student in Year 11, from the date of the change of
    circumstance until the end of the following year, provided they
    continue to Year 12

If they do not meet these requirements, their eligibility ceases on the
day of the change of circumstances.

When payment periods do not align with term end dates

When a student’s circumstances change and they will not qualify for an
AIC payment in the following term, payments must cease at the
appropriate date. There may be circumstances when term instalment
periods and term dates do not align.

If a student discontinues on the last day of a term other than the final
term, and that day is:

-   before the end of the corresponding term instalment period, the
    student’s entitlement continues until the end of the term instalment
    period
-   after the end of the term instalment period, then the end date is
    the day they discontinue full-time study

This applies to fortnightly payments and term in advance instalments.

Eligibility during vacation periods

If the student has resumed study:

-   in the new term no later than the 14th day of the term (or if they
    were prevented from doing so due to unforeseen circumstances), they
    are eligible for the allowance applicable to that term from the
    beginning of the vacation period
-   after the 14th day of the term, they are only eligible for the
    allowance applicable to that term from the date they resumed study

Tertiary students

AIC is intended to assist students at primary, secondary or tertiary
level, who cannot attend an appropriate state school due to geographical
isolation or other reasons specified in AIC policy.

Therefore, AIC is only available for a tertiary student whose study
comes under the state and territory minimum education or training
requirements. This means a student who has:

-   chosen TAFE or vocational education and training level study instead
    of attending a secondary school; and
-   meet the geographical isolation rules in relation to the nearest
    appropriate state school

As a result, Services Australia is unable to approve AIC for a higher
education student as they are no longer required to attend an
appropriate state school.

The Resources page contains the age and qualification requirements for
each state and territory including the end date for tertiary students.
It also contains AIC Term Instalment Periods and examples.

Related links

Determining the Entitlement Start date for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Assessing a new claim for the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme (SY040)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
