-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia is responsible for
assisting customers with the process of making a claim for a foreign
pension, including any non-customers who voluntarily seek assistance.

Customers seeking assistance

Customers who need assistance, or believe they would not qualify for a
foreign pension or wish to apply for an exemption from the requirement
to claim are advised to contact Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Automatic screening for the foreign age pension will only occur 28 days
before the customer turns Australian Age Pension age.

Automatic screening will not occur where a customer reaches the foreign
country’s age pension age, which may be earlier. For example, a
Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer turning foreign age pension
age at 65, would be not auto-screened because they are not within 28
days of Australian Age Pension age. Foreign pension claims for these
customers can be issued voluntarily (ISS-VOL), noting that reviews for
follow-up of the claim will not occur.

Foreign age pension claims that are issued VOL, will need to have a
review set for 28 days before Australian Age Pension age for follow-up
or re-issue of the foreign age pension claim.

Age pension age for other countries can change and is updated in the
automated screening rules, however sometimes there may be a delay in
having this updated.

Assistance provided by staff

-   All staff can manually issue a voluntary claim through the Foreign
    Pension System (FPS) if requested by a customer or non-customer
-   Access staff must help customers with queries on claiming foreign
    pensions, including referring to International Services (CIS) or
    directing customers to service centres
-   Service centre staff must help customers with lodging claim forms
    and other documents, including scanning, copying and certifying any
    necessary documents
-   CIS staff are responsible for helping customers and network staff
    with foreign pension queries, including decisions on compulsory
    claims and Comparable Foreign Payment (CFP) suspensions and
    preparing foreign pension claims or other forms and documents that
    have been lodged for sending to the other country. CIS are also
    responsible for processing all FPS reviews

Information on various countries

The requirement to claim a foreign pension only applies to agreement
countries and specific other high volume non-agreement countries. Known
information on qualification and requirements for foreign pensions from:

-   Agreement countries can be found in the individual country file
    within the International Social Security Agreements
-   Other significant non-agreement countries can be found in
    Eligibility and coding of foreign pensions from non-agreement
    countries. Note: as details are not available for all countries,
    staff may not be able to help customers to claim a pension in all
    cases

The Resources page has links to International Services and International
Program homepages, and contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Processing a foreign pension claim

Assisting customers to maintain an existing foreign pension

Foreign Pension System (FPS) status and reviews

Foreign pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
