
Intent to claim and vulnerable customers 106-18032700

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the process when a customer experiencing a
vulnerable circumstance contacts Services Australia intending to claim a
payment or concession card. A claim for a concession card includes
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC), Health Care Card (HCC), Low
Income Health Care Card (LIC), or Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care
Card (EHC). Note: different start day rules apply to claims for family
assistance, including claims for Family Tax Benefit, Parental Leave Pay
and Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

What you need to know

The Intent to Claim is available to support customers who are unable to
submit a complete claim due to experiencing a vulnerable circumstance,
see Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues.

If a customer experiences pre-claim vulnerable circumstances in the
eight weeks prior to contacting the agency regarding their intent to
claim, they can have their start date back dated to the date of contact
as long as they submitted their completed claim within 14 days of this
contact.

Contact in relation to an intended claim and Implied consent regarding
third parties allows 'anyone' to contact on behalf of the claimant under
section 13 of the Social Security Act. Note: the third party does not
have to mention making a claim, there only needs to be evidence of a
contact.

The intent to claim will capture information on a customer's pre-claim
vulnerable circumstances and uses this information to automatically
calculate, where possible, the correct payment start date once the claim
is granted. When this hasn't occurred, a manual check may be required,
that is, third party.

The system works from the Pre-Claim Circumstance Summary (PRECLM) screen
in Process Direct and the Pre-Claim Circumstance Summary (!CUPC) screen
in Customer First.

When to record contact

All contacts from a customer or their representative in relation to a
new claim for a Social Security payment, ABSTUDY payment, Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme or concession card as a customer
experiencing a vulnerable circumstance must be recorded on the
customer's record until the claim is submitted.

The contact can occur via [A self service option is available for
customers] online, telephone, in person, in writing or via an agent (who
will have to notify Services Australia to have the details recorded).

The customer then has 14 days from the initial contact date to submit a
claim for the contact date to be assessed as the start date for payment.

If the claim is submitted later than 14 days, the contact date will not
be used to assess the start date, unless:

-   a further extension of up to 13 weeks has been granted for a medical
    condition or due to special circumstances, or
-   the customer has experienced vulnerable circumstances in the 8 weeks
    immediately before contact

This can be done by the creation of a DOC or Fast Note in Customer
First.

When a contact is an intention to claim for a customer experiencing a vulnerable circumstance

When a customer or third party contacts about an intent to claim a
payment, Service Officers must identify any vulnerable circumstances
which may impact a customer's ability to submit a claim. All vulnerable
circumstances and claim contacts must be recorded. A customer may not be
qualified on their first contact, however, they may qualify for payment
on subsequent contacts or be eligible to submit an early claim.

When a customer or third party advises Services Australia of the intent
to claim a payment, the customer must be advised to submit the claim
within 14 days from contact. If the customer contacts Services Australia
before they are qualified, they should be advised to lodge a claim
before qualification under the early claim provisions, or to contact
Services Australia when they become qualified.

Service Officers dealing with customers who initially contact because of
a crisis may also need to consider the customer's other potential needs
and where appropriate decide if an internal referral to a social worker
is needed.

Vulnerable circumstances

Customers are considered to be vulnerable if they experienced a
vulnerable circumstance at any time in the 8 weeks before contact and
this was the reason they were unable to submit their claim on the
contact date.

Where pre-claim vulnerable circumstances are not able to be
automatically determined by the system they can be manually added on the
Pre-Claim Vulnerable Circumstance (PRECLM) screen in Process Direct.

If the customer has a pre-claim circumstance displayed on PRECLM with a
start date that is more than 8 weeks ago, consider if that pre-claim
vulnerable circumstance still exists using available information. Some
circumstances can remain current on a customer's record indefinitely,
such as an exemption from seeking child support due to family and
domestic violence. Manually update the claim start date to the date of
submission if evidence supports this, that is, a DOC from a Corrections
Officer or third party.

Table 1 on the Resources page identifies which vulnerable circumstances
are able to be automatically captured by the system and which can be
manually applied. Where a pre-claim vulnerable circumstance exists
against a customer record, it will be available to be viewed on the
PRECLM screen in Process Direct and the Pre-Claim Circumstance Summary
(!CUPC) screen in Customer First.

Qualification for payment or concession card

To be paid from the date of contact, a customer must be qualified for
the payment or concession card on the intent to claim contact date and
considered to be a customer experiencing a vulnerable circumstance.

The claim must be submitted no later than 14 days from the date of
contact, unless a further extension of up to 13 weeks has been granted
for a medical condition or due to special circumstances.

The customer experiencing a vulnerable circumstance must be qualified
for a payment when an intent to claim contact date is used to assess the
start date.

If the customer was not qualified on the contact date and they are
experiencing a vulnerable circumstance, then they must be advised, where
possible, to contact Services Australia again once they do meet the
qualification provisions for the payment. When the customer contacts
early and will be qualified in the future, intent to claim provisions do
not apply. See Early Claims.

Where the customer was not qualified on the contact date, subsequent
contact dates should be checked to identify the earliest contact date
they were qualified on and if they were experiencing a vulnerable
circumstance at any time during the 8 weeks before this contact date.

Medical condition extension

Customers who are identified as experiencing a vulnerable circumstance
and want to extend the time period beyond 14 days up to 13 weeks (after
the initial contact) because of a medical condition must satisfy both of
the following conditions:

-   Between the contact date and the day the claim was submitted, the
    customer, their partner or the person they are caring for, was
    continuously suffering from a medical condition, and
-   The medical condition, or circumstances relating to it, had a
    significant adverse effect that stopped the customer from lodging
    the claim between the contact date and the day the claim was
    submitted

Decisions allowing customers more than 14 days but up to 13 weeks to
submit a claim after the relevant contact must be investigated and
decided on a case by case basis.

A medical certificate must be provided as evidence showing that the
medical condition of the customer or partner, or person for whom they
provide care had a significant adverse effect on the ability to submit
the claim within 14 days after the contact date.

Evidence of the medical condition does not have to be provided when
considering a request to extend the time to submit a claim. However,
when the claim is processed, the decision to apply the extended
submission must be supported by evidence that the medical condition was
continuous between the date of contact and the date the claim was
submitted. A medical report provided for a Carer Payment (CP) and/or
Carer's Allowance (CA) claim may fulfil the evidence requirement.

Special circumstances extension

A claim may be submitted within 13 weeks of the day of contact if there
are special circumstances, which stopped the customer from lodging the
claim within 14 days of contact.

Special circumstances can include, but are not limited to:

-   A customer having practical difficulties in meeting the 14 day time
    frame as a result of living in a remote area, or
-   A customer residing in a country that Australia has a social
    security agreement with, and there are reasons why the customer
    could not submit within the 14 day period, or
-   An emergency interfering with a customer's plans to submit within
    the 14 day period, such as a natural disaster

To decide if special circumstances apply, it is necessary to consider
the totality of the circumstances relating to each particular customer's
situation.

Date the claim was made and start date

The date the claim was made is the date the claim was submitted, unless
it was deemed to have been made on a different date, for example, under
intent to claim, incorrect claim, inappropriate claim or early claim
provisions.

Generally, the start date for payment is the date the claim was made.
See Calculating the start day general rule.

Once the date the claim was made has been determined, backdating may
apply. Backdating provisions differ for each payment. See Backdating
provisions for claim lodgement.

Where the customer has pre-claim vulnerable circumstances recorded
within the eight weeks prior to their intent to claim contact date the
system will automatically calculate the start date.

Where pre-claim vulnerable circumstances are not able to be
automatically determined by the system they can be manually added on the
Pre-Claim Vulnerable Circumstance (PRECLM) screen in Process Direct.

If the customer has a pre-claim circumstance displayed on PRECLM with a
start date that is more than 8 weeks ago and no end date, consider if
that pre-claim vulnerable circumstance still exists using available
information. Where the vulnerable circumstance is no longer active,
consider end dating the vulnerable circumstance from the associated
circumstance page and regenerate the claim. Some circumstances can
remain current on a customer's record indefinitely, such as an exemption
from seeking child support due to family and domestic violence. In these
cases, do not end date the exemption. Manually update the claim start
date to the date of submission if required.

See Customers experiencing a vulnerable circumstance for more
information.

Financial Hardship

Different procedures apply where a customer contacts Services Australia
stating they are in financial hardship and requests urgent processing of
a new claim. See:

-   ABSTUDY and student claims
-   Disability Support Pension
-   Double Orphan Pension
-   Farm Household Allowance
-   Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (job seeker) or Parenting
    Payment
-   Other income support payments

The Resources page has start date scenarios with assessment dates for
claims submitted on or after 23 March 2020, examples of vulnerable
circumstances, details on how to determine if the claim was submitted
within 14 days of initial contact, examples of applying a deemed date of
claim pre and post 1 July and links to Office Locator, Online forms and
self service.

Related links

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Calculating the start day general rule

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Early claims

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Implied consent regarding third parties

Inappropriate claims

Incorrect claims

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Social work service referral

Start Day

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
