
Legacy Proof of Identity (POI) tiered model A to Z documents 106-07080001

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure only applies to payments and services aligned to the
Legacy Proof of Identity (POI) tiered model. For other agency payments
and services, see Identity Confirmation.

This document outlines how to correctly assess and code legacy POI
documents provided. This includes descriptors of names, address, etc.
Verifying POI is important in assessing a customer's eligibility to a
payment and service aligned to the Legacy POI tiered model. This
document is used for some Emergency payments, see Identity documents A
to Z for all other payments.

Proving identity

An emergency payment should not be refused when a customer cannot
provide any or all documents required by POI Tier 1 guidelines.

If customers cannot provide all required identity documents for
emergency payments, the customer may be granted using a POI exemption if
the Service Officer is:

-   satisfied the customer is who they claim to be, and
-   sure the customer will return with all the remaining documents
    within 28 days

Original documents to be sighted

All POI documents must be original documents. Copies are not to be
coded.

If details of documents are taken over the phone, they are not to be
coded and the claim cannot be granted. Encourage customers to attend a
service centre where the originals can be sighted.

Identity documents

Supporting documents must be original and unaltered. Document details
must be entered as they appear on the document.

Service Officers must always assure themselves that the customer is who
they say they are. If in doubt, especially in relation to name or
address on the identity document provided, contact the issuing agency
and verify the details. If this is not possible, the document should not
be used.

Some documents require the same address in order to show the person's
use of identity in the community.

Legal name

Supporting evidence must be supplied if the customer’s name at birth,
maiden name or other legal name has never been coded as their previous
legal name.

If the customer has changed their name, see Changing of Legal name of
customers or their children for more information.

Single names

If a customer indicates they are known by only 1 name, seek evidence
that they are known by that name in the wider community. It would be
expected that documents issued by other institutions and agencies would
also show the single name. In line with the Australian Standard, record
a single name in the surname field on a customer record, with the first
name field left blank.

When a customer indicates their child is legally known by only 1 name, a
system workaround is in place for coding a single name. So that the
child's name displays on written correspondence, record the single name
in both the family and first name fields on the Change Child (CCH)
screen in the child record.

The Process page contains document samples and coding information.

The Resources page contains FAQs, a POI points table, and links to
contact details, How to prove your identity with Centrelink on the
Services Australia website and external websites.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
