-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines why a Real estate details form (MOD R) is issued
and the information that it gathers. This document is helpful when
assisting a customer completing the form.

Principal home is an exempt asset

A person's 'principal home' is regarded as an exempt asset. This means
that it is not included with other assets when applying the assets test.
Curtilage, that is, the land around the principal home, garages and
storerooms associated with a flat or home unit is also exempt. Curtilage
is limited to 2 hectares of land on the same title as the home and must
be used primarily for private and domestic purposes. This satisfies the
'private land use test'. Exception: additional titles can be included if
the properties:

-   are adjacent, satisfy the 'private land use test', the customer has
    lived in the house and been current on payments since prior to 1
    January 2007
-   are protected legally from being sold independently of the property
-   also contain an essential part of the home for example - rooms, but
    not sheds or tanks (unless there were no other water source/sewerage
    method and the tanks could not be moved onto the home title)

Age pension age customers on Age Pension, Carer Payment or a Department
of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) service pension may have the 2 hectare limit
removed if they can show a 20 year continuous attachment to the land and
meet the 'extended land use test'. More information can be found in Real
Estate.

Customer enters aged care on or after 1 January 2017

If a customer enters aged care on or after 1 January 2017 the net rental
income from their former home is assessed as ordinary income and may
affect the customer’s rate of income support payments.

The former principal home will be an exempt asset under the assets test
for two years after the customer vacates it to enter a care situation.

Real estate owned by customer

Other real estate property owned by the customer (and/or their partner)
will be an asset, and they will be required to complete a MOD R if any
of the following applies:

-   The customer's principal home is on a property that is more than 2
    hectares (5 acres) in area, unless the Extended Curtilage concession
    has already been granted, the customer has not left the property for
    more than 12 months and there have been no changes to factors used
    in assessing the Extended Land Use Test
-   The customer's principal home is on more than one title, unless at
    least one of the customer and/or their partner have been
    continuously current since prior to 1 January 2007
-   Any or all of the customer's home property is used for commercial
    (business) purposes
-   The customer owns any real estate other than their principal home in
    Australia or overseas
-   The customer has entered aged care on or after 1 January 2017 and
    they are renting their former principal home

Note: if the customer (and/or their partner) has any interest in a
private company or private trust which owns any real estate, the
customer (and/or their partner) will need to complete a Module PC
Private Company or Module PT Private Trust.

Information collected on MOD R

The MOD R collects information on property owned by the customer. Once
the information is obtained an assessment can be done on the asset and
income (if applicable) value of the property.

It is necessary for the customer to complete both parts of the MOD R,
including the Authority to Inspect Your Property and to provide all
requested documents to enable their claim or payment to proceed.

Services Australia also needs to ascertain if the customer (and/or their
partner) is receiving any income from real estate. Income from real
estate may be obtained from the letting, leasing or rental of a house,
shop or land. For income test purposes, the current net income is taken
into account. The customer should provide their latest tax return to
determine the net income received from their real estate.

Points to note in completing the MOD R:

All relevant questions on the module should be answered. Many questions
only need a Yes or No tick and, depending on the answer, some questions
may be skipped

The module must be signed by the customer

Other documentation may need to be provided, including:

-   rates notice
-   income tax return, depreciation schedule, profit and loss
    statement - if rental income received from the real estate
-   evidence of mortgage or encumbrances on the real estate

A separate MOD R is required for each piece of real estate the customer
owns

Rural properties

The Rural Property Questionnaire (Q454) is used in conjunction with the
MOD R for medium to large farm properties. It collects additional
information from the customer for the valuer, to enable them to more
correctly value the property from the roadside. Generally, if the
property is operated as a commercial enterprise, then issue the Q454 in
addition to the MOD R. The Q454 is not needed for smaller properties
such as hobby farms with minimal farm improvements or bush blocks. Where
the whole property is exempt because it is the principal home, or it is
an exempt farm asset, do not issue a Rural Property Questionnaire for
that property.

The Resources page contains a link to the Module R for staff.

Related links

Assessing and coding the Real estate details Mod R

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Address recording for real estate

Real estate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
