-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure only applies to Centrelink International Services and
some ABSTUDY claims. For Centrelink payments and services use the
Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct, see Identity
Confirmation.

This document outlines how to check and code identity documents on the
legacy POI screen in Customer First.

Checklist for Service Officers when Legacy POI is lodged

Identity documents must be original, unaltered and listed in Legacy POI
tiered model A-Z documents.

The legacy POI screen can only be coded when:

-   a customer is overseas and lodging a claim for a Centrelink payment
    with Centrelink International Services, or
-   as an additional procedure exclusive to ABSTUDY claims in some
    circumstances

Identity documents:

-   with the highest point value or Proof of Birth/Arrival documents
    must be coded first
-   must be provided from the approved list until the required points
    value has been reached

Legacy POI tier level model

The model has 2 components:

-   Commencement of Identity - proof of birth in Australia/ proof of
    arrival in Australia, which establish a customer's existence in
    Australia, and
-   Use of Identity - identity documents have points allocated according
    to their integrity, and demonstrate a customer's continuing
    involvement in the community under that identity

Legacy POI tier levels

From 2015 Payments and Services do not require the legacy tier model,
see Identity Confirmation

Prior to the current 2015 Identity confirmation model, the POI tier
levels were:

-   Tier Zero - no POI documents required
-   Tier One - one Proof of Birth (POB) or Proof of Arrival (POA)
    document or any documents from the approved list to the value of 50
    points
-   Tier Two - one Proof of Birth or Proof of Arrival document and any
    other documents from the approved list that add up to the value of
    50 points
-   Tier Three - one Proof of Birth or Proof of Arrival document and any
    other documents from the approved list that add up to the value of
    100 points

Claims lodged from overseas require Legacy POI Tier 3 coding on the
Legacy POI screen.

Coding Legacy POI document summary

Staff must enter document details as they appear on the document.

Supporting evidence must be supplied if the customer’s name at birth,
maiden name or other legal name has never been coded as their previous
legal name. If the customer has changed their name, see Changing the
legal name of customers or their children.

This procedure summarises how to code the legacy POI screen. This screen
can only be accessed via the legacy POI Document Selection (PDS) screen
when:

-   completing a new claim activity for claims lodged from overseas
-   conducting a review of legacy POI coding and/or correcting legacy
    POI coding errors

If POI has previously been provided and meets the legacy tier
requirements of the service reason claimed, the legacy POI screen will
be protected, for viewing only for example. Limited updates of the
legacy POI screen are required for abridged claims and manual transfers.

Many document codes on the legacy POI screen will have system edits to
ensure a valid document number. Use field help to view the format of the
Serial/Registration number for a document.

There is a limit of 11 lines on the legacy POI screen.

For acceptable documents, see Legacy POI tiered model A to Z documents.

Correcting Legacy POI coding errors

Delegated staff members can amend the POI documents.

Legacy POI for ABSTUDY

Not all ABSTUDY customer groups are required to provide POI documents,
extra procedures apply in some situations. Some ABSTUDY customers can
meet POI requirements without providing POI documents in person.

Historical POI details

The legacy POI Historical Details (POIH) screen displays all POI
documents held on the customer's record prior to September 2001. This
screen is for display of previously held POI documents only. No
documents can be selected or amended.

The Resources page contains a link to Program Identity contact details.

Related links

Alternative Identity

Amending Proof of Identity (POI) documents that have already been
recorded

Legacy Proof of Identity (POI) tiered model A to Z documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
