
Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial hardship 106-03020070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before proceeding staff must read Operational Message – Progress of
Claim enquiries.

This document outlines the process, and things to consider when a
customer requests urgent processing of a new claim due to financial
hardship.

List of claim types to which this process applies

-   ABSTUDY (Australian Apprentice and Living Allowance claims)
-   Age Pension (Non-international agreement claim)
-   Austudy (Australian Apprentice and Student claims)
-   Carer Payment (CP) (Non-international agreement claim)
-   Claims made under international agreements (Age Pension, CP and
    Disability Support Pension (DSP))
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) single and partnered
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (Australian Apprentice, Student and Job Seeker
    claims)

Note: the Process page contains information on how to manage urgent
claim processing requests for other payments not listed above

Urgent new claim processing and Crisis Payment

Crisis Payment claimants need an income support payment to be processed
before Crisis Payment claim processing.

If a Crisis Payment claim is lodged and the customer’s income support
payment has not been assessed (granted or rejected), urgent processing
of the income support payment claim is required to ensure correct
processing of Crisis Payment.

Payments and concessions with no financial hardship provisions

The following payment and concessions are not eligible for urgent claim
processing as they do not have any financial hardship provisions:

-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) customers experiencing
    financial hardship should be offered appropriate referrals and/or
    immediate payments suitable to their income support payment (if
    applicable). Do not refer the customer to the AIC processing teams
    for immediate/urgent processing of their AIC claim
-   Carer Allowance (CA) customers experiencing financial hardship
    should be offered appropriate referrals and/or immediate payments
    suitable to their income support payment (if applicable)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) including ABSTUDY PES is a
    supplementary payment paid in addition to the customers regular
    income support payment. Customers who are in financial hardship
    should be offered appropriate referrals and/or immediate payments
    suitable to their income support payment (if applicable)
-   Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) is a voluntary arrangement
    where a loan is made by Services Australia to the customer.
    Financial hardship provisions do not apply to the processing of the
    Scheme claims. Where a customer is experiencing hardship,
    consideration may be required under assets hardship provisions for
    an income support payment
-   Mobility Allowance provides financial support for people with
    disability, illness or injury who are unable to use public transport
    without substantial assistance and who participate in approved
    activities. Financial hardship provisions do not apply to the
    process of Mobility Allowance.

Note: Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) customers would generally
not meet financial hardship criteria as they are mostly self-funded
retirees and have access to other income. When these customers are not
residentially qualified to claim Age Pension, and cannot support
themselves, they should test their eligibility for Special Benefit
(SpB). CSHC customers who are vulnerable or have complex needs may be
eligible for Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing.

Financial hardship

When a customer is experiencing financial hardship the Service Officer
must assess whether customer meets the criteria for urgent processing of
a new claim due to financial hardship.

Financial hardship provisions do not apply to:

customers transferring from one income support payment to another unless

-   their previous income support payment was cancelled more than 14
    days ago, or
-   an urgent transfer is required for Crisis Payment claimants. Crisis
    Payment rate is dependent on the rate of the customer’s income
    support payment (single or partnered rate of payment)

dependent Youth Allowance (YA) Students, Jobseekers and Australian
Apprentices and ABSTUDY Apprentices and Living Allowance customers,
living with parent(s)/(guardian(s)

For Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) customers, their individual
circumstances must support that a delay in processing their
claim/renewal will place the customer in financial hardship.

This assessment can be completed at any stage of the new claim process.

If a referral to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) is required, an
assessment for hardship is required before making the referral as
outlined in Complex Assessment Officers (CAO).

If a new claim is pending a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment, see
Confirming the need for a MoC assessment.

When a customer has been assessed as in hardship and previous
escalations for urgent processing have not been actioned, they may be
eligible for immediate claim processing.

The Resources page contains contact details and DOC text for
non-approved financial hardship requests.

Related links

Complex Assessment Officers (CAO)

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Claim Lodgement of Centrelink claims

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Initial contact for Aged Care Means Test Assessments (MTA)

Progress of claim - Families claims

Progress of claim - Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Referral to external support services

Timeliness standards - Claims processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
