-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to verify and update residence details.

Qualifying Australian residence

To qualify for most Australian social security payments a customer must
be an Australian resident and to make a legal claim they must also be in
Australia at the time the claim is lodged, or meet an exception to the
lodgement inside Australia rule.

In addition, generally a customer will need to meet either a qualifying
residence period or waiting period.

Alternatively, a customer may qualify for some payments if they are the
holder of a certain type of temporary visa or have a qualifying
residence or waiting period exemption.

Updating legal residence details

This procedure explains how to:

-   verify and update a customer's legal residence status in Australia
-   determine whether a qualifying residence exemption may apply, and
-   record the residence information correctly

This procedure should be used as part of the new claim process if a
customer advises a change in their legal residence status or a
reassessment has caused a residence quarantine to be lifted.

Immigration Datalink and verification of legal residence

If a datalink is established, the Department of Home Affairs advises
Services Australia of certain residence and travel information for
customers claiming or receiving Centrelink payments and concession cards
and for their linked partners, children and care receivers. The
Immigration Datalink provides detail about visas, movement information
and grants of Australian citizenship, where available, from 1 September
1994 onwards.

Customers may be required to provide documentation confirming their
legal residence status prior to this date.

If information has been provided directly through the Immigration
Datalink, the residence information from this source will take
precedence over any conflicting information provided by the customer.

Depending on the assessment, the system uses residence information on
the Legal Residence (RSLEG), Country of Residence (CRES) and Immigration
Advised Movements (RSIM) screens to assess whether the customer:

-   meets the definition of an Australian resident
-   is residing in Australia
-   has a legal right to lodge a claim
-   has served any waiting period or qualifying residence period, or
-   has a qualifying residence exemption

Note: a non-protected Special Category visa (SCV) holder who has lived
in Australia and/or Norfolk Island continuously for at least 10 years
immediately before claiming may qualify for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or
Youth Allowance (YA) under the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption.

Visa ended by the Department of Home Affairs

Where a current customer has their visa ended, that is, cancelled,
ceased or deleted by the Department of Home Affairs:

-   this update will be received automatically via the Immigration
    Datalink, and
-   a visa end date will be recorded against that visa on the RSLEG
    screen

Centrelink only receive and react to visa end dates in the following
situations:

-   Permanent visas and visa subclass 444, where the visa is cancelled
    or deleted
-   Temporary visas (other than visa subclass 444), where the visa is
    cancelled, ceased or deleted

Note: for users who have access to the Department of Home Affairs'
Immigration Movement Records (MR) Database:

-   the Visa Status in MR will show as C=Cancelled, S=Ceased, Z=Deleted

Centrelink do not receive or react to a status of ‘ceased’ for permanent
resident visas and visa subclass 444. This is because when those visas
are ceased it does not mean the customer no longer holds the visa, it
just means the visa re-entry rights have expired and the customer will
need to be granted another visa to re-enter Australia.

In most instances, an end date on a visa will prompt the system to
reassess the customer's residence status from that end date, and update
their record accordingly.

In some circumstances, the end date will not prompt a residence
reassessment and the RSLEG screen will need to be manually updated with
an entry of No Current Visa (NCV), in order to correctly assess the
customer as a non-resident. Scenarios where this may be needed include:

-   customers who still have other qualifying visas coded as current on
    RSLEG that are no longer in effect in MR
-   customers with more than one permanent visa recorded but none of
    them are current
-   customers whose 444 visa has ended and they have no other current
    visa in MR but they still have open 444 visas on their RSLEG screen

Examples are included in Resources.

If the customer's Australian permanent residence visa has been
reinstated (for example, a visa cancellation is overturned on appeal)
the NCV coding will need to be deleted.

Australian citizenship voluntarily relinquished by customer

Where a customer voluntarily renounces their Australian citizenship,
record the new/reverted country from the date Australian citizenship was
relinquished.

RSLEG screen

The legal residence details for the customer are recorded on the Legal
Residence Details (RSLEG) screen. This screen is used to record country
of citizenship, visa details, and New Zealand residence status. The
details on this screen relate to the customer's legal residence status
and are not discretionary.

If the customer has 2 current visas at the same time, both should be
recorded and the system will use the most beneficial visa for the
assessment of their entitlement.

CRES screen

The Country of Residence (CRES) screen may also need to be coded to
ensure the customer satisfies the residing in Australia requirement for
an Australian payment.

The customer's legal residence status and movements from the Department
of Home Affairs, along with additional information from the customer,
will allow the Service Officer to determine where the customer is
residing.

Residence screens for dependent children

Child residence screens are used to view and code information about
dependent children who do not have their own record. The screens are
accessed by selecting the child from the parent or care giver's record.

In most cases, the name of the screen is the same with the letters CH at
the beginning. The Child Legal Residence Details screen is CHRSLEG. The
exception is Immigration Enquiry (RSIMME). The child version of RSIMME
is CHIMME.

The Resources page contains a link to a list of Assurance of Support
contacts and examples where additional coding is needed for cancelled
visas.

Related links

Australian residence requirements for payment

Residence and Portability screens

Proof of Australian citizenship

Completing, assessing and coding the Residence in Australia and other
countries Mod O

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

Foreign pensions

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
