
Actioning immigration datalink activities 106-17061300

-   Background
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to support processing follow-up
activities created by the datalink between the Department of Home
Affairs and Centrelink customer records.

About the Immigration Datalink

A datalink exists between the Department of Home Affairs and Centrelink
to provide customer visa and movement information (travel into and out
of Australia) from 1 September 1994 onwards and grants of Australian
citizenship where available.

Updates are normally applied automatically to Centrelink customer's
records in near real time.

The immigration update may include a new departure, arrival, visa update
or grant of Australian Citizenship. These activities will normally
automatically resolve on the record within 24 hours. Sometimes though
when the activity encounters an issue like an error on the Assessment
Warning and Error (AWE) screen, it cannot automatically resolve and
intervention is required by a Service Officer.

When manual intervention may be required

A Service Officer may need to manually complete an Immigration Datalink
transaction when it has failed to automatically resolve on a record
within 24 hours.

These activities will normally have the keyword I650RS attached to them.

The activity will either already contain immigration information in it,
or the Service Officer will need to request a refresh of the data via
the Immigration Enquiry (RSIMME) screen.

These activities must be completed by a Service Officer and Department
of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled. Cancelling
these activities can result in incorrect payments, overpayments or
payments failing to be restored upon return to Australia.

Disputing Immigration Datalink information

Where the Centrelink customer wants to dispute the information, or a
Service Officer determines that the immigration data may be incomplete
or incorrect, the matter must be referred to Centrelink International
Services (CIS) who will investigate the issue. Under no circumstances is
a Service Officer outside of CIS to advise a customer to contact the
Department of Home Affairs directly. See Referring inconsistencies in
overseas departure and arrival information to Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

Immigration Limiting Date

The Immigration Limiting Date (ILD) is the date from which movement
information obtained via the immigration datalink will be used in the
customer's assessment. Any customer advised departure and arrival dates
that are:

-   already recorded before the immigration match is made and are dated
    before the ILD are used in the assessment
-   recorded after the immigration match is made and are dated after the
    ILD are not used in the assessment. Only Department of Home Affairs
    departure and arrival data is used after the ILD unless the datalink
    is in 'contingency mode'

Datalink in 'contingency mode'

If the datalink is in 'contingency mode' (not available due to technical
problems), the relevant portability and residence information can be
manually recorded by the Service Officer. This Service Officer recorded
data will be used in the assessment until such time as the record is out
of 'contingency mode'. Once this happens and the datalink becomes
available, the immigration data will be applied to the customer's
record. As immigration data will override any customer provided
information, it is possible that a customer's payment may be cancelled
when the data from the Department of Home Affairs becomes available.

Related links

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence details

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a manual follow up
activity when a multimatch occurs

Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a manual follow up
activity when no match occurs

Residence and Portability screens

Recording residence details for dependent children

Australian residence requirements for payment

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
