
Identity documents A to Z 106-07080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Refer to this procedure when confirming a customer's identity. This
procedure must be followed for all payments and services under the
Identity Confirmation model. For information relating to the legacy
Proof of Identity (POI) process see Legacy Proof of Identity (POI)
tiered model A to Z documents

This document outlines the procedure for using identity documents to
establish or confirm a customer's identity and provides details on;

-   acceptable identity documents, and
-   information needed to correctly assess and code identity documents
    onto the customer record

Establishing the identity of a customer is essential for the delivery of
payments and services, and for minimising risk to the agency from
identity crime and other fraud.

Identity documents

Service Officers must be satisfied that a customer/nominee is who they
say they are prior to accepting identity documents, see Authenticating a
Centrelink customer.

For information relating to:

-   Confirming a customer’s identity, see Identity Confirmation
-   When a customer has difficulty providing identity documents, see
    Alternative Identity
-   For legacy Proof of Identity (POI) processing, see Legacy Proof of
    Identity (POI) tiered model A to Z documents

The collection and verification of identity documents help validate the
information provided by a customer. Identity information must be checked
and correctly entered onto the customer record.

Details must be entered, in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in
Process Direct, as they appear on the identity document.

When assessing if identity documents are valid, check for the following:

-   Identity documents are issued in the customer's former or current
    legal name and date of birth. Where the name differs from the
    customer's current legal name, further evidence must be collected to
    provide a link between the two names. See Changing the Legal name of
    customers or their children for further information including
    acceptable evidence of a change of legal name
-   Expiry date and other relevant document details, noting an expired
    Australian Passport is still a valid identity document if it is
    within 3 years of the expiry date
-   Identity documents provided in foreign languages are translated

Any name provided on an identity document must be recorded on the
customer record. The format of the name may vary on some identity
documents. Valid formats include: John James Citizen, John J Citizen,
John Citizen, JJ Citizen or J Citizen. See Aliases and other names
(legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse customers, cultural
considerations, etc) for further information on naming conventions,
single names and updating a record.

Customers can lodge approved identity documents:

-   online, see Upload documents service or by phone, or
-   in person

Accepting Documents

Identity documents must be original and unaltered.

Identity documents can be lodged:

-   in person at a service centre or Agent site (remote areas only)
-   via a nominee
-   by post
-   online via [A self service option is available for customers] Upload
    documents, or
-   by phone when coded and verified in the Identity Confirmation
    Dashboard in Process Direct

Original identity documents received by post must be returned to the
customer by registered post.

Proof of age

Where payments and services require Proof of Age, Service Officers must
check that the date of birth details on identity documents match those
details recorded on the customer record and completed documentation.
See, Confirming a customer’s identity and Coding identity documents.

See Resources page for:

-   Identity document coding tip, e.g. Coding Single Name Customers
-   Frequently Ask Questions (FAQ) about identity documents
-   A link to identity information on the Services Australia Website
-   Links to external websites and attachments for Document Verification
    Service (DVS) documents

Related links

Confirming a customer's identity

Coding identity documents

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Alternative Identity

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Aliases and other names (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse
customers, cultural considerations etc.)

Translation of documents

Fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
