
Commencement of Identity 106-07040070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to verify a customer's Commencement of
Identity (CoI). This helps determine eligibility for most Centrelink
payments and services.

On this page:

Identity requirements

To determine eligibility for payments and services administered by
Services Australia, customers need to establish their identity, see
Identity Confirmation.

Customers must provide one acceptable identity document for each
category below:

Commencement of Identity (CoI)

-   A customer can demonstrate CoI in Australia by providing documents
    that confirm their birth in Australia or arrival in Australia,
    establishing the customer's existence in Australia

Primary Use in Community (PUiC)

Secondary Use In Community (SUiC)

Approved photographic identification documents used to confirm CoI, PUiC
and SUiC may also be used for linkage. For example, an Immicard may be
used to confirm CoI and confirm the link between the identity and the
Individual.

For a list of acceptable documents, see Identity documents A to Z.

Note: birth certificates can only be coded as CoI documents.

If the customer provides more than 1 CoI document, the second document
may be used as PUiC or SUiC.

A different identity document is required for each identity category,
except for documents where it is acceptable to use the one document to
verify two separate categories:

-   Foreign Passport - can be used as a Foreign Passport and an
    Australian Visa
    Note: Australian Visa must be coded and verified prior to the coding
    and verification of the Foreign passport
-   ImmiCard - which can be used as an Australian Visa and an ImmiCard

Proof of arrival

Proof of the commencement of a particular identity in Australia is
required to determine eligibility for payments and services administered
by the agency.

Customers unable to meet CoI requirements

Request for Verification (SS257)

Help customers who are unable to provide a proof of birth in Australia
CoI document by running the Request for Verification (SS257) workflow in
the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.

This is used to confirm the customer’s Australian birth record with the
relevant Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages (RBDM).

Only complete an SS257 if:

-   the customer was born in Australia, and
-   their birth is registered

See FAQs for information on appropriate/inappropriate Request for
Verification (SS257) referrals.

Request for Verification (Australian Visa)

Complete a Fast Note to the DVS Operations team to help customers who
are:

-   born overseas, and
-   unable to provide an Australian Visa CoI document to prove their
    arrival in Australia

Note: this process cannot be used for the COVID-19 Disaster Payment or
the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

Aboriginal Population Record Certificate

The agency accepts Northern Territory Aboriginal Population Record (APR)
Certificates as an acceptable form of CoI. APR certificates are limited
to the Northern Territory only.

Where an APR is presented, staff must complete the Aboriginal Record
Escalation Fast Note to the DVS Operations team. See Process page for
escalation process.

Help with providing identity

If there is difficulty in verifying a customer's identity document,
refer to Identity documents A to Z.

For questions about acceptable documents, contact:

-   Identity SME or
-   local technical support network

Customers may need help providing identity documents. For example, if
they are in financial hardship, the cost of identity documents may be
prohibitive.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions about
commencement of identity and Request for Verification (SS257). There are
also links to the Australian State and Territory Registries of Births,
Deaths and Marriages websites, the Department of Home Affairs website,
and contact details for DVS Operations team.

Related links

Identity Confirmation

Coding identity documents

Identity documents A to Z

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Identity Review Period

Alternative Identity

Documents required for new claims

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Translation of documents

Australian residence requirements for payment

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Incorrect date of birth recorded

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
