
Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident 106-06010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess if a customer is an Australian
resident. Being an Australian resident and time spent in Australia as an
Australian resident are very important for claiming, qualification for
and payability of Australian social security, family assistance and
parental leave payments and concession cards.

Australian resident

A person is an Australian resident if they reside in Australia and is
either:

-   an Australian citizen
-   the holder of a permanent visa, or
-   the holder of a protected Special Category visa (SCV)

Resides in Australia

This means that Australia is where the person principally lives on a
long-term basis. This is shown by factors such as:

-   family
-   property and financial ties
-   nature of accommodation
-   intentions
-   travel patterns
-   other relevant details

Residents of Norfolk Island

From 1 July 2016

Norfolk Island became part of Australia for social security purposes. A
person residing on Norfolk Island who holds the relevant legal status is
an Australian resident.

If they hold the relevant legal status, periods the person resided on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016 are periods as an Australian resident.
For those periods, they meet requirements for:

-   qualifying residence
-   Newly Arrived Resident’s Waiting Period
-   Australian Working Life Residence

Before 1 July 2016

Residents of Norfolk Island, who met certain criteria, were granted
official Norfolk Island Resident status by the Norfolk Island
government, or obtained this at birth. This was not an Australian
permanent visa, but under the Norfolk Island reforms it is considered
the same for Centrelink purposes.

Applying residence rules for payments and concession cards

Residence rules apply to most payments and concession cards for:

-   Claim lodgement - there are residence rules that must be met to
    lodge a legal claim
-   Qualification - to be eligible to be granted, and
-   Ongoing eligibility - for continuation of payments or concession
    card. If a customer stops meeting the residence rules, they lose
    eligibility to their payment and/or card

For payment and concession specific rules and exemptions, see the
relevant Residence assessment procedure under Related links.

Lodgement requirements

To make a legal claim for most Australian social security payments and
concession cards, a person must generally:

-   be an Australian resident, and
-   be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged, or meet an
    exception to the lodgement inside Australia rule

Further exemptions may apply depending on the payment type.

Some family assistance, parental leave and emergency payments do not
have residence lodgement rules.

Qualifying residence

To qualify for Age Pension, Disability Support Pension (DSP) or
Parenting Payment (PP), a customer must have either a period of
qualifying residence or a Qualifying Residence Exemption (QRE).

For other payments and concession cards, a customer must either serve a
Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) or have an exemption
from the NARWP.

To remain qualified for most payments and concession cards, a customer
must generally continue to be an Australian resident for the whole time
they are receiving that payment or concession card. If a customer
receiving a payment or concession card subject to this requirement
ceases to be an Australian resident, they will lose their qualification.
This requirement does not apply to a customer receiving Age Pension or
DSP who is exempt from the ongoing residence requirement.

A customer who is not an Australian resident may still qualify
residentially for:

Special Benefit (SpB) if they hold a temporary visa that qualifies
customers for some payments and are living in Australia

certain payments under an international social security agreement

parental leave payments, family assistance and Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC) if they hold a Special Category visa (SCV) and are living in
Australia, or hold a temporary visa that qualifies customers for some
payments

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) or Foster Child Health Care Card
(FST) if they hold a SCV and are living in Australia

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) if they are a
non-protected SCV holder who has lived continuously in Australia for at
least 10 years just before claiming, under the New Zealand 10 years
residence exemption

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) if they

-   hold a temporary visa that qualifies customers for some payments
-   are a Commonwealth sponsored foreign student, or
-   hardship/special circumstances exist

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) if they hold a
specified visa for AGDRP and DRA or are getting a social security
payment

Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand non-protected SCV holders (NZ
DRP) if they are living in Australia

Disaster Recovery Allowance if they are hold a specified visa for AGDRP
and DRA

Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand non-protected SCV holders
(NZ DRA) if they are living in Australia, or

COVID-19 Disaster Payment or Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment if they are
hold a visa class permitted to work in Australia

From 1 July 2016, Norfolk Island became part of Australia for social
security and family assistance purposes. From this date, any past
periods of residence on Norfolk Island are periods of residence in
Australia if the person held legal permanent resident status while
living on Norfolk Island.

Check the residence requirements for the social security payment,
concession card, family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme
payment. Rules vary from payment to payment.

Assessing claims - determining Australian residence

Accept and record all claims lodged for social security payments,
concession cards, family assistance, parental leave payments, ABSTUDY
and disaster payments to assess if the claimant is residentially
qualified or subject to a qualifying residence period or NARWP.

The numerous savings provisions and qualifying residence exemptions make
it hard to determine manually if a person is residentially qualified.

Recording all the residence information lets the system accurately
assess:

-   the customer's residential entitlement
-   whether they are subject to a NARWP or qualifying residence period,
    and
-   when the NARWP or qualifying residence period will end

If the customer does not meet the residence rules, the system can apply
the correct residence rejection reason and send the correct rejection
letter. This gives the customer the decision in writing so they are
aware of their review and appeal rights and can provide more information
if required.

Changing an Australian residence determination

Determining if a customer is residing in Australia requires a
discretionary decision. This means weighing up the relevant factors and
deciding which country the customer is residing in based on the balance
of the information available. Document the reasons for the decision,
including any discussion with the customer.

Discretionary decisions should not generally be changed unless:

-   there is evidence the customer misrepresented their circumstances
    when the original decision was made, or
-   a significant error about facts requires correction

Changes in circumstances or discovery of factual error may be a reason
to make a new decision about where a customer is residing. However, a
new decision should not generally be backdated unless there is evidence
the customer misrepresented their circumstances when the original
decision was made.

Verification of residence

Proof of a customer’s Australian resident status is required for
verifying residence qualification for entitlements and assists in
determining:

-   the earliest date the customer meets the Australian resident rules
    to be eligible for most payments, benefits and concession cards
-   the start and end dates for periods of Australian residence to
    calculate qualifying residence periods and the NARWP
-   the customer’s Australian Working Life Residence (WLR) periods for
    proportional rate for portability purposes

If not already confirmed, claims request the customer provide proof of
their Australian residence status. For example, citizenship papers,
passport or other documentation.

Immigration Datalink

A datalink with the Department of Home Affairs provides information to
Services Australia about a customer's visa, citizenship (where
available) and movement information.

The system will apply information to the customer's record when the
Immigration Datalink has provided the information. This will take
precedence over any conflicting information provided by the customer.
The datalink will also update any change in visa or travel in or out of
Australia for any customer identified as a mutual customer.

Information from the datalink does not verify whether a person is
residing in Australia. However, it may help a Service Officer determine
periods of residence for the customer.

The Resources page contains links to the International Program homepage
and the Residence in Australia and other countries (Mod O) form, and
examples of Australian residence periods on Norfolk Island.

Related links

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Residence assessment for customers claiming Austudy

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Farm Household Allowance
(FHA)

Residence assessment for customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST HCC) or Ex-Carer
Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit (SpB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and/or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Residence and Portability screens

Recording legal residence status

Proof of Australian citizenship

Australian residence requirements for payment

Residence requirements

Updating residence screens

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Completing, assessing and coding the Residence in Australia and other
countries Mod O

Commencement of Identity

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

International Social Security Agreements

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
