
First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow 106-03010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Paper claims for Age Pension, Carer Payment, Carer Allowance and
Disability Support Pension may be issued, and must be accepted in
service centres.

A system issue exists regarding forms not printing – The workaround for
this issue is available in Network News Updates (NNU) – First Contact
Service Offer (FCSO) – Rejection error received when printing claims for
payments (12500)

This document outlines the purpose and use of the FCSO workflow.

Using the FCSO workflow

FCSO is to be used ONLY if the customer or nominee is unable or
unwilling to claim online or use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

The FCSO workflow is used to record a customer’s initial intention to
claim a payment.

Most payments can (or must) be claimed through Centrelink’s online
services. The FCSO workflow records an intention to claim for some
customers. It is used for claims where the online option is not
appropriate or available.

When a customer first contacts a Smart Centre or attends a service
centre to claim a payment, the FCSO workflow can be used. It determines
which claim may be best suited to their circumstances.

If a customer is not claiming online, staff can run the FCSO workflow
for enquiries about the following payments and services:

-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

For more information on the appropriate claiming option for each
payment, refer to the relevant procedure under Related links.

The FCSO workflow does not identify when the Carer Child to Adult
Transfer (CTAT) is appropriate for a customer. For more information see
Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer
(CTAT).

Features of FCSO workflow

The FCSO workflow guides Service Officers through a set of questions for
the customer. It:

-   identifies the best claim suited to the customer's life event
-   records the responses on the customer's record in a Note
-   issues appropriate forms

The workflow includes the following actions and outcomes:

Gathers and confirms essential information about the customer. It
includes personal details, contact information and relevant partner
information

Allows for combined claims from members of a couple to be offered within
one workflow. This results in one joint claim form being issued (where
applicable)

Pre-fills customised claim forms with relevant information already
recorded on the system. Note: Customised forms are not available for all
claims

Activates the data link with the Department of Home Affairs. If
applicable, it pre-fills the customer's visa, citizenship (in some
cases) and movement information into the relevant screens. If the
information is not available via the data link or the customer's record,
the relevant residence questions will be asked

Ensures the customer's Contact Date is recorded via a Note on file

Identifies, via trigger questions:

-   which documents and forms need to be issued to the customer
-   any special circumstances needing immediate assistance. For example,
    homelessness for under 18s, people in financial hardship. It prompts
    a referral to the appropriate specialist officer. Note: this is
    currently a manual process

The Resources page contains a link to forms.

Related links

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire

Concession cards and information

Claiming Age Pension

Initial contact by customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
