
Assessing the Income and Assets (SA369) 106-07100180

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

This document outlines the use of the SA369 to assess a customer's
entitlement to Age Pension, Carer Payment, Disability Support Pension or
Farm Household Allowance. The SA369 helps find out if more information
and investigation is needed and asks the customer to give supporting
documents to confirm their income and assets.

Information about the form

The SA369 forms part of the paper/manual claim process. It asks
questions about the customer's income and assets. If a customer has a
partner, the income and assets details for both the customer and their
partner are obtained, even if the partner is not claiming.

If the claim has been completed using the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
process, it includes all the questions from the SA369 and produces a
list of supporting documents needed to verify the income and asset
details declared in the claim.

If the First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow
was used to issue:

-   an Age Pension claim pack, it may contain a pre-filled Income and
    Assets (SA415) instead of an SA369
-   a Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) claim pack, it may
    contain a pre-filled Income and Assets (SA414) instead of an SA369.

For Farm Household Allowance (FHA) claims, see Claiming FHA, Assessing
assets for FHA or Assessing income for FHA.

Note: the Income and Assets module (Mod iA) can be accepted instead of
the SA369 form normally sent with a pension claim. The question set and
supporting documents meet the claim requirements.

Changes to income and assets (for current customers)

If a customer wants to advise an update to income and/or assets, see:

-   Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services
-   Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments
-   Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Related links

Address recording for real estate

Assessing assets at their net market value

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Completing the Income and Assets (SA369)

Deeming provisions

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

Real estate

Role of staff outside Compensation Teams

Verifying income and assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
