
Early claims 106-03040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a claim is considered to be an early claim
and the payments that are excluded from early claim provisions.

Early claim definition

An early claim is a claim made by a person prior to being qualified for
that payment. A customer may lodge an early claim for an eligible social
security payment up to 13 weeks before their first day of qualification
for payment.

When early claim provisions do not apply

Early claim provisions do not apply to the following payments and
concessions:

-   Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   Health Care Cards (HCC) and Commonwealth Seniors Health Cards (CSHC)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) where qualification for PP is because of the
    birth of a child
-   Special Benefit (SpB) is provided to eligible people in severe
    financial hardship due to circumstances beyond their control. It is
    a payment of last resort when all other income support options have
    been considered. Therefore, individuals cannot lodge an early claim
    for SpB
-   Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) cannot be made prior to the
    Scheme eligibility criteria being met. For example, the claimant
    must be of Age Pension age or the partner of someone who is (Age
    Pension age) before they apply for the Scheme. An early claim cannot
    be submitted prior to meeting the Scheme age requirements. For
    further details, see Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

Note: where no early claim provisions apply, start day rules may apply a
later start to the claim submission/lodgement date.

Acceptance of early claim

If an early claim lodgement is accepted then the customer's claim for
payment is taken to have been made on the first day the customer becomes
qualified for the payment.

Claims made outside Australia

To meet claim lodgement rules for most social security payments:

-   a person must be an Australian resident and in Australia at the time
    the claim is lodged, or
-   meet an exception to the lodgement inside Australia rule.

Further exemptions may apply for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Parenting
Payment (PP) claims.

For further information, see Assessing if a customer is an Australian
resident (CLK).

ABSTUDY and AIC customers do not have to be in Australia on the day they
lodge a claim but will only be payable from the date they become
eligible for payment.

Early claim for JSP, YA and Austudy

Customers are able to lodge an early claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
and Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker but must provide their bank account
balances, income and employment separation details on the day they
become qualified for payment.

-   For JSP, see Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   For YA job seeker, see Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

A detained person may lodge a claim up to 3 weeks before release from
gaol.

Customers who are transferring from a current Income Support Payment can
lodge an early claim up to 4 weeks prior to the date of qualification.

Full-time students or apprentices may claim YA/Austudy up to 13 weeks
before the first day on which they are qualified for the payment. The
claim is taken to be made on the day on which they qualify. See the
Resources page for an example.

Full time students or Australian Apprentices ceasing studies or apprenticeship

Due to current policy, full-time students or Australian Apprentices
receiving Youth Allowance or Austudy are only able to be registered as
job seekers or receive servicing from a Workforce Australia Employment
Services Providers within 4 weeks of their course or apprenticeship end
date:

-   [] the customer is able to lodge an online claim up to 4 weeks
    before their course end date; or
-   if the customer is unwilling or unable to claim online then the
    Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow can be used either over the
    phone or face to face and the customer registered as a Job Seeker
    Registration Only (JSRO) job seeker, see Student to job seeker
    transfers

Groups affected:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) (students or apprentices aged 21 and under)
    transferring to YA (job seekers)
-   YA (students or apprentices aged 22 and over) and Austudy students
    transferring to JSP

A customer can advise that they intend to cease studies up to 4 weeks
prior to their course end date by contacting Services Australia via:

-   phone call to Centrelink Smart Centres
-   service centres, or
-   [] online services

ABSTUDY students and Australian Apprentices

As ABSTUDY students and Australian Apprentices are not covered by the
Social Security (Administration) Act but are assessed using the ABSTUDY
Policy Manual, discretion can be applied to accept the claim earlier
than 13 weeks from qualification. The 13 week period counts back from
the date the student or Australian Apprentice first qualified for
ABSTUDY. For example:

-   turning 16 years of age - 13 weeks from 16th birthday
-   commencing on the first day of secondary school - 13 weeks prior to
    1 January
-   commencing a tertiary course of study - 13 weeks prior to the first
    day of the course
-   Australian Apprentices - 13 weeks prior to the commencement of the
    apprenticeship
-   to access Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel in the year
    prior to commencing studies

Orientation Travel Reimbursements

Due to system limitations, claims approved for reimbursement are unable
to be released unless a student is current on ABSTUDY. Students assessed
for ABSTUDY (ABY/ASS) who have attended an orientation or interview will
need to wait until they are current to receive the reimbursement.

Service Officers should:

-   Assess/code the reimbursement claim as per normal process
-   Advise claimant the date of payment, and
-   Clearly document this in the Notes tab in the Travel Management
    Application (TMA)

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) customers

As AIC customers (parents/guardians) are not covered by the Social
Security (Administration) Act but are assessed using the AIC Scheme
Guidelines, discretion can be applied to accept the claim earlier than
13 weeks from qualification. Generally, customers should be advised that
claims for the:

-   current calendar year can be lodged at any time within that calendar
    year
-   following calendar year can be lodged from October each year

The Resources page contains examples of an early claim for payment, a
task card about creating a customised Fast Note, AIC free text for Q679
and a link to Office Locator.

Related links

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Job seeker online claim appointment

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Claiming ABSTUDY

Claiming Age Pension

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

Initial contact with customers claiming under the Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Start day (CLK)

Calculating the start date for ABSTUDY

Calculating the start day general rule

Student to job seeker transfers

Rejecting a Centrelink claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
