
Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and post-release prison customers 106-02020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines help available to customers who have recently
been, or will soon be, released from prison.

Pre-release claim

A customer may claim an income support and Crisis Payment before leaving
prison, if the customer meets all of the following:

-   has a known release date that is no more than 21 days in the future
-   agrees to a pre-release appointment, and
-   authentication can be established

The customer can make a claim using any service delivery channel
available at the prison facility.

The Job Seeker Snapshot must be completed during the pre-release
interview. The Job Seeker Snapshot checks a customer's job readiness and
capability to look for and accept work. It will indicate the need for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referral.

Post-release claim

If a customer contacts or makes an income support payment claim within 7
days after release for income support, they may be eligible for Crisis
Payment. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Confirmation of custody dates

Confirmation of custody dates is needed for the claim process. Customers
may have discharge documents or a letter from the correctional centre to
confirm their entry and release dates.

If the customer does not have a discharge document to confirm a period
in custody, confirmation from the respective corrective services
department is needed. See Confirming prison admission and release dates.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child leaves Juvenile Justice

In some cases the released child will have a discharge document to show
a change in care. If this is not given to the child or new carer,
contact the Approved Care Organisation Team (ACO) or see Confirming
prison admission and release dates, to confirm their release date.

Confirming period in custody for overseas prisoners

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) can help with
confirming international prison admission and release dates after
receiving the Disclosure and Use of Personal Information form. See the
Resources page for link to form.

Status Resolution Support Services

A SRSS payment provides temporary needs-based support to asylum seekers
who are unable to support themselves while resolving their immigration
status. If a customer had received a SRSS payment before going to
prison, refer all suspended and cancelled SRSS customers to the SRSS
Helpdesk.

Assistance to customer imprisoned overseas

Australians imprisoned overseas may be eligible for Services Australia
Centrelink payments including Crisis Payment if they meet all of the
following conditions:

-   they return to Australia
-   claim within 7 days of their release from an international prison,
    and
-   meet payment eligibility criteria

See Confirming prison admission and release date.

Mutual obligation requirements

Customers released from prison are exempt from RapidConnect.

Working age customers are not required to start looking for work
straight after their release from prison.

A 2 week exemption from mutual obligation requirements from the date of
release may be granted. A longer exemption may be granted in certain
circumstances. See Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for
prison release customers.

A person does not need to enter into a Job Plan if they are:

-   still in prison, and
-   charged with an offence

After release or at the end of any exemption they must enter into a Job
Plan as soon as possible. A person may be eligible for employment
assistance if they are:

-   in prison, and
-   released on license for paid work

See Eligibility to access employment assistance services through
Workforce Australia.

A customer who is on the Time to Work Employment Service (TWES)
programme is not eligible for a Major Personal Crisis (MPC) exemption.

Customer Vulnerability Indicator

A customer leaving prison may need to have a vulnerability code recorded
on their record. See Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with
compulsory requirement.

Medical Evidence

An Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is a test to decide what type
of employment a customer needs to find and keep a job. The ESAt assesses
the impact of barriers and medical conditions on a customer's ability to
comply with mutual obligations and participate in work or Employment
Services Provider programs of support. Medical evidence is required to
support the completion of an ESAt for customers with medical conditions.
See Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) overview.

Debts and interest charges

A customer’s debt will accrue an interest charge if the debt was not
temporarily written off during imprisonment and should be adjusted at
the time of release.

If a customer is eligible for an income support payment on their release
and has an existing debt, apply a short-term hardship write off code for
a further 28 days. See Temporary write off Centrelink debts.

At the end of the write off period, recovery will recommence and a
payment arrangement must be negotiated. See General Centrelink debt
recovery information.

Centrepay

Centrepay may help customers who are released from prison with
budgeting. It is a free service that allows voluntary deduction from
Centrelink payments to cover a range of expenses. See Centrepay.

Advance payment recovery

Prison release customers who meet the financial hardship criteria for
Crisis Payment are eligible to have the recovery of any advance payment
suspended or reduced for 4 weeks. In line with similar arrangements in
place for debt recovery.

To vary a repayment, see Changes to the repayment rate of an advance
payment.

Member of a couple

Partnered customers with a known prison release date are eligible to
have their claim assessed within 21 days of their known release date.
Customers may need to provide more information to support their
pre-release claim within 14 days of release.

The release from custody of a partnered customer may affect the payment
rate of the partner. See Assessment of circumstances for customers with
partner in prison.

No incarcerated details are recorded

The agency may not be notified that a customer has been imprisoned. If
this occurs, the customer may have been incorrectly paid while in
prison, resulting in a debt.

This can be identified when a customer is applying for a pre-release or
post-release payment.

The agency is to confirm the incarceration details. See Report Suspected
Fraud and Corruption.

Prisoner Wallet Card

The wallet card provides customers with:

-   key information for Services Australia payments and services,
    including
-   actions customers should take to avoid getting a debt when they go
    to prison and
-   documents to bring to Centrelink after a customer is released from
    prison

Service officers can order Prisoner Wallet Cards (product number 12902)
through the Product Ordering Portal (POP) for corrective services staff
to give to customers during their incarceration and release from prison.
See Resources for a link to the POP.

The Resources page contains links to the Prison Servicing intranet page,
verbal declaration script and relevant forms.

Related links

New claim for Crisis Payment prior to the release of a customer in
prison or psychiatric confinement

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

Identifying barriers to participation for prison release customers

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison release
customers

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Identification and eligibility for income management

Voluntary Income Management eligibility

Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) category

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
