
Confirming a customer's identity 106-09000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the identity requirement for customer's claiming
a Centrelink payment or service that requires Identity Confirmation.

Government intent

Identity processes within Services Australia have been updated to
reflect the recommendations outlined in the National Identity Proofing
Guidelines (NIPG) issued by the Attorney-General's Department. The NIPG
are a set of recommended processes and requirements for establishing a
person's identity to an acceptable Level of Assurance (LoA). The agency
aims to meet LoA 3 as represented in the NIPG when identifying a
customer.

To meet LoA3 and 'Confirm' their identity at the National Identity
Standard a customer must

complete linkage using:

-   facial comparison to link the person to their identity documents,
    via photo identification, or
-   knowledge based questions and answers via the myGov linking tool
    Note: linkage via an approved photographic identification is the
    preferred method. Knowledge based Q and A should only be used when
    the customer provides a legitimate reason for not having approved
    photographic identification and the Service Officer has confidence
    in the claimed identity

provide and have verified 1 identity document for each category below:

-   A Commencement of Identity (CoI)
-   A Primary Use in Community (PUiC)
-   A Secondary Use in Community (SUiC)

It is the agency's intent to assess customers claiming payments or
services against these standards to strengthen the identity process and
reduce identity fraud.

All staff must support the Identity Confirmation intent of the agency to
help promote the National Identity Standard.

Identity Confirmation

If a customer does not have an Identity Status of 'Confirmed', they must
be subject to the Identity Confirmation process.

When a customer has a confirmed identity status, they do not need to
provide identity documents again. Unless the documents are required as
part of a review or investigation.

The Resources page contains links to the National Identity Proofing
Guidelines and the Identity Program Section's homepage.

Contents

Identity Confirmation

Identity documents A to Z

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
