
Calculating the deemed date of claim manually 106-03040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 1 July 2018, eligible customers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they actually submit a complete claim with all
relevant supporting documentation. Different processes apply for
customers in vulnerable circumstances, see Intent to claim and
vulnerable customers.

Note: These procedures apply only to customers with a claim contact date
before 1 July 2018 either on the Contact Claim Details (CCD) screen,
recorded on a DOC or uploaded document.

This document outlines how to calculate the deemed date of claim (DDOC).
A customer's DDOC is the earliest possible day that a claim for payment
or concession card can be taken to have been made.

Customer contact

Where a customer contacts Services Australia about making a claim then
the contact can be considered as the customer's DDOC, if the contact
satisfies all of the following conditions:

-   Services Australia is contacted by a customer, or by a third party
    acting on that customer's behalf, in relation to making a claim for
    a Social Security payment (this includes Double Orphan Pension
    (DOP)) or a concession card (Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
    (CSHC), Health Care Card (HCC), or Pensioner Concession Card (PCC))
-   the customer is qualified on the date of contact
-   Services Australia issues the customer with a written notice
    acknowledging their contact. Note: a failure to issue an
    acknowledgement letter can be rectified when the claim is lodged
-   a claim is lodged within 14 days after the date of contact, or
    within 13 weeks (if the customer, their partner or a person they are
    caring for has a medical condition which prevents them lodging a
    claim) or they have been granted an extension under special
    circumstances. Note: If the 14^(th) day falls on a weekend or public
    holiday, the next working day after the weekend or public holiday is
    taken to be the 14^(th) day. Different processes apply for customers
    in vulnerable circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable
    customers

The customer's start day becomes their DDOC, unless they qualify to have
their start day further backdated (for example, through the birth of a
child), as per the start day general rules.

Multiple contacts

Where the customer makes multiple contacts, the first contact date on
which a customer is qualified is the earliest date from which they may
be paid, provided all other conditions are met. Subsequent contact dates
on which a customer is also qualified may become relevant if the
customer does not meet the lodgement requirements for the first contact
date. In such cases, a new 14 day/13 week time frame begins from the
subsequent contact date.

Although a contact should be recorded on the appropriate computer screen
each time one is made, this sometimes does not occur (for example, if
the customer was not clear they were enquiring/contacting about a claim
for payment; or staff misunderstood). Staff should be aware this
possibility exists and should also check the online document recording
system (ODR) when calculating the DDOC.

The Resources page contains examples of applying a deemed date for a
claim.

Related links

Calculating the start day general rule

Calculating the start day for a transferee

Calculating the start date for a claim made after partner's claim

Calculating the start day soon after a partner's death

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
