
Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms 106-02030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines guidelines for Service Officers in helping
customer's complete claims and forms.

Assistance

Assisting customers in completing forms is central to Services
Australia's aim of providing support. The type of assistance offered
will vary from customer to customer to address their individual needs.

In all cases (except Medicare claims) where support is given, a DOC must
be recorded on the customer's record to outline:

-   the type of assistance provided (that is, completing the full form
    or individual questions), and
-   where appropriate the language of the interpreter who also assisted

For Medicare claim forms make a note on the claim form or VG4 form that
the customer is unable to complete or sign the claim form and reasons
why. A note should also be recorded in CDMS.

Staff should not help customers complete the Private Company (MOD PC).
Information needed for the form is only available from those who know
the details of the company. Services Australia suggests the customer
talks to the company tax agent or accountant and consider having them
complete the form on their behalf.

Vulnerable customers returning forms

The Service Officer can help complete claim forms for customers:

-   who are vulnerable (for example, those with a disability or
    customers with language barriers) and
-   ask for more assistance (or where the Service Officer in the Service
    Centre identifies that the customer is incapable of completing the
    form)

If the customer is incapable of filling out the form, it can be
completed on their behalf. Always ask the customer to give an acceptable
form of identification if their disability allows.

Note on the form (or for Medicare complete a VG4 form) that the customer
is unable to complete or sign the form and reasons why.

Inability to sign due to lack of literacy or English

Customers who cannot sign their name in English can print their name in
block letters or use the script of their native language. The customer's
signature should be accepted regardless of the script and there is no
need to have it witnessed by a third party.

An interpreter should be provided to help customers from cultural and
linguistically diverse backgrounds (CALD) who experience difficulty
completing a claim form and to ensure the customer fully understands
what they are signing.

Customers who cannot write, are illiterate or use a mark (for example a
cross) to sign their name, should have a witness verifying their mark
and to confirm their identity.

Ask the customer to provide one of the following forms of
identification:

-   current drivers' licence
-   current passport
-   health care card
-   pension card, or
-   proof of age card

For Centrelink customers, nominee arrangements should be considered.

For Medicare Claim forms, make a note on the VG4 form that the customer
is unable to sign the thermal receipt and reasons why.

Inability to sign due to a disability

Centrelink

Customers who are unable to complete a claim form because of a
disability may have the form completed on their behalf by a responsible
person, preferably a relative or friend, who knows of their
circumstances.

Arrangements must be made to verify the customer's existence before the
claim is processed. This can be verified through contact with the third
party such as a doctor, social worker etc.

Details of the person who completed the form should be included on the
claim form, and both they and the customer must sign the claim form once
it has been completed. If the customer is unable to sign, they:

-   make a mark and the person should witness the mark, or
-   provide (or have provided on their behalf) verification from a
    medical practitioner or health professional that they are unable to
    sign

If another person has completed the claim, nominee arrangements should
be considered.

Medicare

Where a customer is unable to sign the claim form or receipt, and has an
appointed Power of Attorney, Legal Guardian or Administrator, the
appointed person may sign on their behalf.

Where a Power of Attorney, a Guardianship Order or an Administration
Order is held, a full security check is not required. Before processing
the claim, Service Officers must check under the Entitlements tab in
CDMS whether the:

-   Power of Attorney, Guardianship Order or Administration Order is
    still operative, and
-   Power of Attorney, Legal Guardian or Administrator named in CDMS is
    the one lodging the claim for the claimant with a disability

If neither of these is the case, the claim cannot be processed. Where
changes are required to an existing order, or a new order is sighted,
refer to Power of Attorney.

Lodging Medicare claims on behalf of customers who are vulnerable (unauthorised agents or carers)

Organisations or members of a caring team (who do not hold Power of
Attorney, a Guardianship Order or an Administrative Order) can lodge
claims on behalf of claimants who are unable to complete the forms. For
example, care staff for a person with a disability living at home, or
the elderly. These benefits can only be paid to the bank account details
which are currently recorded on Medicare CDMS.

Carers can sign forms, however they must clearly indicate that the
signature is not that of the customer. Service Officers must ensure the
correct claimant is recorded when processing these claims.

Role of Service Officer in assisting customers

There is no conflict of interest in providing assistance to a customer,
as long as the staff member is simply asking the questions and recording
the customer's answers. A Service Officer's role is not to interpret and
reword a customer's responses, but rather to transcribe exactly what the
customer has answered after having been explained the question and its
purpose.

A Service Officer's role is to ensure that claims are received in
accordance with the claim lodgement conditions. This includes making
sure that a customer is aware of what information Services Australia
requires, through assistance and explanation.

A Service Officer should not send a customer away if they cannot
complete a form because of limited English language skills or if the
customer is having communication issues. The customer should not be
turned away to use a family member, friend, community agency or
community centre to complete agency forms.

Where language is a barrier, the best option is for a bilingual officer
to directly assist the customer. If a bilingual officer is not
available, a Service Officer can utilise an interpreter (sessional,
on-site or telephone) to assist.

Note: usually a Service Officer should not send the customer away to
deal directly with an interpreter, except in the case of sessional
interpreters. Even in this instance, the sessional interpreter should
not be answering the customer's questions or issues of concern relating
to the form, and should refer these back to the Service Officer for
clarification.

Additional support

Disadvantaged Centrelink customers may nominate someone else to deal
with Services Australia on their behalf. These people may be known as
payment nominees or correspondence nominees.

Some disadvantaged customers are alone and do not have people to assist
them, that is, they do not have nominees, family, friends or community
support networks.

Multicultural Service Officers (MSOs) conduct outreach and liaise with
multicultural community agencies to inform customers from CALD
backgrounds of the agency's programs, payments and services. If staff
need cultural advice, assistance in referring the customer to other
community agencies or engaging with an interpreter, they should contact
their local MSO. MSOs can be found on locater by:

-   Searching service centre in the 'Orgs' tab
-   Navigate to the notes tab
-   Scroll to specialists, the MSO's name and contact number will be
    listed

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
claims, forms and modules, and information on Interpreter and
translation services. There is also a link to the Services Australia
website for Our Service Commitments.

Related links

Nominees

Interpreters

Written material in other languages

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Claim Lodgement of Centrelink claims

Documents required for new claims

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Timeliness Standards - Claims processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
