
Recovery of debts via the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) 107-05080040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to recover a customer's Centrelink debt from
the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) when the customer receives
payments from DVA.

On this Page:

Debt recovery methods

DVA recovers debts under the Social Security Act 1991 in two ways:

-   from DVA payments on Services Australia behalf, and
-   as direct agents of the Department of Social Services where DVA are
    also making payments under the Social Security Act 1991

This happens if a customer has entitlements to both DVA and Centrelink
payments or allowances and DVA are to administer both payments. In these
cases, debts must be transferred to DVA for recovery.

If a customer is no longer receiving Centrelink payments, but is current
with DVA:

-   a manual request is sent to DVA asking them to recover the debt on
    the agency's behalf
-   repayment and debt balance information is automatically exchanged
    between the 2 agencies through a Customer Reference Number
    (CRN)/Unique Identifier (UIN) link

Centrelink information is stripped each night and sent to DVA. DVA
extract their withholding information the Friday before DVA pension
payday. This is the DVA cut-off day. If DVA receive a cash repayment a
transaction is generated and sent to the agency on the day of receipt.

DVA has an obligation to tell the agency:

-   about amounts recovered for each customer
-   if the customer has income or liquid assets which could be used to
    repay their Centrelink debt
-   the rate of withholdings, and
-   if there have been any queries regarding the rate

It is Centrelink's responsibility to answer questions about the reasons
for the debt.

DVA determines the withholdings rate and a customer must contact them to
negotiate a different rate.

If a debt is not recoverable from a Centrelink payment then refer the
debt to DVA for recovery.

Any over-recovery is the responsibility of the recovery agency. Liaison
between the agency and DVA guarantees the data is correct and the refund
is processed by the recovery agency.

DVA Data-matching reviews

The DVA data match review is on the Integrated Review System (IRS). The
Review Enquiry (IRRE) screen will identify these reviews.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the Centrelink
DVA clearance team and the DVA debts management team.

Related links

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
