-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to request a refund from a financial
institution when payments are made to an incorrect account.

Initiating a request for refund

If a third party receives a payment they are not entitled to, they are
responsible for repaying this amount. This includes when Centrelink
payment/s have been incorrectly paid to a third party's account,
including a joint account.

If a third party calls about a 'Centrelink Refund' from their bank
account, and there are no current Fraud Investigations noted as display
on access (DOA), and no debts raised for RFO (Incorrect Bank Account
(Third Party)), transfer the customer to a debt staff member.

If the agency pays Paid Parental Leave (PPL) funds intended for an
employer into an incorrect account see Delivery of Parental Leave Pay
(PPL).

See the Resources page for contact details to the Debt team.

Third party withdraws funds after customer's death

There is no provision in social security law for debt recovery from
someone who has made an unauthorised withdrawal from another person's
(social security customer) bank account.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

CCS request for refunds are completed manually. See Reissue a payment at
a customer's request.

The Resources page contains a list of acceptable values for fields on
the Debt Amount (OPDA) and the Modify/Assess Debt (OPMA) screens, and
contacts to the Debt team.

Related links

Processing the returned payment

Adding a customer to the system

Creating a new organisation debt record on the Debt Management and
Information System (DMIS)

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Request the return of a payment made to an incorrect recipient

Reissue a payment at a customer's request

Reissue a payment returned from a financial institution

Changing payment destination

Recalled payments not received by Services Australia

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Reissuing a rejected payment

Requests for information after someone has died

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
