-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what Debt Staff and Authorised Review Officers
(ARO) are to do when a customer disagrees with the decision to apply a
garnishee.

Review of garnishee decision

All garnishee decisions can be reviewed at the request of a customer.

The garnishee decision must be explained at first point of contact. Do
not remove a garnishee because a customer disagrees with it. If the
garnishee decision is correct, it needs to remain in place. Staff should
advise the customer of their review and appeal rights.

Only remove the garnishee if:

it was applied incorrectly, or

the customer:

-   no longer has a recoverable debt
-   paid their debt in full after the garnishee was issued and has proof
    of payment

Ensure correct garnishee application by checking:

-   previous payment arrangements
-   broken arrangements
-   debts referred to external collection agencies
-   any relevant details recorded on an online DOC
-   Archive Culling Engine (ACE) for relevant debt documents and details
    of manual and automatic letters.

Advise the customer of warning letters sent when explaining the
decision.

Tax refunds can be used to recover any Family Tax Benefit (FTB) debt.
They can also be used to recover Child Care debts determined on or after
1 July 2006. Recovery from FTB top-up payments and tax refunds occur
automatically regardless of whether there is a payment arrangement in
place. See, Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment,
reconciliation and claim processing.

Exemptions from Auto Tax Garnishee

Customers with the following write-off reasons are exempt from the
automatic garnishee process and will not receive a garnishee warning
letter:

-   Bankruptcy Pending (BRP)
-   Bankruptcy possible future recovery (BRT)
-   Debt Agreement Current (DAC)
-   Deceased - awaiting estate (DDE)
-   Disaster temporary write off (DIS)
-   Insolvency Temporary (Organisations) (IRT)
-   Non Lodger Separated Couple (NLS)
-   Outcome of review or appeal (ORA)
-   Overseas appeal (NZ debts only) (OSA)
-   Proceeds of crime (POC)
-   In Prison (PRI)
-   Short Term Hardship (STH)
-   Excluded from Tax Garnishee process (TAX)

Requests for a refund of a garnishee amount

There is no legal reason to refund a garnishee amount if the garnishee
has been actioned correctly.

If there are exceptional and unforeseen circumstances which cause the
customer real financial hardship, consider a full or partial refund of
the garnishee amount. This is a re-assessment of the customer's
circumstances, not a review of the decision.

If the customer specifically requests a:

review of the decision to apply the garnishee, see Request for an
explanation, quality check or review (CLK), or

refund of all or part of the garnisheed amount:

-   fully explain the garnishee decision to the customer
-   request additional information before making any decisions on a
    refund. If the customer disagrees with a decision about a refund,
    they can apply for a formal review of the decision

The Resources page contains an example of when a refund of a tax
garnishee amount may be appropriate.

Related links

Garnishee of continuing income to recover debts

Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts

Compensation garnishees to recover debts

Tax garnishees to recover debts

Other types of garnishees to recover debts

Varying or ceasing a garnishee notice to recover debts

Transfers and refunds

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
