
Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) 107-02020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manually create debt records on the Debt
Management and Information System (DMIS).

Reassess the customer's record

Reassess a customer's record to create a debt where possible. This
maintains system integrity.

Create a manual debt where reassessments do not create an undetermined
debt.

Account Payable letter

Before issuing any debt notice, refer to Safeguarding customer privacy
when raising and recovering debts. Issue an Account Payable letter to a
customer when a debt is determined.

Non Debt Programme or Compliance and Debt Operations staff

Where the system fails to automatically generate a debt shell, create an
ACTDOC to advise debt staff to manually create a new debt record.

In Customer First:

use Fast Note - select Auto Text, use Debts > DMB Raising > Debt Raising
ACTion DOC Request

include the following in the ACTDOC:

-   reasons a debt should be raised, and
-   information viewed when completing the activity which may result in
    a debt

Note: check when a manual debt is raised for an income support payment.
This may affect FTB. Any FTB debt will need to be investigated and
raised if appropriate.

Debts managed in Process Direct

To manually create and raise a debt in Process Direct, see Raising Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAIs).

Related links

Debt identification

Raising debts resulting from a failure to report or notify

Recovery of Centrelink compensation debts

Raising Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Explaining and actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results
(AR) screen

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Late payment charge and interest under the Student Assistance Act 1973

Debts arising from Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) stay orders

General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities

Finalising Registrar-General's Office Interventions (RGO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
