
Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer 107-04010110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to request a recall of excess payments paid
to a customer, after their death. When to raise a debt after a
customer's death is also included.

Disclosure of information

Only disclose information to:

-   the executor named in the will
-   the Public Trustee
-   a court, or
-   administrator of the estate

Nominee arrangement and Powers of Attorney cease at the time of death.
They no longer have the authority to get information about the deceased
person.

The will of the deceased person normally identifies executors. If a
person dies without a will, the below can apply to the Probate Office of
the Supreme Court for letters of administration:

-   spouse
-   partner, or
-   next of kin

Recovering payments

Do not make contact with the executor by telephone or writing until 4
weeks have passed since a customer's date of death. Try to include all
debt related notifications in one single notice to the executor.

A payment may be made:

-   by direct credit to a customer's preferred financial institution
    (FI)
-   by cheque, or
-   to a group organisation

For all payments paid to the customer after their death, try to recall
individual payments from the FI before raising a debt.

Note: if a number of payments are recalled on the same day, the system
issues a consolidated request to the FI. The legislation states the FI
must comply with a request for refund even where the account is in more
than one name. Deductions may occur before the FI can process the
refund. This may impact on the refund amount.

Deductions include:

-   payments to a third party organisation (TPO) via Centrepay
-   group payments to organisations
-   urgent payment deductions
-   advance repayments
-   debt repayments (including withholdings to other Centrelink debts)
-   child support payments
-   tax deductions
-   participation failure deductions

If Services Australia does not receive the full amount from the refund,
raise the remaining outstanding amount as a debt against the estate.

To cancel cheques, see the Cash Management and Reporting Services team
homepage. See Resources page for the link.

Raising debts

Do not contact the executor within 4 weeks of the date of death.

If the customer has other outstanding debts and a payment paid after
death, send a Q080 (Advice of Account) to the executor with the total
amount.

Include interest in the total amount. The system will exclude interest
from the date of death, once the death activity is complete.

Contact from executor or third party

An executor or third party may contact to:

-   notify of a customer's death, or
-   request information relating to the deceased customer

Do not provide a third party with information, including whether or not
the deceased person was a customer, unless:

-   the death and executor details have been confirmed, and
-   they have provided sufficient evidence of their authority

See Confirmation of the death of an adult or child and Requests for
information after someone has died.

Exercise sensitivity when discussing a deceased customer's debt with an
executor or third party.

If the:

-   deceased customer identified as Indigenous, see Cultural
    considerations when someone dies and Indigenous naming conventions
-   executor or third party is in emotional distress and needs support,
    consider a referral to a Social Worker

Withdrawal of funds made after death

Raise all debts against the estate.

The Administrator/Executor of the estate is responsible for pursuing a
case against:

-   unauthorised withdrawals from the bank account
-   joint account holder or Executor withdrawals
-   any person convicted, or facing conviction, under criminal law

Cashless Debit Card participants

If the customer was participating in the Cashless Debit Card (CDC), see
Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation.

Excessive recalls

If the review requires more than 26 recall activities, issue a Q463
letter to the FI.

The appropriate Compliance and Debt Operations Finance Team must record
the cheque information on the customer's file. This ensures the returned
funds are actioned within the correct procedure.

The Resources page contains:

-   information about Commonwealth Bank procedural information
-   a link to the Cash Management and Reporting Services Team homepage
    for information on cancelling cheques
-   a link to contact details for the Income Management Payments and
    Contact Team (IMPACT)
-   a Q999 pro-forma letter to request a refund of Assistance for
    Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments.

Related links

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

28 day rule for bereavement

General debt management information

Debt raising

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Sending Account Payable letters

Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments returned from financial institution

Reissuing a group payment paid to an organisation in error

Requesting the return of a direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payment made to an incorrect recipient

Refunding debt repayments

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Death of one member of a pensioner couple

Death of a single pensioner

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
