-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing if a recoverable debt
exists when a customer's payment reduces, and the reason for the
reduction is their partner status has changed in a same-sex relationship
update.

Recognition of same-sex marriages, de-facto relationships and registered relationships

From 1 July 2009, changes to legislation recognise customers in a
same-sex de facto or registered relationship are partnered.

From 9 December 2017, same-sex marriages are recognised by the agency.
This includes any marriage held overseas before this date. All customers
assessed as being a member of a couple will have their rate of payment
calculated in the same way.

The start date of a same-sex relationship for the agency's purposes is:

For a relationship which commenced prior to 1 July 2009:

-   The date customers in a same-sex relationship were recognised as
    partnered due to the legislation change

For a relationship which commenced on or after 1 July 2009:

-   The date the same-sex relationship commenced

Determine customer overpayment

To determine if the customer has a debt and its start date depends on:

-   the start date of the same-sex relationship
-   the due date of the notification letter that the customer received
    advising to notify of their relationship. General notification
    provisions apply in this circumstance, and
-   the date the agency links the customer to a same sex-partner after
    the customer has received the letter

Contact the customer before raising a recoverable debt. Assess the
customer's circumstances before finalising the debt. Be aware these
customers may have sensitive issues to be considered.

The Resources page contains scenarios of assessing debts for customers
linked to a same-sex partner. It also has information about how to
access the Notification Handler (NOHL) rules.

Related links

General debt raising information

Categories of debt raised under subsection 1223(1)

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

Special and unusual circumstances waivers

Administrative error waivers

Notification Handler (NOHL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
