-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the (PGPA) framework for dealing with and
managing Commonwealth money and property.

PGPA Act

The PGPA Act replaced the Financial Management and Accountability Act
1997 (FMA) from 1 July 2014.

Commonwealth agencies and departments must recover overpayments under
Rule 11 of the PGPA Rules 2014 when:

-   they have not been legally written off
-   they are legally recoverable, and
-   it is economical to seek recovery

Debts caused by:

-   normal departmental operations, such as those owed by staff and
    vendors, are departmental debts. Finance teams raise and recover
    them
-   payments to the public under schemes controlled by the agency or
    department are called Administered PGPA overpayments

PGPA recovery options

These include:

voluntary withholdings from:

-   Social Security
-   Family Assistance, or
-   Student Assistance Act payments

compulsory withholdings from Social Security Act payments for Financial
Case Management and Income Management overpayments

cash (including direct debit)

legal recovery action for customers who do not enter into a voluntary
arrangement

It is possible to permanently write off Income Management customer
overpayments if:

-   they are less than $50, and
-   recovery has not and will not start

The following recovery options are not able to be used for PGPA Act
debts:

-   garnishee
-   tax garnishee
-   Family Tax Benefit or Child Care Benefit reconciliation debt offset
-   discounts
-   third party withholdings
-   Departure Prohibition Order

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) debts

SRSS Operations (SRO) do all recovery action for Status Resolution
Support Services (SRSS) debts. Normal debt recovery provisions do not
apply to these debts.

Waiver

Waiver decisions under section 63 of the PGPA Act are decided by:

-   the Finance Minister and Parliamentary Secretary, or
-   delegates within Department of Finance

Services Australia staff do not have delegation for these waivers.

Request for waivers from the Department of Finance are referred to the
Legal Branch of Services Australia (the agency). If the waiver is
appropriate:

Legal Branch sends the case to the Debt Management Branch (DMB)

DMB:

-   decides if it supports the waiver
-   responds to the Department of Finance

A DMB Director has the access to record the waiver on the Debt
Management Information System (DMIS)

Review and appeals

Families Assistance, Student Assistance, and Social Security law appeal
provisions do not apply to PGPA debts. PGPA overpayments cannot be
appealed to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

If the customer does not agree with the decision a Subject Matter Expert
will check the decision was correct. A customer who still doesn't agree
can contact the Ombudsman.

For further information, see Reviews of JET Child Care fee assistance
(JETCCFA) decisions and Raising emergency payment debts and
grant/ex-gratia overpayments.

A decision to apply withholdings under Section 1228 (3) to Financial
Case Management overpayments can be appealed.

Appeals against reparation orders (court orders)

Customers must pursue appeals against reparations orders through the
court system. The agency is bound by court orders and reparation orders.

Interest on PGPA and FMA overpayments

PGPA overpayments attract an interest change. However, there is no
option to add penalty interest via the Debt Management Information
System.

There is provision in legislation to apply interest and an
administrative charge. However current policy is not to apply these
charges.

The Resources page contains a link to the Intranet page for the
Instrument of Financial Delegation and a table of recovery methods.

Related links

Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments

Raising Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) debts

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Waiving Centrelink debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
