
Unique recovery actions 107-05080000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to recover debts using an External Collection
Agent (ECA) and the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA). It also
provides information to assist with the recovery of debts from customers
who have moved overseas.

Referring debts to an External Collection Agent (ECA)

Where Centrelink refers a debt to an ECA, the ECA will negotiate
repayments directly with the customer.

Debts referred to an ECA for recovery with a debt status of DMC
(Determined - Collection Agent) are eligible for Interest Charge (IC).
Interest charge is applied when the ECA makes a determination that the
customer is not in an acceptable recovery arrangement.

The ‘collection agent arrangement indicator’ is used to exchange this
information. The system will use the collection agent indicator in the
following instances:

-   When the indicator is set to On - the customer is in an acceptable
    recovery arrangement and no IC is to apply
-   When the indicator is set to Off - the customer is considered to not
    be in an acceptable recovery arrangement and an IC is to apply

When the ECA sets the collection agent arrangement indicator to ‘Off’,
the customer's collection agent exemption is to cease from the date the
last debt is returned.

Debt recovery agreements

Services Australia and DVA have a debt recovery agreement in place. A
link between the two agencies:

-   identifies mutual customers
-   shares debt balances, and
-   recovery details

If a Services Australia customer with a debt is receiving payments from
DVA, it is possible to arrange for DVA to recover the debt from DVA
payments. The repayments automatically update via an overnight data
exchange.

There are also options available for customers residing overseas to
repay their debts. These include BPAY and maintaining repayment
arrangements through Australia Post's POST Billpay.

Contents

Recovery of Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) overpayments

Recoverying debts from organisations

Recoverying other government department (OGD) debts from Centrelink
payments

Recoverying mutually liable co-debtors

Recovery of debts via the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Recovering Centrelink debts from customers living overseas

Actioning broken agency recovery arrangements

Medicare debt recovery

Recovery of Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

Non recovery of organisation debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
