
General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities 107-19061216

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in staff processing Manual
Follow-up (MFU) activities relating to payment summaries calculations.

MFU activities relating to payment summary calculations

These activities are generated from either End of Financial Year (EOFY)
or tax amendment (TXAUTO) processing where the tax calculation has
resulted in an exception being recorded on a customer's tax payment
summary record for:

-   debts and/or
-   benefit transfers, and/or
-   advance recoveries

If the exception results in either:

-   negative taxable/tax withheld/non-taxable/Remote Area Allowance
    (RAA) amount(s), or
-   the Suppress Auto Issue indicator is set to Y (Yes) on the Tax
    Payment Summary (TXGS) screen

Manual follow-up is required for the customer's payment summary to
ensure the negative amount(s) is corrected or in the case of the
Suppress Auto Issue indicator, adjustments are applied.

If unable to correct the negative amount/s or apply relative adjustments
to the TXGS screen, refer the issue to the ICT Level 2 Service Desk by
completing the Tax MFU form on mySupport.

The related links provide detailed procedures for staff on how to
investigate and process tax MFUs.

In some cases, the Tax MFU may reoccur or appear to regenerate. If this
occurs, check the validity of the MFU and action accordingly. The
Process page contains instructions where a Tax MFU has been identified
as previously completed or appears to have been regenerated.

Note: for Service Officers in the service centre or Smart Centre that
have customer requests for payment summaries that contain negative
amounts, the payment summary will have to be corrected prior to being
issued to the customer. The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has advised
that payment summaries are not to be issued where the amount is less
than zero. Refer to Issuing Payment Summaries for details on how to
forward on the customer record for action.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport.

Contents

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for Advance recoveries

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for debt processing

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for multiple debts
raised for the same period

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for benefit transfers

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for ABSTUDY third party
debts

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for third party debts
other than ABSTUDY

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for incorrect component
amount details

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for debts raised for
arrears payments

Related links

General debt raising information

Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) screens

Issuing Payment Summaries

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
