
Overview of the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) 107-02060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about DMIS. DMIS is a national
database designed to raise and recover customer overpayments. It is also
used to manage information and reports.

Level of delegation

Delegations apply to processes when raising overpayments and recovering
accounts. DMIS will not permit an Officer to perform an activity outside
of their delegation.

Refer any enquiries about delegations to the Level 2 Helpdesk.

DMIS Debt Id field

The DMIS Debt Id field is a single alpha character followed by seven
numeric characters (annnnnnn). Each environment is pre-assigned a set of
characters as the leading character of the Debt Id.

DMIS and Process Direct

Staff can view debts managed in Process Direct (such as Child Care
Subsidy) in DMIS. Updates must be made in Process Direct. See:

-   Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct
-   Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

The Resources page contains links to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesks, the
delegation instruments, and a table setting out the allocation of values
for the Debt Id.

Contents

Internal systems interface with Debt Management and Information System
(DMIS)

ESSentials/Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) interface

Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) screens

Related links

Roles and quality service standards for debt raising and recovery staff

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Recovering debts from organisations

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Explaining and actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results
(AR) screen

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
