
Raising Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) debts 107-04020180

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)
debts and when they can be recovered.

On this Page:

PBS payment

The Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) provides a tax free lump sum bonus for
customers who choose to work past Age Pension age. They must also defer
from claiming an Age Pension.

The assessment of the Bonus is part of the claim for Age Pension. The
amount of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) payable depends on the rate of Age
Pension at grant. See Section 93H of the Social Security Act 199. The
References page has a link.

PBS Debts due to administrative error

Raise a PBS when:

-   calculation of the Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) was incorrect at date
    of grant, and
-   it was due to admin or computer error

Consider waiving the debt under the administrative error provisions.

PBS Debts due to fraud or misrepresentation

Debts of PBP are recoverable when they result from:

-   contravention of the social security law
-   a false statement
-   misrepresentation

Note: breach of social security law does not have to be intentional to
raise the debt. The customer error may not have been deliberate.

Other excess Pension Bonus Payments

The PBP paid may be too high. For example, there is a grant of Age
Pension, then some time later, there is a retrospective grant of a
Comparable Foreign Payment.

If the PBP was not made due to error, fraud or misrepresentation, the
excess payment is not a PBP debt because:

-   the customer had entitlement to the PBP at the time of payment
-   PBP payment is a one-off payment

There is no ongoing requirement on the customer to provide information
relating to income and assets.

Finalise this type of excess PBP as no debt.

Pension Bonus Top-up

No negative Pension Bonus Top-up exits if a customer's rate of Age
Pension:

-   was correct at the date of grant, and
-   reduced within 13 weeks of grant due to income or assets

The References page contains links to the Social Security Act 1991.

Related links

Non recovery of Centrelink debts, finalised 'no debt'

Finalised no debt (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Administrative Error Waivers

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
