
Arranging cash repayments to recover debts 107-05020050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure is under review. Read Operational Message Debt pause for
customers impacted by the COVID-19 lockdowns.

For staff undertaking debt recovery only.

This document outlines how to make a cash payment arrangement with a
customer to recover a debt.

Cash payments

Customers can make and modify a cash arrangement:

-   by contacting their regular payment line, or
-   via the Money You Owe option online

Customers can use the following methods to make a cash payment:

-   Internet - The customer can make payments via the Money You Owe
    option online within a Centrelink online account or via Express Plus
    Centrelink mobile app. They can use a debit or credit card
-   BPAY® - The customer can make payments with BPAY® through their
    financial institution
-   Australia Post - The customer can make payments at any Australian
    post office or postal outlet
-   POSTbillpay - This is a phone or online payment made via Australia
    POSTbillpay
-   Mail - Mail a cheque to the Agency. Cheques are not a preferred
    payment option

Acceptable cash level

Customers making an arrangement online must meet the Money You Owe
acceptable cash levels before the arrangements accepted online.

Staff can accept a payment arrangement where:

-   a customer cannot pay the total amount they owe in full, and
-   their repayment offer meets or exceeds the acceptable cash level

Apply acceptable cash levels to self-employed customers who:

-   get regular income from a third party
-   the business name and suburb of the third party are on a DOC, and
-   the gross income is on a DOC

The Resources page has more details about amounts and timeframes.

Investigate the customer's record

Investigate a customer's record when they ask for a new arrangement.

Some customers try to make a new arrangement before lodging their tax
return to avoid a tax garnishee. The customer then fails to make any
cash payments towards their debt. Staff can refuse to accept a cash
arrangement in these instances.

It is important to note that entering into a payment arrangement will
not stop all other recovery action. See Payment Arrangements for more
details.

The Resources page contains contact details and details about acceptable
cash levels.

Related links

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Third party withholdings for debt recovery

Reviewing cash arrangements

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Updating payment arrangement schedule

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
