
Special and unusual circumstances waivers 107-05120030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the waiver of debts under special and unusual
circumstances.

Waiver provisions

A debt may be waived under this provision where:

either the customer, or another person did not:

-   knowingly make a false statement
-   make false representation, or
-   knowingly failing or omitting to comply with the relevant Act

special circumstances (other than financial hardship alone) make it
desirable to waive, and

it is more appropriate to waive the debt than to write it off

The term 'knowingly' should imply actual knowledge. It is not merely
knowledge that they are supposed to know or could have found out. If the
debtor behaved in a recklessly indifferent manner, they may also be
considered to have acted knowingly in respect of their conduct or
representations.

Purpose of the Special circumstances waiver provision

The purpose of this provision (Section 1237AAD) is to provide a flexible
response to any situation, which could result in hardship or unfairness
in rigidly trying to recover a debt.

Special circumstances generally need to be:

-   unusual
-   uncommon, or
-   exceptional

The intention is not to interpret the circumstances as being unique.
They may have a quality of unusualness that makes them special.

Apply this provision where the debt arose because of an innocent mistake
by the social security recipient. Do not consider in cases where the
customer deliberately set out to defraud the Commonwealth. Financial
hardship alone, cannot be used as sufficient reason to apply 'special
circumstances' when considering waiving a debt.

Consider a temporary write-off of a customers' debt if they have no
capacity to repay. Recovery action can recommence if the customer's
financial circumstances change.

Determining special circumstances

Special circumstance legislation is a discretionary provision. What one
person (or tribunal) may see as special, another may not. Special
circumstances are difficult to define. They are generally due to
situations that are unusual, uncommon or exceptional. Consider the
context in which they happen? Are they different from the usual run of
cases? While the circumstances might be unique, they must have a
particular quality of unusualness that would describe them as special.

Many circumstances that occur in isolation are not unusual. The net
effect of all of the circumstances may be unusual. Waiver under special
circumstances may therefore be an option.

It is not possible to set out a complete list of relevant factors to be
taken into account. Consider each case on its own merits.

Interaction of 'administrative error' and special circumstances

A specific waiver provision exists for debts attributable solely to an
administrative error. Administrative errors generally will not lead to
special circumstance waivers.

However, taken in context, an administrative error may sometimes combine
with other circumstances to create a situation that is, overall,
special.

Family and domestic violence

Other factors to consider when determining if special circumstances
exist would include, but are not limited to, the physical and emotional
state of the person together with their decision-making capacity and
financial circumstances, such as family and domestic violence.

When assessing cases involving family and domestic violence, it is
important to provide customers with support services.

For more information, see the Family and Domestic Violence Risk
Identification and Referral (RIR) Model in Family and domestic violence.

Customer is suffering financial hardship

Financial hardship may be one of a number of circumstances which, when
combined, give rise to special circumstances. If financial hardship is
the only factor, do not waive the debt. Consider writing off the debt
rather than waiving the debt.

Apply special circumstances in specific situations

There are situations or events which, due to their nature, have been
determined to meet special circumstance waiver provisions. This occurs
in very limited cases. The Resources page contains more information.

The Resources page has examples of special and unusual circumstances, a
link to Office Locator and contact details for the Debt Programme and
Compliance Debt Operations Branch. It also contains details of approved
text for a manual Q053 advice letter and a link to the Direct Referral
to SSO Webform.

Related links

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Transfers and Refunds

Administrative error waivers

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee

Family and domestic violence

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit (CCB) debts for the
2000-2001 income year

Waiving Centrelink debts

Writing off Centrelink debts

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
earnings

Reversal of waivers

Small debt waivers

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

'Class of debt' waivers for national disasters between 2009 and 2011

Debt ownership

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
