
Single Touch Payroll debt recovery data match 107-21052045

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures regarding Single Touch Payroll
(STP) data matches.

Single Touch Payroll (STP) data matches

Services Australia match customer information with the Australian
Taxation Office to identify mutual customers. When there are matches
with a high level of confidence, customers are added to the Mutual
Client Register (MCR).

Employers report Pay As You Go (PAYG) salary and wage information to the
ATO through their regular payroll cycle using STP. If the customer is on
the MCR, Services Australia will receive the STP payroll information for
that customer.

Services Australia complies with the Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner's (OAIC) Guidelines on Data Matching in
Australian Government administration. See the Resources page for a link.

Privacy

Only use STP data match information obtained for debt recovery purposes.
Do not use data matches where the information was obtained for another
purpose. See Guideline 8 of the OAIC Guidelines on Data Matching in
Australian Government administration. The Resources page has a link.

Customers must be advised of any data matches before taking
administrative action or checking the information with a third party.
See Guideline 6 of the OAIC Guidelines on Data Matching in Australian
Government administration. The Resources page has a link.

STP data

The Debt Programme and Compensation Recovery (DPCR) Branch will identify
customers on the MCR who:

-   are no longer current
-   have an outstanding recoverable debt
-   do not have a current arrangement or valid write off in place

DPCR will receive the following STP details:

-   customer payroll information including address and phone number
    where available
-   employer information including ABN
-   employment start date, payroll event start and end date and
    customers Year To Date (YTD) gross income

The following screens contain the STP data:

-   OPSTE - STP Employer Summary screen
-   OPSED - STP Employer Details screen
-   OPSTC - STP Customer Details screen
-   OPSTX - STP Outcome screen

Note: access to view and update these screens is restricted to staff
with the appropriate ISP role (DMNSTP). This is to ensure appropriate
use of the STP data.

STP data is initially in a Manual Follow Up (MFU) work item on the
Activity List (AL) screen. The work items are automatically removed
after seven days if they retain their REGistered status.

The Resources page contains links to the Privacy and Secrecy intranet
page and Government data matching guidelines.

Related links

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Garnishees

Garnishee of continuing income to recover debts

Case managed debt recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
