-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about the non recovery of organisation
debts.

Non recovery

A Debt Management Officer (DMO) may waive or write off a debt if the
organisation:

-   asks for an interest charge waiver due to special circumstances
-   is in short term solvency hardship
-   declared bankruptcy or insolvency
-   changed owners or ceased operation

Write off

A temporary write off can apply when the organisation is in short-term
hardship.

A permanent write off can apply when no further recovery action is
possible. For example, the organisation has ceased to operate.

Short Term Solvency Hardship

An organisation may experience Short Term Solvency Hardship when they
cannot pay their ongoing expenses. This may include rent, power, wages
etc.

DMO’s can use the financial information calculator to determine solvency
but this is not compulsory.

Bankruptcy

Sole traders or partnerships no longer able to pay debts can include the
organisations debt in their personal bankruptcy. The business itself
does not become bankrupt.

In these cases follow normal processes to write the debt off. A business
may continue to operate when the sole trader/partner is bankrupt.

Bankruptcy applies to an individual. Insolvency applies to a company.

See What to do when a customer is bankrupt for more information.

Insolvency

When a company is no longer able to pay its debts, the company becomes
insolvent. A company may have one of the following outcomes:

-   Liquidation - orderly winding up of a company’s affairs
-   Administration - an external administrator makes a recommendation on
    the company’s future
-   Deed of company arrangement – an agreement between a company and its
    creditors to manage its affairs during insolvency
-   Strike off Action - the Australian Securities and Investment
    Commission (ASIC) can start strike off action to deregister a
    company
-   Deregistered - a company that is no longer operating

Organisation has sold or ceased operation

Recovery options are limited after the sale or change of ownership. A
debt is not transferable to another person or organisation to pursue
recovery. Liability for the debt stays with the organisation who
received the payment. This includes organisations who commence to trade
under a previous Australian Business Number (ABN) or company
registration.

The sale contract includes liability for debts. Contracts will vary
between each sale. Do not request the sale contract to prove ownership.

Explore all reasonable avenues to recover outstanding amounts prior to
the change of ownership or cessation of operation. Consider a permanent
write off when no further recovery options are available.

A permanent insolvency write off only applies when:

-   no further recovery options are available. and
-   the organisation is no longer operating or has changed owners

Note: a permanent write off is not appropriate where an organisation
refuses to pay or disputes the debt.

Interest Charge and non-recovery

Written off debts will not accrue interest. Once a write off ends, the
organisation has 14 days to make an arrangement or interest will accrue.

Debt Recovery Officers can waive the interest charge component of a
debt. The team who raised the debt makes the decision to waive the
principal debt amount. See the Resources page for a link to waiver
delegations.

See Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving
payments.

The Resources page has links to external website, contact details and
intranet links.

Related links

Recovering debts from organisations

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Viewing and updating Interest Charge (IC) via Financial Customer Care in
Customer First

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Special and unusual circumstance waivers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
