
Varying or ceasing a garnishee notice to recover debts 107-05050060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how to vary or cease an existing
garnishee notice.

Varying the garnishee

Base variations in the instalment amounts on the customer's financial
situation and review it after 3 months.

If varying the garnishee:

-   cease the original garnishee, and
-   issue a new notice for the debt amount

Lump sums, such as termination pay, can also be garnisheed. A new notice
must be issued.

Ceasing the garnishee

Cancel the garnishee if:

-   the third party is unable to comply with the notice, even for a
    short time
-   the customer is still employed but has not, or will not, work for a
    long time. For example. the customer works seasonally or has a long
    period of unpaid leave
-   a larger financial asset than the one currently being garnished
    becomes available. Consider any liquid asset that can be used to pay
    the debt in a shorter time frame than the original garnishee

If a customer offers to pay their debt in full, do not cancel the
garnishee until the payment is received.

Voluntary garnishee

If a customer requests a voluntary garnishee, see Garnishees.

Customers can request a change to their voluntary garnishee arrangement.
A financial circumstances assessment is needed.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains examples of varying Notice or instalment
amounts.

Related links

Garnishee of continuing income to recover debts

Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts

Compensation garnishees to recover debts

Tax garnishees to recover debts

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Actioning non-compliant and broken garnishee recovery arrangements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
