
Other types of garnishees to recover debts 107-05050050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff undertaking debt recovery only.

This document outlines when a garnishee action can apply to some less
common sources of income.

On this Page:

Contact with customer

Before applying a garnishee:

-   check the customer’s record
-   make reasonable effort to contact the customer
-   attempt to discuss all payment options with the customer

Where all repayment options have failed garnishee action can apply. This
is to be in line with cost effectiveness when recovering debts.

Proceeding with garnishee action

In some cases it is possible to apply a garnishee if the debtor:

-   does not respond to contact to repay their debt, or
-   failed to disclose information or evidence about their true capacity
    to repay their debt

Staff must establish that the customer:

-   failed to enter into a reasonable arrangement to repay their debt,
    or
-   had an arrangement they did not keep

Other garnishee arrangements and Interest Charge for debtors

The system treats other garnishee arrangements as a debtor not being in
an acceptable recovery arrangement. Interest applies if at the time the
Initial Interest Charge Notice is sent, the debtor is not in an
acceptable recovery arrangement. For more details, see Interest Charge
(IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments.

Repayment arrangement is not reasonable

Where an arrangement is in place, decisions about the arrangement not
being reasonable must be made by debt staff who are APS5 or above. This
decision must be documented on the file if garnishee action is taken.

Do not apply a garnishee action to superannuation.

Customer is known by another name

Issue the notice with the customer’s name on record, and other known
names if:

-   the third party recognises the customer by another name, and
-   does not recognise the customers main name on the record

The References page contains details about Accountable Authority
instructions (AAI).

When a garnishee is not appropriate

Debts raised under the below acts cannot be recovered by garnishee:

-   Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA)
    (under $10,000)
-   Financial Management Administration (FMA) Act

Recovery of PGPA debts over $10,000 can be pursued under Common Law by
the Litigation Team.

Related links

Garnishee of continuing income to recover debts

Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts

Compensation garnishees to recover debts

Tax garnishees to recover debts

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
