
Raising debts under the Social Security Act 107-20090346

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information on the types of debt raised under the
Social Security Act.

Excess payment debts

Subsection 1223(1) explains recoverable debt. If a customer receives a
payment they were not entitled to receive, this results in a debt.

Prepayment debts

A prepayment is a payment made to a customer before their correct
entitlement is determined. A debt occurs where it is later discovered
that the payment was not payable or should have been paid at a reduced
rate.

Carer Payment debts

Carer Payment is an income support payment for people who are unable to
undertake full time work due to the demands of their caring role. Carers
and Care Receivers must meet eligibility criteria. This includes income
and asset tests for both parties.

Excess amounts of Carer Payment do not always result in a debt. There
must be clear evidence the Carer is involved in the Care Receiver's
financial details.

Debts resulting from the commutation of an asset test exempt income stream

Commutation (withdrawal of funds to a lump sum) is allowed under certain
conditions. A debt may result where the required conditions are not met.

Debts where more than one person is liable

Responsibility for repaying a debt/s raised under the Social Security
Act 1991 generally belongs to the customer who received the excess
payment. If another person/s was involved in fraudulently obtaining the
benefit, they may also be liable.

Debts arising from the tax file number data matching program

The Data Matching Program (DMP) matches Tax File Numbers (TFN) to
existing information held on a customer's record. If the match data
indicates the customer has received an incorrect payment, a debt is
created.

Contents

Categories of debt raised under subsection 1223(1)

Raising debts for prepayments, including prison release payments, Crisis
Payment (CrP) and Anticipated Payment

Debts for Carer Payment (CP)

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

Debts where more than one person is liable for recovery

Debts raised under the Data-Matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act

Related Links

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

Administrative error waivers

Application requesting permission to commute all or part of an
asset-test exempt income stream due to extreme financial hardship

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Data matching

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Exempt income and assets for Centrelink payments

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

General debt management information

Income streams

Income, assets and rates of payment

Investigating administrative or computer error debts for Social Security
payments

Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday periods

Debt raising

Specific cause of debt raising

Recovery from mutually liable co-debtors

Requesting refunds from third parties

Storing documents

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

Workload Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
