
Comparable Foreign Payment (CFP) lump sum arrears debts 107-04040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For International Services (CIS) staff only.

This document explains the process for staff in International Services
(CIS) to determine code and raise a debt, when a customer or their
partner is granted a lump sum that represents arrears of a foreign
pension.

On this Page:

Arrears debts

When a customer or their partner is granted a Comparable Foreign Payment
(CFP), on most occasions they are granted with a backdated start date,
which means the person, receives a lump sum payment that represents
arrears for a past period. In some cases, for example, rate revision,
foreign pension authorities may backdate increases in the rate of a
foreign pension and pay a lump sum arrears payment.

Note: arrears debts that may exist because of small back-payment of
regular increases (Consumer Price Index (CPI)) in foreign pensions are
too small to be recovered and investigation is not cost effective.

If the customer's Australian payment would have been reduced had they
received regular payments during the arrears period instead of a lump
sum, a recoverable arrears debt may exist, however, before considering
any arrears debt, it is important to first code the ongoing income from
the correct date of event, see Foreign Pension coding.

Before 1 July 2004, arrears debts could only exist if the CFP was
covered by an international social security agreement and then only
applied to the customer, not their partner. Since 1 July 2004, under
section 1228A of the Social Security Act 1991, a debt may exist for both
the customer and their partner for lump sum arrears of a CFP from any
country.

Note: Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) payments are not affected by lump sum
arrears payments of foreign pensions.

Deceased customers

If:

-   the person who is entitled to the CFP is deceased at the time the
    overpayment is calculated, no arrears debt exists for either a
    person or their partner
-   the partner of a person who is entitled to the CFP is deceased at
    the time the overpayment is calculated, an arrears debt only exists
    for the person who is entitled to the CFP and not the deceased
    partner, even if the partner was alive for any part of the arrears
    period

Coding arrears periods

After coding the ongoing rate of the CFP, arrears periods for backdated
grants are also recorded on the Foreign Pension Details (FPD) screen. As
CFP arrears lump sums are received at a point in time, to reflect the
relative value of the amount received, policy advice is that the
exchange rate used must be the rate that was applicable at the time the
lump sum was received.

If available, the arrears period and lump sum amount may be coded on
FPD. System processing will apply the relevant exchange rate from the
Date of Event coded and divide by the arrears period to derive a
consistent rate to be applied throughout the arrears period. If a
country provides the rates of foreign pension applicable during the
arrears period, the rates may be manually converted and coded in
Australian dollars at the exchange rate applicable at the time the lump
sum was received.

Note: arrears or rate increases for foreign survivors' pensions must
only be coded from the Bereavement Period End Date (BPED). If the
arrears start date advised is before the BPED, the rates of the survivor
pension must be manually converted to Australian dollars and coded
between the BPED and the arrears end date.

Arrears lump sums are treated in the same way as ongoing pensions, for
example income, direct deduction, and will assess independently of
notification rules as they are assessed under s1228A Social Security Act
1991. Foreign pension rate revisions that include arrears can also be
coded on FPD even if the new arrears period overlaps other arrears and
will assess any adjustment independently.

Recovery and embargo

Arrears debts may be recovered by any normal debt recovery methods
available under the Social Security Act 1991. This does not apply to
arrears debts under the Italian Agreement before 1 July 2004.

Some agreements provide for one country to withhold amounts from any
lump sum arrears associated with the grant of pensions and send them to
the other country to recover a debt that arises because of the arrears
amount. This is referred to as an embargo.

Note: Australian arrears lump sums generally do not affect the rate of
foreign pension. Only the Agreement with New Zealand needs Australia to
withhold amounts from Australian pension arrears, see New Zealand
agreement outgoing embargo - action for International Services (CIS).

There are 2 types of embargo. Indirect embargo is where only the amount
of the Australian debt is withheld from the CFP arrears and sent to CIS.
Direct embargo is where the entire CFP arrears amount is withheld and
sent to CIS.

For Australia, requests for embargo from CFP arrears are sent on the
agreed liaison form with the foreign pension claim. For indirect
embargoes, a further liaison requesting the exact amount of the
Australian arrears debt is sent once the arrears debt is calculated
after receiving the Notice of Grant (NOG) from the agreement country.

Note: arrears debts for backdated foreign pension increases cannot be
recovered by embargo.

The Resources page has links to the CIS homepage and International
Programme homepage.

Contents

Finalising embargoes - action for International Services (CIS) staff

Non-standard recovery for debts arising from Foreign Pension Data
Exchange

New Zealand Agreement outgoing embargo - action for International
Services (CIS) staff

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Foreign Pension coding

Foreign pension claims

Foreign Pension System (FPS) statuses and reviews

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICS and exchange of information

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Calculating Centrelink entitlements and gathering information when
investigating debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
