
Actioning broken regular/irregular cash arrangements 107-05040010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process used to action broken
regular/irregular cash recovery arrangements.

Follow up activities

If the customer does not pay the amount by the agreed date plus 7 days:

-   a Payment Not Received letter issues
-   the letter asks the customer to pay the amount within 7 days

If the customer does not pay the outstanding amount within 14 days from
the due date:

-   the arrangement status will change from current (CUR) to broken
    (BKN)
-   a DMN/RCV Broken Arrangement activity will generate
-   the activity will allocate via Customer First Workload Manager (WLM)

Individual circumstances

Review a customer's record when actioning a broken arrangement. Make a
reasonable effort to contact the customer to find why they were not able
to maintain the payments.

Consider other payment methods when there is evidence of a poor
repayment history. If the customer cannot maintain a BPAY arrangement, a
voluntary deduction (direct debit) may be a better option.

When to cease a broken cash arrangement

Finalise the broken arrangement:

-   if there are no determined debts that need follow up action. For
    example, debts that have been referred to an External Collection
    Agent, or
-   after reasonable effort to contact the customer has been made

Once a broken arrangement is ceased, a no arrangement activity may
generate. See Outbound customer contact and gathering information when
recovering debts.

Refusing arrangements

Review a customer's record when a new arrangement is offered. Refuse the
arrangement where customers:

-   manipulate the system to avoid paying their debt
-   make new arrangements to avoid other recovery action. For example,
    making a repayment arrangement to avoid a tax garnishee

Check repeated broken arrangements made at the same time each year. An
arrangement may be appropriate once Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has
processed the customer's tax return.

Interest Charge (IC)

Interest Charge applies when a customer misses a payment under an agreed
payment arrangement. Interest is charged each day from the day after the
last expected repayment was due and will cease when:

-   total debt amount and any calculated interest is paid in full
-   the customer makes up the missed payment and continues to make
    agreed payments
-   we agree to skip the missed payment and the customer continues to
    make agreed payments
-   the customer enters into a new acceptable recovery arrangement and
    makes their first agreed payment
-   the customer has a reasonable excuse exemption applied, or
-   the customer has at least one debt temporarily written off or has a
    pause on debt recovery in place

See Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink Debtors no longer receiving
payments.

Related links

Payment arrangements

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Updating payment arrangement schedule

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink Debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
