
Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts 107-05020070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Discount confirmation letter

This letter:

-   is sent when a discount agreement is coded on the Discount (OPDI)
    screen.
-   confirms the agreement and advises the customer the discounted
    amount will be accepted as full payment if received by the due date
-   generates at the end of the business day
-   will not be sent when the payment due date is within three days

If the due date is changed on the OPDI screen, a new discount letter is
sent.

The letter will display details of recoverable debts that meet all the
following criteria:

the Outstanding Balance is greater than $0

the Status is Determined (DET)

the Authority is not Other Government Department (OGD)

the Debt Reason is not:

-   CMM Compensation Charge (Insurer), or
-   CMB Compensation Breach Debts (Insurer)

the AOS Protection indicator is not coded as 'Y'

The CRN Balance which is displayed both in the Pay Information and the
Schedule will be the total outstanding balance of all debts which meet
the criteria.

Note: this letter may not include details of all debts. For example, it
does not include details of debts that are at an external collection
agent.

The letter includes the below details to help the customer make
payments:

-   A barcode in the footer of the letter to pay at any Australia Post
    office or outlet
-   A Biller Code and an Australia Post POSTbillpay Reference Number.
    These are in the footer of the statement style letter to pay via
    POSTBillpay
-   A BPAY® Biller Code and Reference Number in the footer to make
    payments via BPAY

Intranet links

For the latest delegation instruments, see Delegations.

To access the Present Value Calculator, click the link Calculators and
Tools under Quick links at Calculators and Tools.

Example discount calculation

The current outstanding debt balance is $7,000, and the instalment
amount is $50 per fortnight.

The present value of the debt is calculated to be $6,007.

The maximum discount would be $993.

Negotiations for any potential discount should start at $6,503 (50% of
the maximum discount).

A discount arrangement cannot be accepted for less than $6,007.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
