
Tax File Number Declaration Form (TDF) Debtor matching reviews 107-05010090

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process Tax File Number Declaration Form
(TDF) Debtor matching reviews. This procedure is only for Debt staff.

Tax File Number Declaration Form (TDF)

A person must complete a TDF when they start work with a new employer
under the Pay As You Go (PAYG) tax system (such as paid salary or
wages). The employer sends the TDF to the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO).

No payment arrangement in place

A TDF Debtor matching review generates when:

-   a customer has an outstanding debt
-   no payment arrangement is in place, and
-   a TDF has been signed by them in the past 12 months

The reviews are loaded and managed using the Integrated Review System
(IRS).

Debt staff investigate each review, referring to the information in it
(current or cancelled). The first step is to negotiate a reasonable
payment arrangement. If that fails, garnishee action may be considered.

Other types of reviews contain information provided for a different
purpose and must not be used by debt staff for recovery purposes. For
example TDF Part Time Work, Tip Off.

Attribution

Attribution is the process used to calculate the result of an IRS
review. Details are displayed on the Attribution Results (IRAR) screen.
This function is not available for TDF Debtor matching reviews.

Related links

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Garnishees

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
