
Raising debts for students and Australian Apprentices 107-09120060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of raising debts for students who
fail to notify of ceasing studies.

Legally recoverable debt

Changes to a customer's circumstances will cause reassessment of:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
-   Austudy
-   Department of Social Services Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Changes to a customer’s circumstances will cause a reassessment of the
customer’s payment. This occurs when parent and sibling circumstances
change. This reassessment may cause a positive or negative adjustment.

If the reassessment results in a negative adjustment, check:

-   the excess payment (and any component of it) is correct, and
-   whether it is a legally recoverable debt

Student payment eligibility

To remain eligible, a student must continue to meet either:

the study requirements for:

-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

the activity test requirements for:

-   Austudy
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Prior to 1 January 2008, YA customers (under 21 years of age) could meet
their activity test requirements by means other than study. Investigate
each case to determine if the requirements have been met.

Australian Apprentice payment eligibility

To remain eligible, a customer must:

-   be undertaking a full-time Australian Apprenticeship/Traineeship
-   have a current Commonwealth Registration Number

If a customer becomes temporarily incapacitated they must provide
sufficient medical evidence and their Commonwealth Registration Number
must remain current.

Youth Allowance (YA) paid on behalf of customer to parent

Youth Allowance is paid to the parents on behalf of a dependent person
under 18 years of age.

The person (and not the parent) is the legal recipient of the Youth
Allowance. This means that liability for any debt arising from a loss of
entitlement belongs to the person. This also applies where monies have
been misdirected away from the young person.

For more information, see Raising Parental Income Test (PIT) debts.

Start date of debt

Customers who lose eligibility to Austudy, PES, AIC and YA are to have
their debts raised from the day after they lose eligibility. Australian
Apprentices who cease their apprenticeship are to have debts raised from
the day after they last worked.

Third party debts

AIC Scheme debts may be the responsibility of a third party. This could
be an educational institution, parent or guardian. Check to confirm
which party directly received the payment.

Processing responsibilities

The appropriate Processing Services raise debts on the following
payments:

-   Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme (AIC)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Australian Apprenticeships
-   ABSTUDY customers including apprentices, see Raising ABSTUDY debts
    to the parent, guardian or institution

Debts created by:

-   Centrelink Academic Reassessment Transformation (CART) reviews are
    finalised as part of the CART processing team review
-   Tertiary Collection of Student Information (TCSI) reviews are
    finalised by the Study Load Intervention (SLI) team

Refer all other debts to appropriate business area. See Debt Ownership
to identity appropriate area referrals.

The Resources page contains a link to the self service facilities for
students on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Cancellation of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments

Payment of Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy when a student is deferring
or discontinuing study before the end of the course

Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme

Customer no longer an Australian Apprentice

Raising Parental Income Test (PIT) debts for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Debt raising

Schoolkids Bonus

Late payment charge and interest under the Student Assistance Act 1973

Raising Fares Allowance (FAA) debts

Raising Parental Income Test (PIT) debts

Raising Family Pool debts

Raising ABSTUDY debts to the parent, guardian or institution

Notification provisions (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
