
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the different types of Family Assistance debts.

On this Page:

Identifying Family Tax Benefit debts

FTB debts are identified:

-   through the end of year reconciliation process
-   by a customer or approved care organisation notifying their
    circumstances have changed after the event has occurred or
-   through compliance activities

The main types of debts

There are four main types of FTB debts:

-   qualification
-   circumstance
-   reconciliation
-   non-lodger

FTB qualification debts

Qualification debts occur when a customer receives a payment for which
they were not eligible. This can occur if a customer:

receives more FTB and it is later determined that they were not a
resident of Australia, or

was in receipt of more than base rate of FTB and has failed to meet the
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

does not meet the eligibility requirements for:

-   individuals
-   grandparent carers
-   children in foster care

Raise qualification debts as soon as the loss of qualification is
identified.

FTB circumstance debts

A circumstance debt occurs from any changes, other than:

-   income and
-   maintenance income

Circumstance debts arise if a change in circumstances results in the
customer losing qualification to a payment. Raise the debt at the time
the change in circumstances is identified.

For example, FTB eligibility would cease from the day a child left care
where a customer notifies that a child left their care 1 month ago.
Raise the debt immediately.

Reconciliation debts

Reconciliation debts are a result of underestimating family income
and/or maintenance income.

Customers receiving FTB payments as fortnightly instalments or as a fee
reduction are usually paid based on an estimate of adjusted taxable
income for the financial year. If a customer received more than they
were entitled to for that financial year, they will have a
reconciliation debt.

Reconciliation debts can also be raised due to child income and
retrospective changes in circumstances.

Non-lodger debt

A non-lodger debt occurs when a customer or their partner does not lodge
an income tax return within the required time.

Contents

Duplicate payments of family assistance payments

Debt arising from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation debts where estimated or actual
income was used

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit (CCB) debts for the
2000-2001 income year

Qualification debt identified in FTB reconciliation result or when
completing activity that triggers FTB reconciliation

Manual Follow-ups (MFU) for family assistance reconciliation recovery

Related links

General debt raising information

Debt arising from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation debts where estimated or actual
income was used

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments arising from reconciliation

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

Child care debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
