-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines RDF table coding during an emergency event to
control debt raising and recovery. Access to these tables is for
authorised staff only.

For appropriately trained staff only.

Debt pausing for emergency events

Debt raising and recovery can be paused for customers in
disaster-impacted areas. Services Australia use postcode exclusions or a
national exclusion to implement this, such as during the activation of
the:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)

Coding RDF tables for emergency events

Coding the RDF tables with the impacted location postcodes or extending
emergency events, must be done manually. The following 3 tables are used
for emergency events:

DMN.EMG.Postcodes table has the impacted postcodes recorded. Only
customers with an address in those postcodes can have Situational
Hardship provisions applied. Customers with addresses in these recorded
postcodes are excluded from the following recovery actions:

-   Tax Garnishee
-   Automatic over-recovery re-allocation
-   Further interest charge being applied

DMN.Debt.Recovery.Pause table stores the switch that determines whether
Situational Hardship is ‘ON’ or Disaster automatic write off
functionality is ‘ON’. It also holds the configuration details for each
Debt Recovery pause.

DMN.Sus.Auto.Det.Raise.Debt table pauses some automatic debt raising
activities and activates flexible due date and informal account payable
functionality. This table also has the impacted postcodes recorded. This
table does not affect Families debts or Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
reconciliation debts, which have separate mechanisms for pausing debts
during emergencies

Treatment Pathway tool coding in Process Direct for emergency events

The Treatment Pathway tool affects debts in Process Direct. It
streamlines response to emergencies. It also provides a way to
specialise recovery treatments for individual or groups of customers.

The functionality is facilitated by rules, rule sets, cohorts and
campaigns where a:

-   ‘rule’ dictates the changed recovery action
-   ‘rule set’ is a collection of rules
-   ‘cohort’ is a group of customers, as defined by business rules
-   ‘campaign’ is the encompassing reason for wanting to change recovery

Related links

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Sending Account Payable letters

Debt Raising and Recovery for customers in locations affected by
disaster events

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
