
Using Debt Scripts in Customer Record 107-21031006

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides details on how to update user profile settings
and how to use debt scripts.

User profile settings

Before running the debt action script, ensure the user profile settings
are accurate. The details in the user profile settings dictate work
allocations and the details that populate in letters.

Debt Script transfer protocols

Resolve all customer calls at the first point of contact. While the
Transfer? screen may suggest transferring indigenous customers to the
Darwin Debt Recovery Unit. Only transfer customer, if:

-   the enquiry cannot be resolved at the first point of contact
-   there is a Display on Access (DOA) DOC advising recovery is being
    managed by a specific site, or
-   the customer asks to be referred to a different team

Debt Action Script

The Debt Action script is only available in Customer Record.

Use the Debt Action script in the Debt Management and Information System
(DMIS) to:

-   raise an undetermined debt
-   waive a full or partial debt
-   finalise an undetermined debt
-   amend a debt
-   manually add a debt record to DMIS if the system did not create one

The script asks questions to gather information about the debt. The
script will use the information:

-   to complete the activity
-   prepare a DOC, and
-   where required, prepare an advice

Debt Recovery Script

The Debt Recovery script is only available in Customer Record.

Use the Debt Recovery script to:

-   contact a customer when adding or modifying a payment
    arrangement/garnishee
-   send letters where required, including to third parties
-   write off or waive debts
-   record agreed missed payments
-   code or modify all arrangement types including cash and voluntary
    deductions

The Resources page provides document and letter text examples and a link
to calculators and tools.

Related links

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Debt investigation

Debt identification

Calculating Centrelink entitlements and gathering information when
investigating debts

Explaining and actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results
(AR) screen

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Rent Assistance (RA)

Net rent rules for Rent Assistance (RA)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers

General Centrelink debt recovery information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
