
Transferring debt repayments 107-05140020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Debt Management Officers (DMO) only.

This document outlines background information for transferring debt
repayments.

Transferring debt repayments

A transfer can be done when:

-   the debt is over recovered and the Debt Management Officer (DMO) has
    confirmed the amount is transferable to another debt
-   an identified system issue resulted in the repayment incorrectly
    applying to one debt when it should be on another debt

Transfer reasons

Over - recovered

If the customer has an over recovered debt, the process will depend on
whether:

-   there are other determined debts
-   there are other pending debts (that is, pending FTB reconciliation)
-   a debt adjustment caused the debt to over recover
-   the DMO has the authority to transfer the repayment source to
    another debt

Identified System Issue

The agency may identify a system issue which resulted in a repayment
incorrectly applying to a debt. For example, a dividend applies to the
incorrect debt instead of the debt under a current Debt Agreement.
Circumstances will vary, dependent on the identified system issue.

Note: this does not include situations where the customer requests a
repayment be applied to a specific debt. Do not transfer in these
situations. Funds are applied based on the debt payment hierarchy.

Family Assistance Offsetting

Take care with Work Items which relate to family assistance offsetting,
including the following repayment sources:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation top-ups and lump sum claim
    entitlements (including FTB supplements)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment arrears
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS) entitlements delivered at reconciliation
-   Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation top-ups and lump sum claim
    entitlements
-   Child Care Rebate (CCR) entitlements delivered at reconciliation
-   Tax refunds (excluding tax refunds received through garnishee
    action)

Do not transfer some family assistance offset amounts to other debts.
See the Transfer Rules table on the Resources page. This table
identifies how repayments display and whether they can be transferred.

Transferring to a third party's debt

On rare occasions, it may be suitable to transfer a repayment to a third
party's outstanding debt. For example, transfer third party withholdings
to the same third party if they now have an outstanding debt.

The Resources page contains a transfer rules table and contact details
to assist with consultation and referrals.

Related links

Debt repayments not on the customers record

Refunding debt repayments

Manual Follow-ups (MFUs) for family assistance reconciliation recovery

Transfers and refunds

Adjusting and adding debt repayments

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
