
Outbound customer contact and gathering information when recovering debts 107-05010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff undertaking debt recovery only.

This document outlines the process when contacting the customer,
gathering and verifying information, and making accurate decisions when
recovering debts.

Reasons for outbound contact

Outbound contact may be required when a debt is not paid in full, or is
not currently under a payment arrangement. The purpose of outbound
recovery is to negotiate a reasonable payment arrangement with the
customer. Contact can be through:

-   Debt Recovery SMS Nudge Messaging
-   automated dialler technology, or
-   manual attempts

The most common reason for outbound customer contact is to discuss a:

-   'No Arrangement' activity, or
-   'Broken Arrangement' activity

View these activities through Workload Management in Customer First.
Outbound work is not limited to these activities. Refer to this
procedure as well as the specific debt recovery procedures for the
different activity types, such as:

-   Payment arrangements
-   Arranging cash repayments to recover debts
-   Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts
-   Civil procedures to recover Centrelink debts
-   Departure Prohibition Orders (DPO) for Centrelink customers
-   What to do when a customer is bankrupt

After hours debt calls to customers

At times, outbound contact may occur outside of our usual contact times
of Monday to Friday 9.00am to 5.00pm, including on overtime.

If a customer asks why they are being contacted after hours, staff
should advise them that we have attempted to find the best time to
discuss their debt with them. Due to potential sensitivities, staff
should not mention that they are doing this work on overtime.

Debt staff are to record all customer contacts on a DOC.

Customer service delivery staff

If a customer asks about an after-hours call:

-   read the Customer Overview screen
-   confirm if the contact was legitimate

Cost effectiveness

Consider the cost effectiveness of recovery. Weigh up:

-   amount owed
-   the customer's circumstances, and
-   the relative cost of available recovery action should be taken into
    account

It is not cost effective to apply any garnishee on a customer if their
total debt balance is less than $200, unless it is a tax garnishee.

Privacy

Privacy is integral to the Service Commitment made by Services
Australia. Treat customer's personal information confidentially. Use the
information in an appropriate manner.

Protect the customer's privacy in all outbound recovery work.

Debt staff must:

-   introduce themselves, and
-   authenticate the identity of the caller

The Debt Recovery script prompts the staff member to ask the customer
certain questions. These questions assist with the negotiation.

Exercise caution when attempting contact with a customer or third party.
A third party includes a person or answering service where the
customer's name is not included in the greeting.

If leaving a message, ask the customer to return the call and include:

-   staff member name
-   identification (for example, Services Australia). Do not mention
    their team (for example, Compliance and Debt Operations)
-   a contact phone number, and
-   a contact deadline, for example, 'by 5:00pm dd/mm/yy'

Gathering information

Procedures must be followed when seeking information from customers and
third parties. Only information needed for the purposes of recovery can
be collected.

Consider the reliability of information obtained from third parties
before taking any action.

Phone calls are the preferred method of contact. Use letters:

-   to confirm phone discussions, or
-   where phone contact is not possible

Maintaining customer privacy is a fundamental part of the agency's
obligations. Before sending any debt notices, see Safeguarding customer
privacy when raising and recovering debts.

Electronic communication may be required when communicating with third
parties. Use this method when the preferred methods of communication
(that is, email or fax) are unavailable or not suitable.

Electronic communication must use a secured mail service and be sent
from a positional mailbox.

Do not use electronic communications through unsupported and unapproved
mediums.

The Resources page contains a link to the Symantec PGP user guide.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

Participants in this scheme receive a funded package of support. Bank
accounts held exclusively for the purposes of self-managing NDIS funds,
cannot be garnisheed. There is no requirement for participants to inform
Services Australia about this bank account.

Outbound dialler

The automated dialler calls numbers listed on the customer's Telephone
Summary (TDS) screen.

Repeated attempts to contact the customer will automatically continue
until:

-   a successful connection is detected, or
-   the maximum amount of attempts have been reached

Debt Recovery SMS Nudge Messaging

On 22 February 2021, Services Australia commenced sending Debt Recovery
SMS Nudge Messages notifying eligible customers to manage their debt
using:

-   Money You Owe in their Centrelink Online account, or
-   the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Eligible customers may receive the following Debt Recovery SMS Nudge
Messages:

Withholdings will restart, sent to current withholdable customers who:

-   are not under a withholdings arrangement, and
-   have one or more debts temporarily written off under a Disaster
    (DIS), Short Term Hardship (STH) or Outcome of Review/Appeal (ORA)
    code which will end in 4-6 days

Recovery will restart, sent to former and non-withholdable customers
who:

-   are not under an arrangement, and
-   have one or more debts temporarily written off under a Disaster
    (DIS), Short Term Hardship (STH) or Outcome of Review/Appeal (ORA)
    code which will end in 4-6 days

Recovery restarted, sent to former and non-withholdable customers who:

-   are not under an arrangement, and
-   had one or more debts temporarily written off under a Disaster
    (DIS), Short Term Hardship (STH) or Outcome of Review/Appeal (ORA)
    code which ended 8-10 days prior

Debt due soon, sent to former and non-withholdable customers who:

-   are not under an arrangement
-   have one or more debts which are due in 3-5 days, and
-   have one or more debts which are not written off

Debt overdue, sent to former and non-withholdable customers who:

-   are not under an arrangement
-   have one or more debts which were due 7-9 days prior, and
-   have one or more debts which are not written off

Service Recovery:

-   SMS messaging is now being used in conjunction with Service Recovery
    processes
-   impacted customers will be contacted by this method where outbound
    call attempts are unsuccessful

Disaster, sent to customers who:

-   have a debt
-   are in a current payment arrangement, and
-   live in the areas impacted by the Victorian Storms and Floods - June
    2021
-   Note: due to system limitations, the SMS is not visible on the
    customer's record

Overdue payment, sent to eligible former and non-withholdable customers
who:

-   have entered into a cash payment arrangement, and
-   failed to make the cash payment which is now 5-7 days past due

Declined payment, sent to eligible former and non-withholdable
customers:

-   who have entered into a direct debit payment arrangement, and
-   where the direct debit payment was declined and it is now 7-9 days
    after the due date

Customers may contact the agency in response to a Debt Recovery SMS
Nudge Message. Check the customer's record for a DOC identifying the SMS
sent and the recommended action. There may be a delay between the
sending of the SMS and the recording of a DOC. If there is no DOC, check
the Debt List (OPDL), Arrangement List (OPAL) and Write-off (OPWO)
screens to identify the required action.

Resolve customer calls at the first point of contact. See General
Centrelink debt recovery information.

If a customer advises they have received an SMS incorrectly or would
like to unsubscribe from electronic messaging, see Centrelink letters
online and Electronic Messaging.

Before 14 May 2021, Debt Recovery SMS Nudge Messages were:

-   sent using a bulk issue messaging platform, not via the system, and
-   not visible on the History Summary (HS) screen or using the Outbound
    Correspondence tool

From 17 May 2021, Debt Recovery SMS Nudge Messages are sent via the
system. Messages sent from this date will be visible:

-   on the Customer Overview screen for 7 days after they are issued
-   on the History Summary (HS) screen, or
-   using the Outbound Correspondence tool

Note: Debt Recovery SMS Nudge Messages do not contain personal
information and they abide by Privacy and Secrecy Principles.

Fast Notes

Fast Note is a tool that creates DOCs, using nationally endorsed
templates. This assists in documenting the actions taken on a customer
record. Fast Notes must be used wherever the Debt Recovery script is
not.

The Resources page contains a list of Debt Recovery Fast Notes.

Warnings

Notices are sent to customers regularly warning them about actions that
may occur if they do not:

-   enter into a reasonable payment arrangement, or
-   adhere to an agreed arrangement

See the Resources page in Garnishees for types of warnings and which
letters contain warnings.

Non-current customers

Refer non-current customers to the Specialised Recovery Team (SRT) if
they have:

-   debts greater than $10,000, and
-   a capacity to repay in full, or
-   increase their recovery rate due to significant savings or property
    equity

The Resources page contains a list of Fast Notes used by Debt Recovery
and instructions for when to use them, plus a User Guide to the secure
Symantec PGP Universal Web Messenger.

Related links

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Roles and quality service standards for debt raising and recovery staff

Safeguarding customer privacy when raising and recovering debts

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Reviewing cash arrangements

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Garnishees

Using Debt Scripts in Customer Record

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
