-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the garnishee of tax refunds to
recover debts via the auto tax garnishee process. It includes how to
respond to garnishee enquiries from customers.

The tax garnishee process

Customers not receiving payments who have an outstanding debt without a
payment arrangement are clients of interest (COI).

Automatic COI matching with the Australian Tax Office (ATO) Taxpayer
Records System may occur.

When a COI lodges their tax return, the ATO may send some or all of
their tax refund to repay debt owed to the agency.

Tax garnishee decisions are not made in advance. Staff cannot confirm
with customers whether a garnishee will occur.

The tax garnishee process is conducted in the following stages:

A tax garnishee warning letter is issued to COI that are eligible for
tax garnishee. The letter advises that the agency may ask the ATO to use
amounts from tax refunds or similar payments to recover debt

The following customer data is automatically sent to the ATO:

-   Customer Reference Number (CRN)
-   Customer's surname and either first or middle names
-   Customer's date of birth, and
-   Postcode of the customer’s address

COI matching to the ATO occurs, and an indicator is put on both records.
The ATO sends mismatches or multiple matches to the Debt Programme for
follow up

The ATO sends a trigger to the agency when a COI lodges their tax return
or activity statement, and a refund or credit is due. The Debt
Management Information System (DMIS) checks if the customer has any
debts eligible for garnishee and where the customer:

-   is not currently receiving a payment
-   does not have a current or broken payment arrangement with the
    agency, and
-   no repayments have been received in the last 14 days

An electronic response automatically returns to the ATO. Services
Australia will issue the garnishee notice to the postal address on the
tax return. The garnishee notice goes to the customer's last known
address recorded with the department if the tax return is:

-   lodged by a tax agent
-   an activity statement return

The ATO returns the funds to the agency electronically with details
going into DMIS and ESSentials

Potential mismatches are then referred to an ATO Liaison Officer

Note:

Between 1 January 2017 and 2 April 2017 debts recoverable under the
Family Assistance (Administration) Act 1999 or the Paid Parental Leave
Act 2010 were eligible for garnishee at any time. Some people's tax
refunds may have been automatically garnisheed even if they had a
current payment arrangement or they were receiving a Centrelink payment.
This was correct processing.

Treatment of Tax Garnishee for Interest Charge Purposes

Tax garnishees are not an acceptable recovery arrangement for Interest
Charge (IC) purposes. Where garnishee of a tax refund occurs interest
will continue to calculate and be charged.

For more details, see Interest charge for Centrelink debtors no longer
receiving payments.

Family assistance tax refund offset

The tax garnishee process is unrelated to tax refund offsetting that
happens with the ATO during family assistance reconciliation.

The automatic garnishee process determines if the customer has a family
assistance debt subject to offsetting before applying a tax garnishee.
This ensures the tax garnishee and family assistance tax refund offset
do not occur simultaneously for the same debt/s.

Minimum amount for garnishees

It is not cost effective to garnishee a tax refund when the CRN balance
outstanding is less than $20.

Tax refund amount and enquiries from customers and/or tax agents

Never tell a customer, their nominee or tax agent if a tax refund will
be garnisheed. This is regardless of whether the debt is included in the
tax garnishee process. This is important as tax garnishee decisions
cannot be made in advance.

Non debt staff speaking to customers worried about a tax garnishee
should transfer the call to Debt Recovery.

A statement of account is included with the Notice of Assessment (NOA)
if a tax garnishee is deducted from the refund. These notices are sent
by the ATO. The statement of account will detail garnishees applied by
the agency as 'Credit offset to Centrelink'.

Refer customer’s queries about tax refund amounts, after they receive
their NOA, to tax agents for explanation. The agency does not support
tax agents withholding money from customer’s tax refunds to repay agency
debt outside of the existing process.

Electronic garnishee transaction/s to the ATO

The automated tax garnishee process meets all legislative requirements
under:

-   Section 1233 of the Social Security Act 1991
-   Section 89 of the Family Assistance (Administration) Act 1999
-   Section 42 of the Student Assistance Act 1973, and
-   Section 184 of the Paid Parental Leave Act 2010

It is not a legislative requirement for people to be warned or issued a
garnishee warning letter prior to a garnishee being implemented.
However, legislation requires the department to provide a copy of the
garnishee notice to the debtor.

Tax garnishees and refunds

Once a customer is identified as a COI the garnishee must proceed. If a
customer requests a refund, the decision to refund any amount is made by
the agency. There is no legal requirement for the agency to refund an
amount if the garnishee is implemented correctly.

There may be exceptional and unforeseen circumstances that place the
customer in real financial hardship. In these instances a full or
partial refund of the garnishee amount may be considered. See review of
the garnishee decision. Consider the individual circumstances of each
case when assessing if a refund is appropriate.

In certain circumstances the ATO may perform a tax assessment manually.
The ATO will contact the Payment and Integrity Strategy Operations team
if a manual tax assessment or adjustment is required.

Policy contains links to Accountable Authority instructions (AAI).

The Resources page contains a link to the Debt Program intranet page. It
also has a list of tax garnishee screens in Customer First and a list of
tax garnishee examples.

Related links

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Tax agents authority to enquire on behalf of customers

Transfers and refunds

Garnishee customer does not agree with decision

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Interest charge for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
