
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Policy

Guide to Social Security Law, 6.7.1.10, Debts Due to the Commonwealth

Paid Parental Leave Guide, 7.3, Debt recovery

Family Assistance Guide, 7.1.1, FA debts - general provisions

Family Assistance Guide, 7.2.1, Debt recovery - general provisions

Accountable Authority Instructions (AAI)

ABSTUDY/Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Links to the ABSTUDY Policy Manual and the AIC Scheme guidelines point
to consolidated pdf or docx documents. Select the document and navigate
to the appropriate reference(s) listed below.

For information about ABSTUDY overpayment and recovery of allowances,
see Chapter 3 and click on the relevant link.

ABSTUDY Policy Manual, Part I Administration of ABSTUDY, Overpayments
and Recovery of Allowances

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Policy Guidelines, 7.3.3,
Recovery of debt

Legislation

Links to the Federal Register of Legislation site go to a 'Series' page.
Select the 'Latest' version.

Social Security Act 1991, section 1222A, Debts due to the Commonwealth

Student Assistance Act 1973, section 39, Debts are recoverable by the
Commonwealth

A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999, section
70, Debts due to the Commonwealth

Social Security Act 1991, part 5.2, Amounts recoverable under this Act

A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999, part 4,
division 1, Preliminary

Paid Parental Leave Act 2010, part 4-3, Debt recovery

Student Assistance Act 1973, part 6, section 38, What is a Debt?

Agreements and arrangements

Services Australia relationships with other government departments are
bound by a high-level multilateral strategic partnership document. There
are several detailed Bilateral Management Arrangements (BMA), each
between the agency and individual departments.

BMAs specify Commonwealth services to be provided by Services Australia
and conditions applying to their provision. They improve assurance and
provide greater transparency of the agency's performance in meeting:

-   service delivery outcomes
-   risk management and
-   accuracy targets

See Department of Social Services (DSS) Relationship Team.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
