
Active recovery of outstanding Medicare debt 107-21042133

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to follow up outstanding Medicare
debts.

For Medicare Debt Management Officers (DMO) only

Active recovery

'Active recovery' is the increased effort to pursue recovery of an
outstanding debt. It involves contacting customers with debt that
remains unpaid after the due date.

Active debt recovery can include matters such as:

-   customer contact and privacy
-   the recovery of debt from deceased customers
-   debt disputes
-   bankruptcy, and
-   release of information within the agency

See the Process page for more information.

Payment options

Payment options include:

-   BPAY®
-   Direct Deposit (Electronic Funds Transfer)
-   cheques and money orders

See the Resources page for payment options.

Instalment Plans

Customers may have the option of repaying debts by instalments.
Instalment plans should have the debt repaid within 6 months. All
instalment plans require approval by a delegate.

Guidelines for the application of interest

Medicare will not charge interest if the customer has an instalment plan
and are paying regularly.

If a customer defaults on an instalment, interest rates may apply under
the:

-   Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA),
    or
-   Health Insurance Act 1973 (HIA)

Each Medicare program has different interest requirements.

Medicare Australia may impose interest on the outstanding balance of the
debt at the rate prescribed, accrued daily. See the Resources page for
interest rates.

The Resources page contains links to customer contact standards, the
instalment plan template, payment options, contact details, help with
using your Cisco phone and a table of Assignment field values.

Related links

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Dunning for Medicare debt

Financial adjustments for Medicare debt

General administration for Medicare debt

Online Search (OLS) facility

Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
