
New Zealand Agreement outgoing embargo – action for International Services (CIS) 107-04040060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Centrelink International Services (CIS) staff only.

This document outlines information for staff in International Services
(CIS) about the policy and process under the Agreement with New Zealand
that allows for recovery of New Zealand debts by embargo from Australian
pension arrears associated with a new claim.

Recovery by embargo from Australian arrears

The Agreement with New Zealand provides for direct embargo. For
information on Australian embargo from NZ pension arrears, see
Comparable Foreign Payment (CFP) lump sum arrears debts. A different
procedure applies to recovery by withholdings under the Agreement.

Under the terms of the Agreement, where a customer is granted a payment
by Australia and is paid arrears and the arrears would result in a debt
owing to NZ, upon request, Australia will hold the arrears and send them
direct to the NZ authorities. The NZ authorities then recover the NZ
debt from the Australian arrears and send the remaining amount, if any,
to the customer. These 'outgoing' embargoes, that is, Australia sending
monies to another country, although provided for in some other
agreements, is unique to the Agreement with New Zealand.

The NZ authorities request an embargo for each Australian pension claim
that is lodged in New Zealand. When processing the claim for an
Australian payment under the Agreement, specialist coding in the new
claim activity diverts the arrears to a temporary holding account.

Reconciliation

Schedules detailing individual arrears amounts for each customer are
sent to CIS via email. CIS send the schedule to New Zealand and
authorise the Finance Team in Zone Tasmania to remit the funds to the
nominated New Zealand account.

All information for processing NZ embargoes should be available in the
first week of each month. The agreed arrangement is for Australia to
send the monthly schedule and payment to New Zealand by the 15th of each
month.

The Resources contains links to the International Services homepage and
International Programme homepage.

Related links

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign Pension coding

Foreign pension claims

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
