
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts 107-19060301

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct.

On this Page:

CCS debts

CCS debts are raised and recovered in Process Direct.

To access CCS debts in Process Direct see Resources page, CCS Debt
Resource Code requests.

To view the debts in Customer First and Customer Record use:

-   Debt List (OPDL) screen, and
-   Debt List (Financial Customer Care)

Reviewing CCS debts and repayments in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)

After a CCS debt is raised in Process Direct staff can see the debt
details within Debt Management and Information System (DMIS). It will
assign a Debt ID number. View details of the debt on the:

-   Debt List Screen (OPDL)
-   General Information (OPGI)
-   Modify/Assess screen (OPMA)
-   Process Direct Debt Details (OPDSD)

The debt tile in Process Direct can assist to identify the cause of the
debt. The Debt Explanation Tool (ADEX) is not available for CCS.

Repayment from any source made to a CCS debt is displayed on the Process
Direct Repayment Status (OPPR) screen.

Cash arrangements and voluntary deduction arrangements

Cash arrangements do not stop withholding for CCS customers. The system
will start a withholding for a customer if the customer has a CCS debt
and is a current CCS customer.

Process Direct will not allow cash and voluntary arrangements for CCS
debts. Use the Debt Recovery script in Customer First or Customer
Record. See Arranging cash repayment to recover debts

Non Debt Management staff, see Debt Management Branch (DMB) customer
contacts page for the Debt Recovery Team details.

Debt and general withholding

CCS can have 2 types of withholding:

-   general reconciliation (standard rate 5%)
-   debt recovery (standard rate 20%)

The agency applies a standard 5% withholding to all CCS customers, the
customer does not need to have a CCS debt for this to occur. The amount
taken is to minimise any potential debt calculated during reconciliation
at the end of the financial year.

The agency will apply an additional withholding of 20% if the customer
has a CCS debt.

For more information on the general reconciliation withholding see Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings.

CCS withholdings from a customer’s ongoing entitlement

A customer’s ongoing CCS entitlement will be used to recover outstanding
child care debts. This will include:

-   Child Care Benefit
-   Child Care Rebate, and
-   Child Care Subsidy

For more information, see Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in
Process Direct .

Non CCS withholding arrangements

The system limits one withholding arrangement per customer.

If a customer has a withholding arrangement in DMIS, Process Direct will
not withhold their CCS payments to repay a debt.

Customers can request a withholding arrangement from a non-CCS payment
to repay their CCS debts.

See Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts.

Third party withholdings

Third party withholdings for CCS debts need to have arrangement recorded
in DMIS.

Non-current CCS customers or zero rate customers

Standard debt recovery processes apply. See General Centrelink debt
recovery information.

Interest Charges

Debts managed in Process Direct rely on interest charge processes
established within DMIS.

Use Update Interest to get an up-to-date calculation (up to the day
prior) for a final payout figure. Apply this in both DMIS and Process
Direct, if the customer has debts in both systems. See Recovering Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct.

Standard interest charges apply for CCS debts, see Interest Charge (IC)
for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments.

Writing off a CCS debt

Debt write offs must be performed by a Debt Management Officer (DMO),
refer case to Debt Management Branch (DMB) if a write off needs to be
considered. See Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process
Direct.

Waiving CCS Debts

For information on waiving a CCS debt, see Raising Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) debts in Process Direct.

Over recovered debts and refunds

For information on over recovered debts and refunds, see Recovering
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct.

Related links

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) screens

Debt screens in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
