
Recovery from mutually liable co-debtors 107-05090030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Debt Staff only

This document outlines recovery for cases where two or more customers
(co-debtors) have mutual liability to repay a debt.

Jointly and severally liable co-debtor

A jointly and severally liable co-debtor can be a person who knowingly
engaged in an action where another person obtained money. This action
must contravene a provision of the Social Security Act 1991 or Family
Assistance (Administration) Act 1999, and:

-   convictions for the offence/s committed are successful for both
    people, and
-   the people are jointly and severally liable to repay all or part of
    the debt as directed by the judge

In addition to those that are the result of a court judgement, co-debtor
liability can occur:

-   for a debt incurred during the Assurance of Support (AoS) period
    where there is more than one assurer
-   because of non-compliance with a garnishee notice

Primary co-debtor

The primary debtor is always the customer the debt has initially been
raised against.

When pursuing these debts, staff can use all recovery methods. For
deceased customers, recovery can occur from the estate. The individual
finance circumstance of the customer should determine their rate of
repayments. The other party's rate of recovery should not influence the
customer's rate of repayments.

If the primary co-debtor passes away, their estate can be pursued for
payment. After recovery from the estate, re-raise the outstanding
balance against the co-debtor. This is when the co-debtor liability was
for the full amount of the debt. If there are multiple co-debtors they
must be re-linked after the debt is re-raised. Reduce the debt on the
primary co-debtor record by the amount recovered. Include any amount
collected from the settlement of the primary customer's estate.

Co-debtor provisions

Co-debtor provisions do not apply where third parties make unauthorised
withdrawal of funds paid after the death of a customer. There are no
legal grounds for debt recovery under social security law. An exception
is when a person is convicted of collusion with the social security
recipient to defraud the Commonwealth.

It is the responsibility of the administrator/executor of the deceased
customer's estate to pursue a case under criminal law. This will include
raising a debt against the deceased estate. See:

-   Death of an income support customer or their partner
-   Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

This includes where an executor or joint account holder has withdrawn
funds. See Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer
for more information.

Multiple liability co-debtor debts and Interest Charge

When both parties are eligible, then Interest charge (IC) will apply. If
either party has a payment arrangement or exclusion in place, both
parties will be excluded from an Interest Charge.

Limited liability

Limited liability will apply when a court has determined the amount each
co-debtor must re-pay.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk
Intranet page.

Related links

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Raising Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

Recovery from non complying garnishee debtors

Recovery of Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

Actioning non-compliant and broken garnishee recovery arrangements

Debts where more than one person is liable for recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
