
Quarantine of Centrelink debts 107-20061706

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia can Quarantine a debt to
exclude it from recovery and other debt actions.

Objective

Sometimes certain debts need to be removed from the debt recovery
process. Services Australia has created a Quarantine status to address
this need.

The Quarantine status:

-   allows a debt to remain in the Debt Management and Information
    System (DMIS), without any form of impact on the customer
-   ensures proper consideration is given to address any issues related
    to the debt

Note: placing a debt on hold is different to placing a debt in
Quarantine. See Un-holding an undetermined debt activity.

Application of the status

The delegate must have the DMISAO administrative access to:

-   Quarantine a debt, and
-   End a Quarantine period

APS 5 and above staff can request DMISA0 access via ICT Security Portal.
See the Resources page for a link. The request will flow through to Debt
Programme and Compensation Recovery (DPCR) Correspondence and Systems
team.

View debt in Quarantine

The system will place a Display on Access (DoA) DOC on the customer's
record when a Quarantine period begins. This DoA DOC will expire when
the last debt in Quarantine ends.

The agency will not pursue active debt recovery for debts in Quarantine.
Quarantine debts will not display on the standard Debt List (OPDL) view.

To view Quarantined debts:

-   select View 'PRK' on Debt List (OPDL), or
-   go to Debt List for Parked Debts (OPDLP)

Debts that cannot be placed in Quarantine

Subject to the conditions mentioned above, users can put a debt in
Quarantine if the debt status is:

-   DET – Determined, or
-   DWO – Written off

Do not put debts with the following debt reason code/type in Quarantine:

-   ASB – Assurance of Support Bond Recovery
-   DVA – Receipt of DVA payment
-   DVC – DVA Clearance

See table on the Resources page, for a list of debt types excluded from
the Quarantine function.

The Resources page has contact details for the Debt Programme and
Compensation Recovery (DPCR) Branch and links to the ICT Security Portal
and mySupport.

Related links

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Continuing payments pending review (PPR)

Waiving Centrelink debts

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Six Year Limitation Write off

Automatic referrals of Centrelink debts to an External Collection Agent
(ECA)

Bankruptcy for Centrelink debts

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Tax garnishees to recover debts

Family and domestic violence

Recovery of debts pending a reassessment, explanation or review of
decision

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
