
Withholdings 107-05020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the different types of withholdings applied to
recover debts.

Standard withholdings

Standard withholdings automatically apply to current customers if:

-   they have not repaid their debt in full by the due date, or
-   they have not contacted Services Australia to arrange another
    withholding rate

Until the debt reaches its due date, the customer's record will display
as:

-   'No active arrangements' in Customer First
-   'No arrangements exist' in Process Direct

A debt is not due and payable until 28 days after the issue date of the
Account Payable notice.

For Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts, a letter is sent to the customer
advising when automatic withholdings will start. This will include what
percentage of their subsidy will be withheld.

For all other debts, the start date for automatic withholdings is not
quoted on the Account Payable letter. If a customer cannot pay in full
by the due date, they should contact Services Australia to negotiate an
arrangement.

When a customer contacts about their debt, negotiate:

-   payment in full, or
-   partial lump sum payment

If the customer cannot afford this, discuss a reduced rate.

Non-standard withholdings

A customer may ask for reduced withholdings if they are in financial
hardship.

Staff should:

-   help the customer at the first point of contact
-   consider their income and asset details as recorded on the system
-   ask what they can afford
-   negotiate a reduced rate

Accept the customer's offer if it meets or exceeds the:

-   family assistance minimum acceptable withholding level (for family
    assistance debts)
-   minimum acceptable withholding level (for all other debts)

See the Resources page for withholding levels.

Refer payment offers that do not meet the acceptable withholding level
to Debt Recovery.

Note: do not disclose the minimum acceptable amounts or periods to
customers.

Automatic re-instatement of non-standard withholdings through Money you owe and Express Plus App

Customers with non-standard withholdings who apply a DIS pause to their
debt repayments through Money you owe or the Express plus App, will have
their non-standard withholdings automatically re-instated at the same
rate as immediately prior to the pause, for a further 3 months.

Minimum acceptable withholding level

The rate of withholdings is based on the payment the withholdings are
being deducted from, not the payment the debt is for.

If the withholding rate offered by the customer is equal to or more than
the amount listed staff:

-   should accept the offer
-   do not need to verify a customer's financial circumstances

See the Resources page for withholding levels.

Withholdings reviews

Non-standard arrangements that meet the minimum acceptable withholding
level have an arrangement end date. The arrangements are reviewed:

-   automatically after 3 months
-   based on the customer's income and assets as recorded on the system
-   to help identify customers with a capacity to repay their debt at a
    higher rate. In these cases a letter is sent 21 days before the
    arrangement end date

Standard withholdings will automatically reapply if:

-   the arrangement has ended and there has been no contact from the
    customer
-   the withholdings were manually ended

If needed, extend the customer's current arrangement, after:

-   checking their income and assets recorded on the system, and
-   confirming how much they can afford

For:

-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts, see Recovering Child Care Subsidy
    (CCS) debts in Process Direct
-   all other debts, see Reviewing a withholding arrangement for
    recovering a debt

Note: a warning will appear when using the Debt Repayment guided
procedure due to the default repayment option. Update the payment option
to 'Withholdings' to remove this warning.

Refer the customer to Debt Programme if their repayment offer does not
meet the acceptable withholding level.

Withholdings from arrears

Pension bonus payments and arrears can be withheld to recover a debt.
This is possible when the debt:

-   was raised at least 28 days in the past, and
-   is due and payable

The agency can withhold Parental Leave Pay (PPL) arrears to repay a PPL
overpayment or income support payment (ISP) overpayment if both occurs
in the same activity. The offset will occur so a payment does not issue
and subsequently raise a debt on the same day. See Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) debt raising, debt offsetting and recovery.

Splitting withholdings

Withholdings should not be split across different payment types.

Third Party withholdings

A customer may request a third party withholding arrangement to repay
their debt if they are:

-   not a current Income Support Payment (ISP) recipient, or receives a
    payment that cannot be withheld, and
-   unable to enter a payment arrangement

Refer the customer to Debt Recovery. For more details see Third party
withholdings for debt recovery.

Withholdings letters

When a withholding rate is applied to a payment, an entitlement letter
is issued that shows the amount to be withheld. Do not issue a manual
letter.

Family assistance non-reconciliation withholding rates

When the only debt/s outstanding is/are family assistance reconciliation
or re-reconciliation debt/s, the family assistance reconciliation
withholding rate will be applied.

Different withholding arrangements apply if a customer has a family
assistance reconciliation debt and another type of debt. This includes:

-   Qualification
-   Circumstance
-   Non-lodger
-   Non-family assistance

If the customer is:

-   getting an income support payment - withholdings apply to that
    payment
-   not getting an income support payment - withholdings apply at
    specific rates to their FTB payment

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Manage CCS debts in Process Direct. Users can only view a CCS debt in
DMIS.

If a customer has an outstanding CCS or Child Care Benefit (CCB)/Child
Care Rebate (CCR) debt and have not fully paid the debt by the due date,
withholdings will commence for their CCS entitlement.

Do not apply further withholdings to recover a CCS debt if the customer
has:

-   other outstanding debt(s), and
-   a withholding arrangement already in place

The CCS debt will form part of the debt repayment hierarchy.

Recover CCS debt from withholdings of CCS entitlement and/or other
income support payments

Do not use withholdings from a customer's ongoing CCS entitlement or any
other CCS arrears to recover non child care debts.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

From 12 September 2020, standard withholdings apply to PPL only for the
recovery of PPL debts.

Deductions from PPL instalments can occur for the recovery of non-PPL
debts if the customer:

-   voluntarily requests deductions, and
-   authorises the request in writing, and
-   determines the amount of the deduction

The customer can withdraw their authority at any time.

Note: customers cannot request withholdings from DAP.

Income support payment (ISP) debts due to PPL or DAP

The agency can withhold PPL and DAP to pay an ISP debt if the customer's
ISP debt is a result of PPL/DAP overlapping the ISP.

PPL/DAP withholding can only apply to ISP debts for the period which
PPL/DAP overlaps resulting in the debt. PPL/DAP cannot be used to
recover ISP debts outside the overlapping period (unless PPL withholding
is authorised by the customer).

See the References page for a link to the Paid Parental Leave Act of
2010.

The Resources page has the minimum acceptable withholding levels.

Contents

Reviewing a withholding arrangement for recovering a debt

Standard withholdings for debt recovery

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Third party withholdings for debt recovery

Related links

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Recovering debts pending review of decisions

Reviewing a withholding arrangement for recovering a debt

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Sending Account Payable letters

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Financial circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Online estimator options

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
