
General debt information 107-01000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines an overview of all aspects of debt processing.

Government Intent

Debt servicing is an important part of Centrelink's core business. It is
important we service customer accounts quickly, accurately and in a
sensitive manner. This is central to achieving customer service, partner
agency and efficiency goals.

Debt servicing

Debt servicing includes:

-   prevention
-   identification
-   calculation
-   raising
-   debt and compensation recovery

The Getting it Right strategy

The Getting It Right strategy is a key strategy for the organisation.
Pay the right person the right payment at the right time under the right
program. Debt Management enhances the getting it right strategy through
customer profiling and risk management strategies. Priorities, delivery
arrangements and causes of debts are analysed to target high risk areas.

The agency has a responsibility to protect government revenue by
recovering debts efficiently and effectively.

Maintaining customer privacy when raising or recovering debts

Maintaining customer privacy is a fundamental part of the agency's
obligations. See Safeguarding customer privacy when raising and
recovering debts, before contacting a customer or issuing a debt notice.
Take the appropriate actions to protect the customer's privacy.

Recovery fees

Certain debts raised from 1 July 2006 will have a 10% Recovery Fee
applied.

-   Working age customers who do not declare their earnings correctly,
    may have a recovery fee added to their debt for: refusing or failing
    to report income, or
-   knowingly or recklessly misreporting income from their own exertion,
    without a reasonable excuse

Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)

DMIS is a national database designed for:

-   recording
-   raising and
-   recovering of debts

Reports are available for viewing and/or printing from DMIS.

Financial Customer Care in Customer First

For information about locating debts in Customer First, see Viewing and
updating Interest Charge (IC) via Financial Customer Care in Customer
First.

Process Direct

A new Debt application was developed to action overpayments created in
Process Direct. This was due to system limitations in the DMIS.

Data transfer to DMIS occurs for debts raised and recovered in Process
Direct. This ensures all details of a customer's outstanding balance and
status of all debts.

Related links

Tax agents authority to enquire on behalf of customers

Safeguarding customer privacy when raising and recovering debts

Roles and quality service standards for debt raising and recovery staff

Delegations of managing debt

Debt raising over duplicate, multiple or intertwined Customer Reference
Numbers (CRN)

How to code and action a manual review

Debts and nominees

Debt ownership

Inter-environment transfer of debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
