
Garnishee of continuing income to recover debts 107-05050010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Debt Staff responsible for putting in place garnishees.

This document outlines the procedure to apply a garnishee of a
customer's continuing income, such as wages or weekly compensation
payments.

Considerations before placing garnishee

Recovery of debt must be quick and efficient without causing financial
hardship to customers. Recovery arrangements include:

-   full cash payments
-   recovery by instalments
-   withholdings, and
-   garnishee action

Staff must:

-   review a customer's record carefully before applying a garnishee,
    and
-   contact the customer to make sure that applying the garnishee is
    appropriate

A customer may prefer to organise a payment in full rather than be
subject to a garnishee notice.

Before garnishee action can be taken, staff must try to negotiate
payment by all available voluntary methods. Garnishee action can occur
if the customer:

-   does not respond to contact by letter or phone
-   failed to enter into a reasonable arrangement
-   had arrangement/s they did not keep
-   failed to disclose details about their true capacity to repay

Where a customer refuses to enter into a payment arrangement, garnishee
action can proceed without any further contact. If the customer retracts
their refusal statement, agree on a payment arrangement if garnishee has
not already applied.

Note: use of tax refunds to repay an outstanding Centrelink debt can
occur even if the customer has a current garnishee or payment
arrangement. For more details, see Tax garnishees to recover debts.

Child Support and garnishees

Do not garnishee Child Support payments.

Customers may have more than one garnishee on their continuing income
(for example, a Child Support and Centrelink garnishee). No garnishee
takes precedence over others. Customers should contact all creditors who
have issued a garnishee notice and negotiate an equitable outcome for
all parties.

There is no protected earnings amount for Centrelink garnishees (except
Child Support payments). A customer's financial situation should always
be taken into consideration. If recorded information is less than 3
months old, use this to set the rate of the garnishee.

Where no current information is available, the rate for a garnishee
should be the normal garnishee instalment rate.

Garnishee notices

Address the garnishee notice to the legal business/company name, not the
trading name. Locate the company's legal name via the 'ABN Lookup' link
on the Resources page.

Find out if the customer has another name or recorded alias before
actioning a garnishee. If the employer knows the customer by another
name the garnishee notice must be issued in the customer's main name as
well as the customer's other known name or alias. For example, Judy
Resident also known as (AKA) Judy Citizen. Only include aliases on a
garnishee notice when the employer advises they do not know the customer
by their main name on the customer record.

The use of email to send and receive garnishee correspondence is not our
preferred contact method. However if the use of email is required this
should be through PGP secure webmail.

When issuing a garnishee notice, carefully consider the appropriate pay
start date:

-   The date must be no earlier than 15 days after the notice is issued
-   If sending the notice via post, you must allow an additional 8
    calendar days for potential postage delays
-   The auto populated start date may need to be manually altered due to
    script limitations

Garnishee to a sole trader or partnership

If issuing a garnishee to partnerships, such as legal or accounting
firms, address the notice to one partner. This makes that partner
responsible in law. Address the garnishee to the legal business/company
name rather than any trading name. Stamp 'Staff-in-Confidence' on the
envelope of all wage garnishee notices. Where the notice is marked for
attention of a person or position, this name is to be after the
business/company name.

Where a customer is a sole trader in a business, the business is not a
separate legal entity. Hence, money owed to the business is money owed
to the customer. This money can be subject to garnishee action.

Privacy

All requests for information from an employer must be in writing. Staff
should use the Q609 letter to request information from an employer. Do
not obtain Information regarding the customer's employment status or
gross wage over the phone.

Employment details are often located through Single Touch Payroll (STP)
data matches and Tax Declaration Form (TDF) debtor matching reviews.
Advise the customer of any data matches before taking administrative
action or checking the information with a third party. See Single Touch
Payroll debt recovery data match or Tax Declaration Form (TDF) Debtor
matching reviews.

Interest charge and garnishee of continuing income

Non-current customers with debt(s) without a payment arrangement may
have Interest Charge's (IC) applied. Interest Charges only apply to
customers aware of their debt. Customers can avoid interest charges by:

-   paying the debt in full
-   continually making repayments under an existing payment arrangement,
    or
-   entering into an acceptable payment arrangement and paying an
    instalment within 28 days from the date of the notice

Interest continues accruing until the employer remits the first payment
and the arrangement status changes to CURrent. Consider accrued interest
after garnishee implementation for IC exclusion.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains:

-   a link to 'ABN Lookup', which is part of the Australian Business
    Register (ABR)
-   contact details for the Debt Finance team, and
-   examples of assessing garnishee instalment rates

Related links

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Third party withholdings for debt recovery

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Single Touch Payroll debt recovery data match

Actioning non-compliant and broken garnishee recovery arrangements

Using Debt Scripts in Customer Record

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
