
What to do with Bankruptcy Act Part IX Debt Arrangements and Bankruptcy Act Part X Personal Insolvency Agreements (PIAs) 107-05070040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Debt Management Officers (DMO) only.

This document outlines debt recovery action when a debtor has an
agreement under the Bankruptcy Act. Agreements are an alternative to
bankruptcy.

Debt agreements

This is a way for debtors to negotiate a binding compromise with their
creditors. It is based on their expected income from all sources,
household expenses and circumstances.

The Australian Financial Security Authority (AFSA) website explains how
debt agreements work.

Personal insolvency agreements (PIA)

To propose a PIA, a debtor must be unable to pay all their debts. There
are no income, asset or debt limits.

The debtor appoints a trustee to take control of their property and make
a proposal to creditors.

The AFSA website explains how PIAs work.

Agreement proposals

When a proposal is received, cease debt recovery.

If creditors vote to:

-   accept the proposal, all creditors receive the same amount over the
    same period
-   reject the proposal, restart debt recovery

Services Australia does not need to vote unless the debt amount in the
proposal is much different to the debt balance.

Variation or termination

The debt administrator informs the agency of changes or default by the
debtor.

The agency may need to take action for new or adjusted debts.

Debtors will not be released from the debts covered by the agreement
until the Official Receiver issues a certificate.

After an agreement ends, the agency can only recover debts that were
incurred by fraud.

Escalation

If a case is unusual or not covered in Operational Blueprint , discuss
the case with the APS5 Bankruptcy Officer. The APS5 will refer to the
relevant Helpdesk, policy team and/or Legal Services for guidance.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains links to the AFSA website.

Related links

Deciding whether a debt was due to fraud for a bankrupt customer

Effect of bankruptcy on family assistance overpayments

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

What to do when a customer is bankrupt

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
