
Debt identification 107-02010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about identifying overpayments and
deciding whether they are legally recoverable.

Identifying a debt

A debt may occur from:

-   a change in a customer's circumstances
-   reviews and data matching by Services Australia
-   members of the public (tip-off)
-   pre-payment or an advance
-   grant of compensation payment
-   Assurance of Support (AoS)

Debt start date

Start dates and date of effect rules can vary according to payment type.
See the relevant payment type in Operational Blueprint for details.

Dates that may determine whether an overpayment (or underpayment) exists
include:

-   date of commencement (generally the day a customer makes a claim)
-   qualification start date
-   entitlement start date
-   the date a change in circumstances affects ongoing payments

Arrears payments

The start date or duration of a debt may be affected by any arrears
payable. Arrears payable to a person are restricted to 13 weeks.
Different rules apply for Family Tax Benefit (FTB). See the References
page for links to legislation.

Recording the reason for the debt

Once a possible debt has been identified, record the reasons for the
debt on the:

-   Online Document Recording (ODR)
-   Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)
-   Debt screens in Process Direct
-   Integrated Review System (IRS)

Effective debt management

Effective debt management maintains public confidence. Services
Australia recovers funds if a customer has received public moneys that
they were not lawfully entitled to.

The agency promotes the efficient, effective and ethical use of
Commonwealth resources. These resources include debts owed to the
Commonwealth.

Legal basis for recovery

A customer may get more than they are entitled to. Any amounts that are
overpaid are not debts unless there is a legal basis for recovery.

A recoverable debt is any amount that is legally due and payable to the
Commonwealth. A debt may incur a 10% Recovery Fee.

Pursue recovery of a debt unless:

-   the debt has been written off
-   the debt is not legally recoverable
-   recovery of the debt is waived
-   it is not economical to recover the debt
-   the debt is an excess payment

The References page has a link to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAIs)

Contents

Locating debts in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) identity fraud and debts

Related links

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

Roles and quality service standards for debt raising and recovery staff

Debts resulting from internal transfers and clearances

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Debt investigation

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results (AR) screen

Types of Centrelink debts and how they are generated

Raising debts resulting from a failure to report or notify

General debt information

Start Day

General 14 day notification provisions

Storing documents

Writing off Centrelink debts

Waiving Centrelink debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
