
Pensions debts 107-20080421

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about supplementary pension payments
and when raising a debt is appropriate.

Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) debts

The PBS provides a tax-free lump sum bonus for customers who choose to
work past Age Pension age. They must also defer from claiming an Age
Pension.

Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) debts are recoverable if they resulted from
error, fraud or misrepresentation.

Pension Supplement and Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP) debts

If a customer receives a Pension Supplement or SSP when they weren't
eligible, the amount received is a debt. Raise these debts under
Subsection 1223(1) of the SSA.

One-off Payments to Older Australians debts

Seniors received a one-off bonus payment in 2006, 2007 and 2008 when
they were in receipt of:

-   Utilities Allowance or
-   Seniors Concession Allowance

One-off Payment debts are recoverable where:

-   there was no entitlement to the payment, or
-   it resulted from fraud or misrepresentation

Supplementary Payment information (SSP)

Seniors Concession Allowance (SCA)

SCA was replaced by SSP on 20 September 2009.

Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP)

SSP ceased on 20 June 2015. It was replaced with the Quarterly
Supplement.

Quarterly Supplement

The Quarterly Supplement was based on the Energy Supplement. It was paid
to all Commonwealth Seniors Card holders until 20 March 2017. From that
date only CSHC Card holders who met grandfathering provisions continued
to receive the payment. See Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors
Health Care Card holders.

Double Dipping of Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Entitlement to DOP stops when the customer is receiving a pension from
DVA. Any amount paid for overlapping periods is recovered from arrears
of the DVA pension. See Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances
for Communication Protocols and timeliness standards.

Contents

Raising Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) debts

Raising Pension Supplement and Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP) debts

Raising debts for One-off Payments to Older Australians

Related Links

General debt information

General debt management information

Debt identification

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

General debt raising information

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Categories of debt raised under subsection 1223(1)

Quarterly Supplement

Energy Supplement

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances

Recovery of debts via the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
