
Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts 107-05020060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure is under review. Read Operational Message Debt pause for
customers impacted by the COVID-19 lockdowns.

For Debt Management Officers (DMO) only.

This document outlines the process of accepting voluntary deductions
(direct debit) from a customer's financial institution (FI).

Automatic deductions

Customers can make a direct arrangement:

-   by contacting the Debt Management Recovery Team, or
-   [] via the Money You Owe option online

If a customer wants to cancel or defer a direct debit payment, they
must:

-   notify the Debt Management Branch (DMB) by phone, or in writing
-   give at least five business days before the next deduction

If a direct debit falls on a non-business day, the deduction will be
made on the next business day.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) - employer debts

Employers cannot arrange a direct debit to pay PPL Employer debt/s.
There are other options available to them:

-   BPAY®
-   Post billpay

Direct Debit Review (DDR)

A customer may notice a direct debit transaction on their bank
statement, which they believe to be incorrect. This could be because the
customer:

-   does not recognise Services Australia as the payee or
-   does not remember setting up / authorising the direct debt or
-   has set up a direct debit using a joint account and forgotten to
    tell the other party / partner
-   did not set up / authorise the direct deduction (fraudulently set up
    or set up on wrong account)

If the customer contacts their financial institution to investigate, the
financial institution will send a Direct Debit Systems Claim Request to
the Reserve Bank of Australia. The Reserve Bank forwards these to the
agency for investigation.

The Resources page contains a link to the SS311(A) form, the direct
debit confirmation letter and customer claim process.

Related links

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Reviewing cash arrangements

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Updating payment arrangement schedule

Steps in the review and appeals system

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
