
Bankruptcy for Centrelink debts 107-05070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Debt Staff only.

This document outlines how bankruptcy or a Bankruptcy Act agreement
affects customers with Centrelink debts.

On this Page:

When a customer is bankrupt

If a customer cannot pay debts or come to a suitable arrangement, they
may volunteer to become bankrupt. Bankruptcy normally lasts for 3 years
but it can be longer.

When a customer is declared bankrupt, it can impact Centrelink debts.
Some debts cease to be payable during the bankruptcy.

Advice to customers considering bankruptcy

Customers may ask how bankruptcy will affect their debts.

Advise customers:

-   recovery of debts covered by bankruptcy will stop for the bankruptcy
    period
-   they should include all Centrelink debts when informing their
    bankruptcy trustee

Decisions about debts will be made when the customer enters bankruptcy.

Do not give advice about debts which may be due to fraud. Wait until the
customer is bankrupt and the Bankruptcy Team investigates the debt. The
Bankruptcy Act does not release a bankrupt from a debt incurred by means
of fraud. The customer is liable to repay the debt in full after
discharge from bankruptcy.

After bankruptcy, the customer is released from most debts incurred
before the date of bankruptcy. This includes debts under the Social
Security Act 1991 and Student Assistance Act 1973.

For example, a debt is not recoverable if:

-   the customer is discharged from bankruptcy
-   the period of the debt was before the date of bankruptcy, and
-   the debt was not incurred by fraud

Customer contact

The work undertaken in the Bankruptcy Team is specialised. If a
customer's enquiry cannot be resolved at the first point of contact,
advise them someone from the Bankruptcy Team will contact them. See
Customer requires a callback.

Escalation

Bankruptcy Processing Officers should discuss a case with the Bankruptcy
APS5 officer if:

-   the case is unusual and not covered in the relevant Operational
    Blueprint
-   referral to relevant Helpdesk, policy and/or Legal Services is
    required

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains links to forms on the Australian Financial
Security Authority (AFSA) website.

Contents

What to do when a customer is bankrupt

Is a refund of repayments payable to a bankrupt customer

Deciding whether a debt was due to fraud for a bankrupt customer

What to do with Bankruptcy Act Part IX Debt Agreements and Bankruptcy
Act Part X Personal Insolvency Agreements (PIAs)

Effect of bankruptcy on family assistance overpayments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
