
Issue, vary or revoke a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) 107-17060101

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to prepare a submission to issue, vary or
revoke a DPO.

Multiple DPOs

A person may have up to 4 DPOs at a time. Issue a separate DPO for each
of the following Acts for which they have outstanding debt(s):

-   Social Security Act 1991 (SSA)
-   Student Assistance Act 1973
-   Paid Parental Leave Act 2010
-   A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
    (FA(Admin)Act)

For example, a person has a debt for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and a debt
for Family Tax Benefit. The debts total over $50,000 and all the
criteria for a DPO are satisfied. There will be 2 DPO's issued, 1 under
SSA and 1 under FA(Admin)Act. If the person repays the Family Tax
Benefit debt, revoke the DPO that is under FA(Admin)Act. However the DPO
under SSA may remain in force.

Departure Authorisation Certificates (DAC)

A DAC allows a person to depart Australia for a defined period despite a
DPO being in force. A DAC places strict limits on when a person can
depart and must return to Australia.

See Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC) processing.

Issue a DPO

Consider all other recovery methods before issuing a DPO. Other
considerations include the size of the debt and whether making the order
will make payment more likely.

The order will prevent the person from leaving Australia unless the
person:

-   no longer has any debts outstanding
-   has a satisfactory payment arrangement to repay their debts in full
-   has been issued a Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC) allowing
    them to temporarily depart Australia

Vary a DPO

Any changes made to a DPO will be to correct errors on the face of the
order itself on:

-   the Secretary's initiative
-   application by the person
-   incorrect issue date of the DPO

It is not necessary to vary a DPO due to an increase in debt amount or
receipt of payment.

A DPO cannot be varied to allow a person to depart Australia. A DPO can
be revoked, or the person can apply for a DAC where necessary.

Revoke a DPO

A DPO must be revoked if:

the relevant debts have been fully repaid

the person has entered into a satisfactory payment arrangement for all
relevant debts

the debts will be irrecoverable

the person is deceased

any of the following details are incorrect:

-   person's full name
-   date of birth
-   legislation under which the DPO was issued

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the ICT
Security Portal.

Related links

Departure Prohibition Order (DPO)

Review or appeal a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or Departure
Authorisation Certificate (DAC) decision

Activation or retention of a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or
Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC)

Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC) processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
