
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to determine whether a legally
recoverable debt exists.

Evidence of a debt

If there is evidence of a debt, Debt Management staff will:

-   investigate the customer's circumstances
-   investigate all events relevant to the debt

Investigate as soon as possible after a potential debt is identified.
Evidence includes:

-   documentation/evidence from the customer, employer etc.
-   payment history records
-   source documents (continuation forms, etc.)
-   details of start and end dates of the debt period

Document all actions on the customer's record.

Use respect, empathy and courtesy when contacting customers, employers
or other agencies in line with the Services Australia's Service
Commitments.

Action advice received from a customer or their representative
immediately to prevent or minimise debts.

Cause of a debt

A debt may be due to a single event, for example, incorrect declaration
of income. Identify if parts of the overpayment are solely due to
administrative error. Consider a partial waiver in these cases.

For Social Security payments, the Automatic Rate Reduction provisions
operate to create the start date of the debt. Administrative delays (in
excess of normal processing time):

-   May cause a customer to be paid more than they were entitled. This
    happens even though the customer advised correctly
-   Are regarded as administrative error

Consider these debts for waiver, provided the provisions are met. Assess
each on its merits.

Finalised No Debt (FND) determination

FND is different from waiving a debt:

-   A FND determination involves deciding that no debt ever existed
-   Waiving a debt determines that there is a legally recoverable debt.
    Services Australia has decided to forego its legal right to recover
    that debt

If the debt has been (incorrectly) determined, this decision can be
overturned. The debt must be FND through the Debt Amount (OPDA) screen
in DMIS and a different FND code used.

Contents

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

Calculating Centrelink entitlements and gathering information when
investigating debts

Investigating administrative or computer error debts for Social Security
payments

Acceptable evidence for verifying income when investigating debts

Investigating the source and cause of the debt

Related links

Administrative error waivers

Storing scanned documents

Waiving Centrelink debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
