-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to recover a debt from an organisation, and
how the process differs to other debt recovery. Early contact is key to
positive recovery outcomes.

Debt types

Organisations may have the below debts:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) payments to an Approved Care Organisation
    (ACO)
-   Assurance of Support (AoS) payment where the assurer is an
    organisation
-   Third Party Organisation (TPO) payments

Services Australia does not pursue recovery of the below debts:

-   Child Care Assistance (CCA), and
-   Child Care Benefit (CCB)

A small number of organisations have arrangements with the agency. These
will continue until they pay the debt, or break the arrangement. See
Resources page for more details.

Recovery methods

There are 3 main methods used to recover an organisation debt:

-   Cash repayments
-   Withholding from Centrelink payments (for ACO only)
-   Legal proceedings

Not all methods apply to each organisations.

Do not use garnishee action to recover an organisation debt unless it
forms part of legal proceedings (civil recovery). The Litigation Team
will decide if the agency starts civil procedures to recover debts.
Refer cases to an APS5 or above in the Specialised Recovery Team (SRT).

Consider the daily operation of the business. Any recovery action taken
must not:

-   put the business at risk or
-   have a negative effect on its staff, customers or students

Receipting hierarchy

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) debts

PPL employers get a separate reference number on each Account Payable
Notice. This allows an employer to make individual debt payments.

Manual intervention is required when employers pay multiple debts using
one reference number. This requires moving money from one debt to
another.

Employer payments made by EFT and cheque require manual receipting via
ESSentials.

All other debts

When an organisation has more than one debt, the debt repayment
hierarchy determines the recovery order.

Organisations may make a payment for a specific debt. The debt repayment
hierarchy can allocate this payment to another debt. This will require
manual intervention to move the funds to the intended debt.

Privacy

Communicating with organisations should be via one of the below:

-   phone
-   fax
-   mail correspondence

Debt Staff can use PGP secure webmail when these methods are not
successful or suitable.

See General Centrelink debt recovery information.

Organisation debts relate to employees, students or customers. Debt
Staff can only release certain information from the organisation record.
This includes:

-   the individual's name
-   dates of the debt
-   reason for the debt

Recovery through individuals

Recovery options are limited after the sale or change of ownership. A
debt cannot be transferred to another person or organisation to pursue
recovery. Liability for the debt stays with the organisation who
received the payment.

An exception is where the legal entity name is also the individual’s
name.

If the organisation entity name:

-   is the individual’s name, for example John Smith, pursue recovery
    through the individual
-   includes the individual’s name, for example John Smith Painting, do
    not pursue recovery through the individual

The debt must remain on the organisations record and not move to an
individual’s record. Exercise extreme caution to identify the correct
individual as the business owner.

In rare circumstances, an individual who commits commonwealth fraud
through the organisation may become personally liable for a debt. The
Litigation Team will decide if the agency starts civil procedures to
recover debts. Refer cases to an APS5 or above in the Specialised
Recovery Team (SRT).

Discounts

Do not offer a discount to an organisation that can afford to pay their
debt.

A discount may be suitable when an organisation is having ongoing
financial problems and insolvency or bankruptcy is pending.

See Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts.

Non recovery of debts

Debt Staff may waive or write off a debt if the organisation:

-   requests an interest charge waiver due to special circumstances
-   is experiencing short term solvency hardship
-   declared bankruptcy or insolvency
-   changed owners or ceased operation

See Non recovery of organisation debts.

Interest Charge (IC)

The IC is an incentive for organisations to repay their debt. They must
have an outstanding debt and not be making repayments.

An automatic exclusion applies to:

-   Approved Care Organisations (ACO) when receiving FTB
-   Assurance of Support (AoS) debts with an Assurance of Support Bank
    (ASB) debt reason

See Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving
payments.

Appeal and reviews

Paid Parent Leave (PPL) debts

PPL employers cannot request a review of a debt raising or debt recovery
decision.

See Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employer initiated reviews and appeals.

ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) debts

Organisations with an ABSTUDY or AIC debt can request a review of:

-   Entitlement and eligibility decisions
-   Debt recovery decisions

Note: do not use the Internal Review/Explanation script to record a
review. Record the reason the organisation does not agree with the
decision on a DOC and send to the ABSTUDY team.

See: Review of ABSTUDY and AIC Scheme decisions

Other organisations

Follow normal reviews and appeals process for all other organisation
debts. See Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision
process for all other debts

The Resources page has links to contact details and information about
payments paid to organisations.

Related links

Non recovery of organisation debts

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) debt raising and recovery

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Viewing and updating Interest Charge (IC) via Financial Customer Care in
Customer First

Civil procedures to recover Centrelink debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Review of ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
decisions

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employer initiated reviews and appeals

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Approved Care Organisations (ACO)

Requirements for an individual or organisation to be an assurer

Group payments schedules and payment to organisations

Transfers and Refunds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
