-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for staff in International Services
(CIS) about the policy and process under the Agreement with New Zealand
that allows for recovery of Australian or New Zealand debts by
withholdings from a customer's ongoing payments from the other country.

Recovery of debts by withholdings

Under the terms of the New Zealand Social Security Agreement, when a
customer has incurred an income support debt with one country and is not
in receipt of an ongoing payment from that country but receives an
ongoing payment from the other country, the debt may be recovered by the
other country upon request.

A different procedure applies to debts recovered by embargo process
under the Agreement.

Historically, there were 3 general debt recovery arrangements:

-   Australia recovered debts owed to New Zealand via withholdings
-   New Zealand recovered debts owed to Australia via withholdings, and
-   New Zealand recovered debts owed to Australia via lump sum, from a
    Special Banking Option (SBO) account

From 1 May 2020, New Zealand no longer recovers debts owed to Australia
via withholdings. Recovery from a SBO account is still permitted.

Debt Certificates are sent between New Zealand and Australia via secure
electronic liaison to request recovery under the Agreement. The Debt
Certificate must certify that the requested recovery meets the agreed
terms and conditions (see below).

If a debt meets the agreed terms and conditions, and the agency is going
to recover it on behalf of NZ via withholdings, we use regular debt
recovery processes, that is, withholdings via the Debt Management and
Information System (DMIS), and the standard rate of recovery applies.
However, if requested by the customer, a minimum rate of recovery of
AUD20 per fortnight may be accepted without need for further
investigation or evidence. Customers may also make cash repayments.

Notes: debts being recovered for New Zealand must not be referred to a
collection agency.

Terms and conditions

Only social security law payments are covered by the Agreement.
Australian family assistance and student assistance debts (for example
FTB and AUSTUDY) cannot be recovered from NZ payments and NZ debt
recovery amounts cannot be withheld from Australian family assistance
payments.

For Special Banking Option recovery, the customer must have been paid
into a Special Banking Option account for the entire period of the debt.

For recovery via withholdings, the original debt amount must be more
than AUD400 and first found to be owing within the 5 years immediately
prior to the debt recovery request.

Staff responsibilities

The office that originally created the debt is responsible for any query
about why the debt occurred including any appeals or reviews. That is:

-   the New Zealand debt authorities are responsible for explaining why
    a debt of NZ pension occurred and for appeals against that decision,
    and
-   Services Australia is responsible for explaining why a debt of
    Australian pension occurred and for any appeals against that
    decision

Staff in CIS are responsible for all actions associated with the request
and recovery of these debts including:

-   liaison with New Zealand
-   customer requests about the rate of recovery
-   reconciliation of amounts that have been recovered

Reconciliation

Schedules detailing individual amounts withheld for each customer are
sent between Australia and New Zealand via secure electronic liaison on
a monthly basis. For amounts:

For more details on handling the monthly reconciliation process, see New
Zealand Agreement debt recovery reconciliation – action for
International Services (CIS).

The Resources page contains links to the International Services homepage
and International Programme homepage.

Related links

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

New Zealand Agreement debt recovery reconciliation – action for
International Services (CIS)

New Zealand embargoes

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
