
Raising Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA) debts 107-04130000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to raise PGPA debts arising from payments
made to customers and organisations on behalf of customers.

On this Page:

PGPA and Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997 (FMA)

The PGPA replaced the FMA from 1 July 2014.

The PGPA sets out the framework for managing the money and property of
the Commonwealth.

Administered PGPA debts

Services Australia is sometimes authorised by government to pay
customers outside the usual legislative framework set out by:

-   social security law
-   student assistance and
-   family assistance law

Examples of these payments include:

-   ex gratia payments for emergency relief payments
-   Jobs, Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance
-   the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) Vehicle Scheme
-   essential costs under the Financial Case Management Scheme
-   the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP), and
-   some one-off assistance payments

Debts from these schemes are Administered PGPA debts. Policy guidelines
for the payment state when an overpayment can occur. This can be due to:

-   incorrect payments
-   duplicate payments, and
-   fraud

Key features of a PGPA overpayment

Authority to raise the overpayment is included in the payments policy
guidelines

Tax adjustments are needed if payments are taxable

No appeal rights to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal

No automatic withholdings, except in the case of financial case
management and income management debts. This is where the person:

-   is receiving a social security payment, and
-   the amount is an overpayment recoverable through deductions from the
    person's social security payments

There is no legislative basis to permanently write off due to statute
barring

No issue of the automatic Account Payable letter - a manual Online
Advice (OLA) letter must be issued, and

Services Australia has no delegation to waive PGPA debts. This includes
small debt waiver

Raising Administered PGPA overpayments

These type of debts are raised:

-   on the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)
-   for payments to organisations on behalf of customers

Waiver of PGPA overpayments

Services Australia staff do not have delegation for these waivers.

Review and appeals

Family Assistance, Student Assistance, and Social Security Law appeal
provisions do not apply to PGPA debts.

Goods and Services Tax (GST) Assistance Scheme (GAS) payment

The GAS payment was:

a tax free payment of $120

payable to eligible Australians in the 2000/2001 and 2001/2002 financial
years

available to people who:

-   were not able to receive compensation from either the taxation or
    income security systems, and
-   were not a partner or a dependant of such a person

Applicants must not have been:

-   in receipt of an income support payment, or
-   in the income tax system, or
-   dependants or partners of someone in the taxation or income support
    systems

One-off Payment for the Aged (GSR)

The GSR was a $300 special tax free One-off Payment for the Aged. It was
announced in the Governments 2001/2002 Budget to:

-   acknowledge the contribution older Australians make to society, and
-   recognise that many live on a limited income

Eligible customers for the GSR

Income support customers who:

-   reached pension age on or before 22 May 2001, and
-   received income support payments on 22 May 2001

Non income support customers who:

-   reached pension age on or before 22 May 2001, and
-   were not on income support payments at that date. Customers
    qualified after meeting specific income and residence requirements

Payments made to non income support customers are:

not legislated

paid under the authority of a Cabinet Decision. These are only
recoverable by cash payments (including direct debit). Recovery cannot
be through:

-   withholdings
-   garnishee or
-   discount

GSR was automatically paid on 22 May 2001 under Part 2.2B of the Social
Security Act 1991. Debts for these customers are raised under the
primary benefit. All recovery methods are available under the Social
Security Act 1991. For example, withholdings, cash, etc. The debts can
be written off and waived.

The Resources page contains a link to the Delegations Intranet page for
the latest delegation instruments.

Contents

Raising debts associated with civil and criminal action

Related links

Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments

Recovery of Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) overpayments

Interest charge and recovery fee

Income Management debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
