
Roles and quality service standards for debt raising and recovery staff 107-05010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the roles and quality service standards for debt
raising and recovery staff when performing their duties.

Stages of debt processing

Debt processing has five stages:

-   identification
-   investigation
-   calculation
-   raising the debt and advising the customer
-   recovery

Debt staff contact with customers

Debt staff interact with a wide group of people and organisations,
including:

-   customers and their representatives
-   welfare organisations
-   other government agencies
-   employers, solicitors, police etc.

Debt staff must show respect, empathy, courtesy and fairness with every
contact. Services Australia's focus is to obtain accurate and up-to-date
information to prevent debts or identify and raise them in a timely
manner.

Debt staff must act upon any information given by a customer or their
representative immediately.

Maintaining customer privacy is a fundamental part of the agency's
obligations. See Safeguarding customer privacy when raising and
recovering debts, before contacting a customer or issuing a debt notice.
Take the appropriate actions to protect the customer's privacy.

Staff are accountable for acting on information and/or giving correct
advice to customers and safeguarding customer privacy.

Debt collection conduct

The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) and the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) share
responsibility at the Commonwealth level for:

-   protecting people who are debtors
-   alleged debtors from improper collection conduct

ASIC and the ACCC published the Debt collection guideline: for
collectors and creditors replacing the ACCC Debt collection and the
Trade Practices Act guideline. This document discusses the legislative
impacts of the Trade Practices Act 1974 and the Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001 on debt collection conduct.

The guideline explains conduct expected of recovery staff in the context
of general community expectations. For example, it includes the
appropriate times for recovery staff to contact customers.

Using this guideline Centrelink has defined reasonable hours of customer
contact for the purposes of debt recovery. Unless a customer has
requested contact outside these times, staff must ensure they phone
customers only within the prescribed hours.

Note: during initial negotiations, staff should advise customers they
have a legal obligation to notify Centrelink of any change of address
within 14 days while a debt is owed, even if they no longer receive a
payment.

The Resources page contains a link to the ACCC website to access the
guideline.

Related links

Debt raising

General debt raising information

Outbound customer contact and gathering information when recovering
debts

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
