-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how staff in Centrelink International Services
(CIS) and the International Finance Team process embargoes under the New
Zealand Agreement.

New Zealand (NZ) Agreement recovery by embargo

Some agreements allow for one country to withhold amounts from any lump
sum arrears associated with the grant of pensions and send them to
another country to recover a debt that arises because of the arrears
amount. This is referred to as an embargo.

Embargoes can apply when a claim for a pension from one country is
lodged in the other country. For example, where a foreign pension claim
is lodged in Australia (with Services Australia), the embargo is
requested when the pension claim is sent to the other country.

For practical reasons, embargo of foreign pension arrears is only
applied under the Agreement with NZ.

The NZ Agreement uses a direct embargo model. This means that the entire
amount of the arrears generated from a new claim is sent to the other
country.

Each country will then calculate the debt because of the arrears of the
other country’s pension, recover any overpayment from the arrears and
send any remaining amount to the customer.

If the embargo action fails, arrears debts are raised and recovered in
accordance with normal debt procedures. This is a two-way process:

for incoming embargoes, the agency:

-   receives the total amount of NZ pension arrears from NZ authorities
-   recovers the Australian debt from the NZ arrears
-   codes the recovery of these debts in the Debt Management and
    Information System (DMIS)

for outgoing embargoes:

-   the total amount of Australian pension arrears is sent to the NZ
    authorities
-   the NZ authorities recover the NZ debt from the Australian arrears
-   embargo of arrears from Australian claims is coded during the
    Australian new claim activity on the Embargo Details (EMB) screen.
    This coding prevents the arrears from being issued to the customer
    until the embargo is actioned. See Claims for Australian payments
    under international social security agreements

Exchange rates and embargo

NZ pension is always treated as a direct deduction and NZ pensions in
Australia are ‘capped’ to no more than the rate of the Australian
pension, see New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information.

This means that in theory, the amount of the arrears received from NZ
should equal the amount of the Australian debt. However, as the Agency
uses set exchange rates under section 1100 of the Social Security Act to
convert foreign currency to Australian dollars in assessing amounts
included in the income test, there is always a difference in the amount
of the Australian debt and the arrears the agency receives.

Where the difference is only due to exchange rate conversions, the debt
is considered fully repaid and no further action should be taken. For
this reason, embargo coding generally requires the recording of the
embargo amount to match the calculated arrears debt amount rather than
the converted amount actually received.

Impact on partners

Where a member of a couple is granted a NZ pension, the amount of the
Australian debt for the customer will be exactly half. If the partner
also receives an income support payment, they will have the same debt
amount.

Note: the customer must authorise the recovery of their partner’s debt
from their arrears. If not, half the arrears amount must be released to
the customer and the partner debt must be raised and recovered
separately.

Agreed arrangements

Bulk amounts of all monies withheld are sent to the other country on an
agreed cycle, usually by the 15th of each month.

The foreign pension authorities send a schedule with details of
individual arrears amounts for all customers included in the payment for
that cycle.

The International Finance Team confirm receipt of the monies received by
the agency and prepare the schedule for processing.

CIS code the lump sum arrears, calculate the debt, raise the debt, code
the embargo recovery and arrange to pay any excess amounts to the
customer. CIS then send lists of all action taken to the International
Finance Team who reconcile the monies received.

The International Finance Team also authorises payment of Australian
arrears to the NZ pension authorities for NZ to reconcile NZ debts, via
the outgoing embargo schedule.

The Resources page contains links to the International Services homepage
and International Programme homepage. It also contains a link to
ESSentials Support Online for the procedure to pay excess amounts to
customers.

Related links

Comparable Foreign Payment (CFP) lump sum arrears debts

International Social Security Agreements

Foreign pension coding

Foreign pension claims

Foreign Pension System (FPS) status and reviews

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
