
Civil procedures to recover Centrelink debts 107-05060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Commonwealth can take action in a civil
court against a debtor. It also has details about Services Australia's
civil recovery options.

Civil recovery action

Civil recovery action is only for debtors:

-   with total debts owing greater than $10,000, and
-   an identified capacity to repay their debt/s

A capacity to repay debts can be shown if the debtor has significant
income, property, or savings.

The Litigation Team (LT) in the Legal Services Division is responsible
for starting civil proceedings. An APS 5 officer and above from the
Specialised Recovery Team (SRT) will refer cases to the LT. LT will
assess the case and engage an external Legal Service Provider (LSP).

LT and SRT approve costs and manage cases when a LSP has been engaged.
The Resources page has more details about delegations and
authorisations.

Before pursuing civil recovery, the agency must explore all options
including voluntary arrangements, garnishee and withholdings. SRT will
decide the right action based on a debtor's capacity to pay. SRT will
try and negotiate with debtors before referring a case for civil
recovery action. See, standard debt recovery guidelines in Managing
recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts.

Civil recovery action refers to:

-   issuing a Letter of Demand to the debtor
-   obtaining a Judgment Order for the value of the debt (includes
    interest and costs), or
-   enforcement action, which can include enforcing a judgment order
    through seizure and sale of assets (real or personal property) or
    bankruptcy

Civil recovery and interest charge

Interest will not apply during the civil action assessment process if
the debtor:

-   enters into an acceptable recovery arrangement, and
-   makes repayments as per their payment arrangement

When referring civil action debts to LT, any ongoing interest will need
to stop. Court documents will be prepared based on the total amount
owing for the period until judgment and settlement. The amount may
include GIC or pre and post judgment interest.

Enquiries and referrals about civil recovery

Enquiries and referrals about civil recovery can be sent to the
Specialised Recovery Team (SRT).

The Resources page has:

-   definitions for civil recovery
-   link to the Austrac Access and Disclosure document
-   link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk page
-   link to Debt Management Branch (DMB) contact page

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
