
Payment arrangements 107-05040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for debt recovery staff about
different types of payment arrangements.

Payment arrangement overview

A debt is due for payment 28 days after the date of issue on the Account
Payable letter.

When a customer cannot pay their debt in full, they can enter into a
payment arrangement.

One payment arrangement covers all debts. The customer does not need to
enter into a separate payment arrangement for each debt. Debt recovery
staff should try to negotiate a cash arrangement before looking at other
recovery action such as a garnishee.

Customers with a payment status of Current Zero Rate (CZR) are
‘non-current’ customers for debt recovery purposes. Withholdings do not
apply to these customers. They must enter a cash arrangement.

Entering into a payment arrangement will not cease all other recovery
action. See the Resources page for more details.

Cash payments

Cash payments arrangements allow former customers to pay their debts.

A cash arrangement can be Irregular (IRR), Regular (REG) or a
combination of both. IRR payments are one off and do not usually follow
a pattern. This may include a lump sum payment or large payments of
different amounts or frequency. A REG payment follows a pattern of the
same amount at the same frequency. For example, $100 per week every
Monday.

To negotiate and code a cash arrangement, see Arranging cash repayments
to recover debts.

Do not cease a withholdings arrangement to enter into a cash
arrangement. The withholdings arrangement will automatically restart the
next day. See Withholdings to make a withholdings arrangement.

Voluntary Deduction (Direct Debit) arrangements

A direct debit deducts money from the customer’s bank account. The
customer must own the account and approve the deduction.

To negotiate a direct debit arrangement, see Arranging cash repayments
to recover debts.

To code a direct debt, see Voluntary Deductions (direct debit)
arrangements to recover debts.

If an External Collection Agent coded the direct debit the customer must
contact them to discuss. See External Collection Agents (ECA).

Discount arrangements

Staff must not raise the subject or offer a discount to a customer. The
customer must ask for a discount. If a customer can afford to pay their
debt in full, do not discuss or accept a discount arrangement.

To negotiate and code a Discount arrangement, see Discounting
arrangements for recovery of debts.

Other payment types and methods

Customers may choose or require other payment arrangement types and
methods, for:

-   Withholdings arrangements, see Withholdings
-   External Collection Agent arrangements, see External Collection
    Agents (ECA)
-   Online customer arrangements online, see Money You Owe
-   garnishee arrangements, see Garnishees
-   Organisations, other Government Departments, Assurance of Support
    etc, see Unique recovery action

Broken arrangements

An arrangement breaks when the Agency does not receive a scheduled
payment by the due date. For cash and discount arrangements, this is 14
days after the payment due date. For a direct debit, this is about three
days after the Reserve Bank rejects/returns the transaction.

The status of the arrangement will change from current (CUR) to broken
(BKN). An activity will generate on the customers record and assign to
debt recovery staff through Customer First Workload Manager (WLM).

For a broken:

-   Cash arrangement, see Actioning broken regular/irregular cash
    arrangements
-   Direct Debit, see Actioning broken voluntary deduction (direct
    debit) arrangements
-   Discount arrangement, see Actioning broken discount arrangements

No arrangement

A no arrangement activity will generate when the debt balance is over
$1,500.00 or the customer is deceased, and:

-   the debt is due and payable with no arrangement put in place
-   a broken (BKN) arrangement is ceased
-   the temporary write off period expires
-   the debt is returned from an ECA with no other arrangement put in
    place
-   the current arrangement is cancelled with no new arrangement/write
    off in place
-   a waiver is reversed on a fully repaid/waived debt
-   a fully repaid debt is amended to have a higher balance
-   any write off is manually ended with nothing else coded in its place

All no arrangement activities are actioned the same way. See Outbound
customer contact and gathering information when recovering debts.

Reviewing an arrangement

A customer can request a review of an arrangement at any time. If the
agency wants to review an arrangement, the customer must receive 28
days’ notice, except if the customer has not disclosed details about
their true capacity to pay their debt.

See Reviewing cash instalment and withholding arrangements or
Withholdings for reviewing withholdings arrangements.

Locating missing payments and updating payment arrangement schedules

On occasion payments made by the customer may not display on their
record. This can occur for many reasons. To locate missing payments, see
Debt repayments not on the customer's record.

A customer can request to skip a payment on occasion. This can be before
or after an arrangement breaks. Skipping a payment/s on a broken regular
arrangement will change the status from broken (BKN) to current (CUR).
See Updating payment arrangement schedule.

The Resources page provides details of recovery actions when an
arrangement is in place.

Contents

Debt repayments not on the customer's record

Updating payment arrangement schedule

Actioning broken discount arrangements

Actioning broken voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements

Actioning broken regular/irregular cash arrangements

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Case managed debt recovery

Related links

External Collection Agents (ECA)

Garnishees

Withholdings

Actioning broken agency recovery arrangements

Actioning non-compliant and broken garnishee recovery arrangements

Outbound customer contact and gathering information when recovering
debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
