
Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct 107-19060353

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Compliance and Debt Operations (CDO) staff and/or Child Care Subsidy
Manual Intervention Team only.

This document outlines how to raise Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in
Process Direct. Access restrictions apply.

Using Process Direct to raise debts

CCS debts are accessed in Process Direct via the Debt Management
Application. This application allows certain staff with the required
accesses to:

-   adjust debts
-   waive a debt
-   reverse a waiver

Do not use the Finalise No Debt function within the Debt App in Process
Direct until further notice.

If staff require access to CCS debts in Process Direct, see the
Resources page for CCS Debt Resource Code requests.

Access limitations apply. These updates are limited to suitably trained
Debt staff and/or Child Care Subsidy Manual Intervention Staff (CCS MIV)
only.

After raising the debt in Process Direct, the system will assign a Debt
Management and Information System (DMIS) Debt Identification number and
then staff will be able to view (but not action) details of the debt on
the:

-   Debt List (OPDL) screen in Customer First and Customer Record
-   Debt List (Financial Customer Care)
-   General Information (OPGI) screen
-   Modify/Assess (OPMA) screen
-   Process Direct Debt Details (OPDSD)
-   Process Direct Repayment Status (OPPR)

Cash arrangements and voluntary deduction arrangements

Process Direct will not allow cash and voluntary arrangements for CCS
debts. Compliance and Debt Operations (CDO) staff must use the Debt
Recovery script in Customer First or Customer Record. See Arranging cash
repayments to recover debts.

Action needed on a debt as part of an appeal

Where a Subject Matter Expert (SME) or an Authorised Review Officer
(ARO) needs action to be undertaken on a debt as part of an appeal,
escalate the reconciliation outcome to a Child Care Subsidy (CCS) Manual
Intervention staff member before any adjustments are completed.

Use Fast Note - select Auto Text, use Families > Reconciliation >
Complex CCS reco escalation.

The Resources page contains a table of debt id values and links to the
delegation instruments and the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Related links

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Debt screens in Process Direct

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments arising from reconciliation

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) payments and adjustments

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Debt identification

Types of Centrelink debt and how they are generated

Storing documents

Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
