
Raising Pension Supplement and Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP) debts 107-04020210

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances where it is appropriate to
raise debts for overpayments of Pension Supplement.

Pension Supplement debts

Raise a Pension Supplement debt under subsection 1223 (1) of the Social
Security Act if:

-   a Pension Supplement payment is made, and
-   the customer who received the payment was not eligible for it

Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP) debts

Raise an SSP debt under subsection 1223(1) of the Social Security Act
if:

-   an SSP payment is made, and
-   the customer who received the payment was not eligible for it

Change in circumstances

Pension Supplement customers are subject to the general 14 day
notification provisions.

SSP is paid to customers with their Commonwealth Seniors Health Care
Card (CSHC). Customers must inform Services Australia when:

-   they expect their income to exceed the CSHC limits, and
-   when they know their income has exceeded the limits

A customer's CSHC should only be cancelled when it is known their income
has exceeded the limits. For more information, see Cancellation of
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

Raising the debt

Pension Supplement is paid through the pension system. It is included
with a person's regular income support payment. In general, Pension
Supplement debts generate as a component of a pension debt.

The Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card (CSHC) system issues the SSP.
This requires manual action to detect and raise a debt.

Seniors Supplement Payment debt period

The provisional debt period for an SSP commences from:

-   the date of issue of the customer's Notice of Assessment (NOA)
    where,
-   their income exceeds the income threshold

The debt period commences from 1 July of the estimate year where:

-   the customer provides an estimate
-   it is later determined to be incorrect, and
-   the customer knew the estimate was based on false information or the
    facts were misrepresented

The provisional debt period commences on the date of issue of the Notice
of Assessment (NOA) which has the customer's assessable income as
exceeding the income thresholds for their circumstances.

When the debt is calculated, only payments made for full quarterly
supplement entitlement periods that fall within the debt period are
raised as an overpayment.

Recovery via Withholdings

Pension Supplement debts and SSP debts are not recoverable by
withholdings from Pension Supplement Payments or SSPs respectively.

Both supplement payments are recoverable by withholdings from other
payments paid under:

-   Social Security Act 1991
-   A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
-   Student Assistance Act 1973

The References page has a link to the relevant Acts.

Related links

General debt information

General debt management information

Debt identification

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

General debt raising information

Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments

Categories of debt raised under subsection 1223(1)

Pension Supplement

Quarterly Supplement

Cancellation of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
