
Debt arising from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation 107-04090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the FTB reconciliation and
re-reconciliation process that results in a debt.

FTB reconciliation

For customers who receive FTB and child care payments, reconciliation
occurs once they (and their partner) lodge their Income Tax Returns, if
required.

FTB reconciliation is the recalculation of a customer's FTB entitlement
for customers who:

-   received payments of FTB during the relevant financial year
-   claim a lump sum at the end of the relevant financial year and who
    are paid at a rate based on an estimate of the partner's income at
    the time the claim is made

Comparison of the recalculated entitlement is against the FTB already
paid for the relevant financial year. This results in:

-   a top-up payment, where the customer was not paid enough FTB
-   a debt, where the customer was paid too much FTB, or
-   nil adjustment where the customer received the correct rate of FTB

The timing of FTB reconciliation depends on whether the customer:

-   is single or partnered
-   has any ex-partners
-   shares care of the dependents
-   or their partner or ex-partners are required to lodge a tax return,
    and
-   when their tax returns are lodged and processed

When a re-reconciliation occurs

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) occurs when:

-   a customer's FTB has already been reconciled for the relevant income
    year, and
-   a change in circumstance or income details for the relevant income
    year occurs

This can happen when the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) makes changes
to a Notice of Assessment (NOA) or Services Australia updates income or
circumstance details. This can affect the customer’s FTB entitlement.

Debt processing

The ATO recovers debts during reconciliation and lump sum claim
processing. Debt processing is automatic, with recovery from tax
refunds. Services Australia raise any remaining amount as a debt.

Most reconciliation debts are because of a difference:

-   between estimated and actual income and
-   maintenance income

'Zero' overpayments resulting from the above to ensure they are included
at reconciliation. Use the reason code FAM, finalised - 'no debt'.

FTB circumstance debts

A circumstance debt occurs from any changes, other than:

-   income and
-   maintenance income

Circumstance debts arise if a change in circumstances results in the
customer losing qualification to a payment. Raise the debt at the time
the change in circumstances is identified. Examples include:

-   changes in shared care arrangements
-   changes in dependent care (qualification debts) or
-   a loss of entitlement to Rent Assistance (RA)

FTB qualification debts

Qualification debts occur when a customer receives a payment for which
they were not eligible. These can occur if a customer:

receives FTB and it is later determined that they were not a resident of
Australia, or

was in receipt of more than the base rate of FTB and has failed to meet
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

has an FTB child who is granted a disqualifying payment for a past
period

does not meet the eligibility requirements for:

-   individuals
-   grandparent carers
-   children in foster care

Raise qualification debts as soon as the loss of qualification is
identified. See Qualification Debt identified in FTB reconciliation
result or when completing activity that triggers FTB reconciliation.

The Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) automatically creates
a debt where an overpayment is calculated. Debt recovery commences.

Re-reconciliation debts

If re-reconciliation results in a debt, the original debt ID is
adjusted. Re-reconciliation debts less than $50 are auto-waived.

Re-reconciliation debts are not recovered from tax refunds. Recovery is
through Services Australia. If the ATO provides amended information,
re-reconciliation may result in a debt. Any debt must be held pending
ATO advice. The ATO may advise there will be no recovery action from
their end. If so, recovery will occur through Services Australia.

Contents

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation debts where actual income was
used

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation debts where estimated or actual
income was used

Debt arising from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit (CCB) debts for the
2000-2001 income year

Qualification debt identified in FTB reconciliation result or when
completing activity that triggers FTB reconciliation

Related links

'Class of debt' waivers for national disasters between 2009 and 2011

Reviews and appeals

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Debts arising from Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) stay orders

Storing documents

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Customer enquires about reconciliation overpayment

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
estimated income

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child support issues

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
shared care

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
blended family percentage

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child income

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child leaving care

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
Centrelink lump sum claim

Customer enquires about Child Care Benefit (CCB) and/or Child Care
Rebate (CCR) reconciliation or lump sum claim outcome

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Non-payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment payments to zero
entitlement customers

Child leaves customer's care/custody

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
