
Raising Parental Income Test (PIT) debts for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 107-04080060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines raising debts for AIC Scheme students who board
away from home for study.

Parental Income Test (PIT)

The PIT is used to assess the amount of Additional Boarding Allowance
(ABA) payable to an approved applicant. AIC is paid under the Assistance
for Isolated Children Guidelines.

The PIT is based on the total combined income of the
parent(s)/guardian(s) for the previous financial year (the base tax
year).

Depending on circumstances, applicants may be entitled to assessments
based on the parental income for the financial year ending in the year
of study (current income assessments).

Reassessments

A change in circumstances may mean the student's entitlements are
reassessed. These changes include:

-   the parent(s)/guardian(s) reported taxable income of the base tax
    year has been adjusted, for example, an amendment by the Australian
    Taxation Office (ATO)
-   the parent(s)/guardian(s) income for the financial year ending in
    the year of study is at least 25% higher than the base tax year
-   actual income figures have become available for the base tax year
    (or the current tax year, if used) to replace estimates of income
-   the number of dependent children in the family pool has changed
-   a parent is no longer in receipt of an income support payment,
    Health Care Card or low income card
-   a parent has lost or gained a partner or there is a different
    approved applicant for the student
-   the applicant provided false or misleading information about their
    income

The re-assessment of the student's record may mean that they are
entitled to a different rate of payment. This may result in an
underpayment or an overpayment. If there is an underpayment, adjust the
payments. If there is an overpayment, and it is recoverable, raise a
debt via the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS). Send an
account payable letter to the applicant for repayment of the debt.

Related links

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Assessing verified Parental Income for current income assessments for
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Family Taper for the Parental Income Test (PIT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
