
Debt Raising and Recovery for customers in locations affected by disaster events 107-22072724

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines debt raising and recovery actions required when a
customer is affected by a declared disaster event.

Customer lives in a declared disaster area

Services Australia supports customers who owe money and live in
locations impacted by a natural disaster or emergency event.

Debt raising and debt recovery continues, however, customers may choose
to delay debt repayments for periods of 1, 2 or 3 months for new debts
or existing repayment arrangements.

If the customer does not live in an affected area or has not been
otherwise affected by the disaster, for example, loss of income or
employment:

-   assess the customer’s financial circumstances, and
-   determine whether a Short Term Hardship (STH) temporary write off is
    warranted

See the Resources page for a link to the Emergencies and Incidents
intranet page and the Lockdown and Disaster Debt Pause Master
Spreadsheet, to determine if a customer lives within an impacted area.

Debt Raising

Debt raising activities continue following a disaster or emergency
event. Customers are made aware, through SMS and media campaigns of the
flexible repayment options available.

Customers living in impacted locations who receive account payable
letters, can delay repayments for 1, 2 or 3 months using self-service
through their Money you owe service. The system will automatically apply
a DIS write-off to their debt.

If customers from affected areas contact to discuss a debt, appeal or
withholdings, consider the option to pause withholdings or repayments
for 1, 2 or 3 months.

Where customers require help, refer them to a social worker or other
specialist staff who can:

-   provide short term counselling, and
-   give them information and referrals to other services

Debt recovery - customers with an existing debt

Customers living in an impacted location (declared disaster area) can:

access their Money you owe service in their Centrelink online account
via myGov or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to:

-   cease their existing debt repayments for a period of 1, 2 or 3
    months (a DIS pause is automatically applied to their debts for the
    corresponding period)
-   reduce their repayments to a minimum of $10 per week
-   set up a payment arrangement during this period, or
-   edit a payment arrangement

contact Services Australia for help to:

-   cease their existing debt repayments and have a DIS write off
    applied
-   reduce their repayments to a minimum of $10 per week
-   set up a payment arrangement during this period
-   edit a payment arrangement

Compensation debt raising

Compensation staff must continue existing compensation debt raising
processes for customers impacted by a natural disaster or emergency.
This includes:

-   outbound customer contact before raising a debt, and
-   defer raising or recovering debts if the customer declines the debt
    being raised or entering into an arrangement

Third Party Compensation debts will continue to be raised using normal
processes.

Where a customer declines to have their debt raised, send the work item
in an email to the Payments and Integrity Operations Strategy team for
isolation.

SMS nudge messages for customers with an existing debt

Customers with an existing debt who are registered for electronic
messaging, will be sent the following SMS nudge messages when debt
recovery restarts:

Recovery will restart (non-current customer with no repayment
arrangement):

-   'You will need to start paying the money you owe soon. Please set up
    a payment arrangement now by using the Express Plus Centrelink
    mobile app or your Centrelink online account through myGov. Thank
    you if you have already paid. Do not reply by SMS.'

Withholding will restart (current customers with a withholdable payment
but with no current standard or non-standard withholding arrangement):

-   'Payment of the money you owe will start soon. A standard amount
    will be deducted automatically from your Centrelink payment. You can
    change this amount by using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
    or your Centrelink online account through myGov. Thank you if you
    have already paid. Do not reply by SMS.'

Recovery restarted (disaster write off ended 7 days before, but the
non-current customer has not entered into a payment arrangement):

-   'You need to start paying the money you owe to avoid daily interest
    charges. Set up a payment arrangement now by using the Express Plus
    Centrelink mobile app or your Centrelink online account through my
    Gov. Thank you if you have already paid. Do not reply by SMS.'

Non-standard withholdings will take effect (current customers with a
withholdable payment and paused a non-standard withholding arrangement):

-   ‘Payment of the money you owe will start again soon. We will deduct
    your agreed amount automatically from your Centrelink payment. You
    can change this amount by using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile
    app or your Centrelink online account through myGov. Thank you if
    you have already paid. Do not reply by SMS.’

The Resources page contains contact details, intranet and external
links, information on exemptions to the debt pause and general
information relating to the debt pause.

Related links

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Queensland floods – January 2022

Customer enquires about reconciliation overpayment

Enquiries about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum
claim

Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation

Customer enquires about Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation outcome

Manual intervention for Child Care Subsidy reconciliation

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
