-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Debt Staff and authorised Service Officers in the Incarcerated
Customer Servicing Team with access to Debt Recovery script only.

This document outlines when a temporary write off can occur.

General write off information

For general write off information, see Writing off Centrelink debts,
which includes:

-   things to consider before writing off a debt
-   write off definition
-   interest charges

Some temporarily written off family assistance debts may still be
subject to recovery by offsetting during family assistance reassessment,
reconciliation and claim processing.

Some temporarily written off debts are still subject to Automatic Tax
Garnishee. See the Resources page for details.

A write off requiring action in Process Direct and DMIS

Use Process Direct to write off Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts.

Action debts in Debt Management Information System (DMIS) and Process
Direct at the same time, where a write off is:

-   added
-   end dated, or
-   amended

Actioning a write off in Process Direct triggers a Manual Follow Up
(MFU) in DMIS to prompt staff to action debt.

Disaster (DIS) pause for disaster events or Crisis Payment

Customers living in locations impacted by emergency or disaster events
may have a DIS pause applied to their existing debt.

A DIS pause may also be applied for customers who are not residing in a
disaster affected area, but only if the customer has been granted/paid a
disaster or hardship related payment in the last 14 days. These payments
include (but are not limited to):

-   Crisis Payment (CrP)
-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   High-Risk Settings Pandemic Payment (HRSPP)

Eligible customers can use self-service to pause their debt repayments
on-line using Money you owe or the Express Plus App.

Customers may also choose to pause their debt repayments via the phone
using Integrated Voice Response (IVR) micro-service or by calling the
Debt Recovery Team.

The aim of this write off is to:

-   assist people impacted by disaster and hardship
-   give people time to restore their property and livelihood

Impact of a DIS pause on debt due date

Applying a DIS pause to a debt raised using the formal process may
change the debt due date where an informal Account Payable debt has been
issued.

See Writing off Centrelink debts.

Effects of Interest Charge on temporary write offs and pauses

Interest charges do not apply to debts with a status of Determined
Written Off (DWO).

The system will issue a 14 day grace letter (GNOTDMNINT), if:

-   the temporary write off ends, and
-   there is no arrangement in place

This letter advises the debtor they have 14 days before Services
Australia charges them interest on their debt. They can avoid this by:

-   paying the debt in full, or
-   entering into and making a payment under an agreed payment
    arrangement

This will also occur when the debt status changes to Determined (DET)
from Finalised Written Off (FWO).

Temporary write off / pause due to known system problems

Temporary write offs or pauses may apply due to system problems or other
issues.

As issues arise, staff can find details in:

-   Operational Messaging within Operational Blueprint, or
-   a Network News Update (NNU)

The message will also advise who is responsible for coding the write
off. Do not code the write off in these situations unless the message
specifies.

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) debts

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payments are paid by Services
Australia on behalf of the Department of Home Affairs. Payments of SRSS
are administered under the Public Governance, Performance and
Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA).

Normal debt recovery provisions do not apply to these debts. Document
the record and contact the SRSS Level 1 Helpdesk.

Pausing debts pending an explanation or formal review of decision

A person can request a pause on the recovery of their debt while an
explanation or formal review is being completed.

See Recovery of debts pending a reassessment, explanation or review of
decision.

Imprisoned debtors

In most cases, a person who is imprisoned does not have capacity to
repay their debt.

Services Australia does weekly data matching with corrections services
departments in every state and territory to:

-   assist with identifying customers who are imprisoned, and
-   automatically apply and remove a prison (PRI) temporary write off

For help on issues with the bulk action script, see the Resources page.

PRI write off excludes customers from having their tax returns
garnished. Instead, a Tax Garnishee Warning Letter is sent whilst a
write off is in place.

Service officers in Face to Face Incarcerated Customer Servicing Team
without access to the Debt Recovery script must request the resource
through ICT Security Portal (ISP). For further information, see the
Resources page for the link to ISP.

Impact of a PRI write off on debt due date

Applying a PRI write off to a debt raised using the informal Account
Payable process may change the debt due date.

See Writing off Centrelink Debts.

Customers in Immigration Detention Centres

Do not apply PRI write offs to customers in an Immigration Detention
Centre. A person who is in detention will not have capacity to repay
their debt. See the STH write off code on the Resources page.

Customers staying at rehabilitation facilities

Social Workers or Service Officer may ask Debt Staff to pause recovery
of a debt during a customer's stay at the facility. See the STH write
off code on the Resources page.

Supporting customers who may be at risk of harm due to suicide, self-harm or family and domestic violence concerns

Many customers contact Services Australia when they are vulnerable and
in crisis.

For more information, refer to the Family and Domestic Violence Support
Model (FDVSM) in Family and domestic violence.

For customers presenting at risk of suicide or self-harm, refer to
Customers talking about suicide or self-harm.

Role of Debt Staff

Debt Staff may:

-   deal with customers who may be affected by family and domestic
    violence or who talk about suicide or self-harm, or
-   receive a request from a Social Worker or a Service Officer to
    temporarily write off debt

See the STH write off code on the Resources page.

Role of non-Debt staff

Non-Debt staff may request a debt be temporarily written off. Use Fast
Note - select Auto text, use Debt Recovery > Debt Recovery Referrals >
Debt Recovery Action Required.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains contact details, internet links and a table
of reason codes for temporary write off and maximum write off periods.

Related links

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Continuing payments pending review (PPR)

Waiving Centrelink debts

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Six Year Limitation Write off

Bankruptcy for Centrelink debts

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Tax garnishees to recover debts

Family and domestic violence

Recovery of debts pending a reassessment, explanation or review of
decision

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
