-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff undertaking debt recovery only.

This document outlines the steps to recover an outstanding debt or a
debt identified after a customer passes away.

Recovery of debt

Outstanding debts on a deceased customer's record become the liability
of the estate. Another person may be liable for the debt where:

-   the executor has been negligent in their distribution of the estate
-   a third party is identified as having received a payment intended
    for the customer

Investigate these cases further. The debt may need to be raised against
the liable person.

If pursuing recovery of a debt on a deceased customer's record:

-   do not accept payment of a debt from any source other than the
    deceased customer's estate
-   do not, under any circumstance, pursue or accept ongoing repayment
    arrangements (including third party withholdings) from a third party
    for a deceased customer's debt
-   do not garnishee a financial institution account/s belonging to a
    deceased customer's estate
-   do recover a deceased customer's debt through Families debt
    offsetting

Non-recovery of debt

Permanently write off a debt on a deceased customer's record if:

-   it is under $200, because recovery action is not cost effective, or
-   there is no estate or there is insufficient funds in the estate to
    pay the debt

No estate or insufficient funds in the estate

Permanently write off a debt due to no estate or insufficient funds in
the estate when:

-   an executor or third party notifies there is no estate
-   an executor or third party notifies the estate has been distributed
    and there is insufficient funds remaining in the estate to pay the
    outstanding debt/s
-   the estate has partially repaid the debt and the executor or third
    party notifies there is insufficient funds remaining in the estate
    to pay the balance
-   the executor or any assets/property are unable to be located

Not cost effective

Permanently write off a debt where it is not cost effective to recover.
This is when:

-   the outstanding debt balance is less than $200, and
-   a new debt is raised, it is under $200 and there are no other
    outstanding debts, or
-   the outstanding debt balance is less than $10,000 and reasonable
    efforts have been made to recover the amount from the estate

Note: if it is not cost effective to recover an outstanding debt, write
off the debt using permanent write off code Deceased Insufficient
Estate. See Permanent write off of Centrelink debts.

Notifying the executor of the deceased estate

Do not contact the executor or third party (verbal or written) until 4
weeks have passed since the customer's death. Exercise sensitivity when
discussing a debt with an executor or third party at all times.

If the deceased customer identified as Indigenous, before contacting the
executor or third party see:

-   Cultural considerations when someone dies, and
-   Indigenous naming conventions

Notify the executor by telephone and in writing of any:

-   outstanding debts raised against the customer before they passed
    away, including any interest
-   new debts raised after the customer passed away
-   amendments made to an outstanding debt as a result of reassessment
    or review

If the executor is unknown, prepare an advice of account addressed to
the executor, and mail to the next of kin or the customer's last known
address. Consider if customer needs Social Worker support.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAIs) and to Centrelink Delegations and Authorisations.

The Resources page contains links to examples of debt recovery letters
for a deceased estate and contact details for the Debt Programme and
Compensation Recovery Branch, (including Intensive Collections Teams),
and Compliance Programme Branch. It also contains links to probate
websites.

Related links

Initial contact after someone has died

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Requests for information after someone has died

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Requesting refunds from third parties

Debt raising

Sending Account Payable letters

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Social work service referral

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
