
Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct 107-19060356

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how staff can recover Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
debts in Process Direct.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts is the only debt type raised and
recovered in Process Direct. Debts raised in Process Direct can be also
be viewed in Debt Management and Information System (DMIS).

CCS repayment withholdings from a customer's ongoing entitlement

Ongoing CCS entitlement can be used to recover outstanding child care
debts, including:

-   Child Care Benefit
-   Child Care Rebate
-   Child Care Subsidy

Withholdings from a customer's other payments can be used to repay CCS
debts, however CCS entitlement cannot be used to repay non-child care
debt.

The standard rate of recovery is 20% of the CCS weekly rate. Customers
can request a decreased rate if they are experiencing financial
hardship.

Staff must convert the '%' figure to '$' to determine if the amount
meets or exceeds an acceptable level of withholding. Apply non-standard
rates for a period of 3 months.

Withholding for an outstanding CCS debt is separate from the standard 5%
withholding used to offset future debt. The Process page contains a
table on Viewing debt repayment withholdings from an ongoing CCS
entitlement.

Writing off a debt

Debts raised in Process Direct, must be written off in Process Direct.

Some write off reasons will apply to all debts for a customer. These
reasons are general and not debt specific. The customer's circumstance
is the reason for the write off.

Some debts must be written off in both Process direct and DMIS. See the
Resources page for a list.

External Collection Agents (ECA)

Select debt from debt list to view if the debt has been referred to a
Collection Agent. Use the Collection Agent icon to view details. Details
of the referral can also be viewed in DMIS on Process Direct Debt
Details (OPDSD) screen.

A manual re-referral and recall of the debt from the Collection Agent is
also available in Process Direct.

Refunds and over recovered debts

Debts raised and recovered in Process Direct cannot be refunded in DMIS.

Refunds must be processed manually if:

-   the refund value is greater than $10,000
-   an auto refund has been attempted and the money is returned to
    Services Australia, or
-   it's a third party refund. Third party withholdings are refunded
    back to third party

Auto refunds of over-recovered debts

An over recovered amount can be created in the following scenarios:

-   Debt Action - A debt action (Adjust, Waive, finalise no debt (FND)
    etc.)
-   Non-Lodger Process - Non-lodger process after the reconciliation or
    re-reconciliation process
-   Incoming Payments - Incoming repayments

An auto refund will not occur if the refund amount is:

-   Over $10,000, or
-   Less than $1

To stop an auto refund, see Refunding debt payments.

Eligible outstanding debt exists

Over-recovered amounts will be applied to eligible outstanding debts
first in the following order:

eligible debts based on the repayment hierarchy.
Includes DMIS debts with a status of DET/DWO/DMC.
Excludes Determined Written Off debts (Process Direct and DMIS) with
following Write Off reasons:

-   BRP - Bankruptcy pending (Temp)
-   BRT - Bankruptcy - poss future recovery (Temp)
-   NLS - Non Lodger Separated Couple(Temp)
-   STH - Short term hardship (Temp/General)

Process Direct Fully Written Off Debts

Auto refund bank accounts

The system will pick up the latest bank details for FAO (based in the
date changed or created) when the customer is one of the following for
FAO:

-   Current (CUR)
-   Current - zero rate (CZR)
-   Cancelled - (CAN)

Refunds from third party withholding must be refunded back to third
party.

The Resources page contains an example of viewing withholdings from a
CCS entitlement, Write offs that need action in both Process Direct and
DMIS table, contact details, links to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk and
the Services Australia website.

Related Links

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Debt screens in Process Direct

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments arising from reconciliation

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) payments and adjustments

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings

Writing off Centrelink debts

Unique recovery actions

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Third party withholdings for debt recovery

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Debt identification

Types of Centrelink debt and how they are generated

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
