
Standard withholdings for debt recovery 107-05020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines withholding rates for debt recovery.

Withholding arrangements

Withholdings are deductions taken from a customer's payment used to
repay a debt.

Standard withholdings will apply to customers if:

-   a debt exists after the due date, and
-   no contact is made to organise another withholding rate

Standard withholdings apply the day after the debt becomes due (due
date + 1 day).

A cash arrangement cannot replace withholdings. Cash payments can
supplement withholdings.

For customers who are paid weekly, the withholding amount is calculated
using their rate of payment for the full 14 day entitlement period.

See the Resources page for withholding hierarchy.

Family assistance

Apply the family assistance reconciliation withholding rate to Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) payments if the only debts are:

-   family assistance reconciliation, or
-   re-reconciliation

Staff can accept an offer for reduced withholding rate. See
Withholdings.

Family assistance non-reconciliation withholding rates

Different withholding arrangements apply if a customer has a family
assistance reconciliation debt and another type of debt. This includes:

-   Qualification
-   Circumstance
-   Non-lodger
-   Non-family assistance

If the customer is:

-   getting an income support payment - withholdings apply to that
    payment
-   not getting an income support payment - withholdings apply at
    specific rates to their FTB payment

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

The standard CCS withholding rate is 20% of their ongoing entitlement.

See Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts for more details.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Standard withholdings from PPL can only be used to recover PPL debts.

See Parental Leave Pay (PPL) debt raising, debt offsetting and recovery.

The Resources page has details to help Service Officers determine how
the withholding amount is calculated.

Related links

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Reviewing a withholding arrangement for recovering a debt

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Financial circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Online estimator options

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
