
Debt recovery for Medicare debt 107-20042818

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about Medicare debt recovery.

Medicare debts

A Medicare debt is monies owing to Services Australia due to
overpayments. These can be across a range of Medicare programs such as:

-   Medicare benefits
-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   Aged Care
-   Continence Aids Payment scheme (CAPS)
-   Practice Incentive Programs (PIP)
-   Medicare Compensation

Debt can result from incorrect claiming by:

-   health professionals
-   health funds
-   pharmacists
-   members of the public, or
-   Aged Care service providers

Debt can also result from processing errors by Services Australia.

Debts are recorded in the agency's Financial Management system (SAP
Finance).

Types of debts

The below is a list of the different types of debts:

Patient debt

Provider debt (Bulk bill)

Private Health Fund debt (Simplified billing)

Specific program debt. These are payments to doctors, dentists, nurses
and other health professionals. They cover services such as:

-   Aged care facilities
-   Mental Health Nursing Programme
-   Service incentives and other incentive programs

Serious Non Compliance debt. These result from investigations by the
Business Integrity division

Services Australia fines and costs. These are fines and costs awarded to
the agency during the prosecution of a person/s

Payment options

Payments can be made using:

-   BPay®
-   Direct Deposit (Electronic Funds Transfer)
-   cheques and money orders

See Active recovery of outstanding Medicare debts for payment options.

Interest charge

The Interest Charge rate applied to Medicare debts varies. The
legislation used to recover a debt decides the interest rate to apply.
The Resources page has more information.

Debt repayment

Payment in full

Aim to achieve repayment of debt in the shortest possible time. The
first option should always be payment in full. See the Resources page
for interest rates.

Paying by instalments or deferring

A debtor may request to:

-   pay the debt back in instalments
-   defer the date of payment

Send all requests for payment by instalments to Medicare Recovery. They
will make a recommendation to the delegate.

Waivers must be approved by the Department of Finance.

Repayment within 30 days (from the date of first letter)

The debtor gets a letter to tell them of their debt. This will tell them
to pay within 30 days of the date of the letter. After this time, they
may incur interest charges. The interest rate will depend on the debt
type. In some cases a delegate may approve to waive the interest.

Interest may be applied if the debtor starts to repay the amount, but
does not pay it in full within the stipulated 3 months interest free
period. Services Australia and Medicare Recovery may impose interest on
the outstanding balance.

See the Resources page for interest rates.

The Resources page has contact details and interest rates

Contents

General debt recovery information for Medicare

Debt recovery for Medicare programmes

Related links

Dunning for Medicare debt

SAP invoices and customer navigation

Financial adjustments for Medicare debt

Active recovery of outstanding Medicare debt

General administration for Medicare debt

Reports for Medicare debt

Allocations, receipting and banking for Medicare debt

Bulk bill latter day adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare

Latter day adjustments (LDA) and HELD payments for patient claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
