
Cessation of employment income 108-07010110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions to take and how income is to be
assessed when a current customer advises they or their partner have
ceased employment. Customers must advise cessation of employment as
early as possible, and certainly within the 14 day notification period
(28 days for overseas customers), otherwise the customer may be paid an
incorrect amount.

New claim due to ceasing work

A separate procedure covers customers who are no longer self-employed.

If a non-customer advises they are ceasing work, they may wish to make a
new claim for income support. If they will be ceasing employment within
2 weeks of contact, run the First Contact Concessions, Carers and
Seniors (FCCCS) workflow and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) where
applicable. Note: JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) job
seeker customers must be advised to contact the next working day after
ceasing work for FCCCS and ACC to be run.

Note: if the customer is in the Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy 26 week
suspension period, they may be eligible to have their payments restored
without the need for a new claim if employment has ceased through no
fault of their own.

Advise the customer of new claim procedures, including details of any
waiting period that may affect the payment start day if relevant. If
customer is ceasing employment more than 2 weeks in the future and not
claiming JSP or YA, advise customer to contact again 2 weeks prior to
the cessation of employment.

When a customer or their partner ceases work, the customer can accrue
Working Credits if eligible.

When employment ceases, the assessment of remunerative income depends on
various factors.

Lump sum termination payment

If a current customer or their partner ceases work and receives a lump
sum termination payment, the payment will be treated differently
depending on which payment each person receives. For customers
receiving:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Partner Allowance (PA), Widow Allowance
    (WA), Parenting Payment (PP) (Partnered and Single), Disability
    Support Pension (DSP) (except customers who are permanently blind),
    Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy, an Income Maintenance Period (IMP)
    may be imposed
-   ABSTUDY, it is treated as employment income, excluding exempt lump
    sums
-   other payments, whether termination payment is received as a single
    payment or by instalments is not considered income, however
    payment/s will be considered to be a financial asset
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) / Child Care Subsidy (CCS), a lump sum
    termination payment may mean the income estimate needs to be updated

If a customer left work or was terminated from a job in the previous 12
months, check if employment income and/or ceasing work was previously
declared. If employment income/ceasing work was not previously advised,
request an Employment Separation Certificate (SU1) for customer claiming
or receiving payment to determine if a failure must be investigated, or
if an income maintenance period (IMP) is to apply.

Customers who are receiving an IMP-affected payment who have ceased
employment and received a redundancy payment or a termination payment,
including leave entitlements, will have an IMP imposed from the date the
leave payment is received from the employer. If the customer is to serve
a Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP), the date of receipt of the leave
or redundancy payment is the start date of the LAWP. This could be
delayed for many weeks. In this case, there is no IMP imposed until the
payment is received. It will then affect the customer’s income support
payments for the relevant leave period.

For Allowance, DSP (except customers who are permanently blind), and all
PP (single and partnered) customers who receive a lump sum termination
payment, the IMP is imposed for the period for which the leave payment
was made (for example, 4 weeks annual leave will affect for 4 weeks).

Note: termination or leave payments received by a customer through
supported employment including employment with an Australian Disability
Enterprise (ADE), the Supported Wage System or another program of
support, are assessed the same as leave or termination payments received
from open employment.

Temporarily ceasing work

In contrast, any similar lump sum payment received when the customer is
only temporarily ceasing work (for example, taking long service leave)
is employment income and is to be included with any other employment
income and coded on the appropriate screen. Generally, customers taking
paid leave will receive their leave entitlement in instalments, similar
to the normal wages from the employer.

Regardless of whether a leave, redundancy or termination payment is
treated as income under the IMP provisions or not, any payments received
by a customer may be treated as financial assets, and subject to the
deeming provisions, depending on how they are invested or used.

Note: for FTB / CCS, a lump sum termination payment may mean the income
estimate needs to be updated.

DSP

If a customer’s DSP was previously suspended for 2 years (or cancelled
deemed suspended) due to full-time work, payment of DSP can be restored
within this period and earnings updated if either:

-   employment has ceased, or
-   their income reduces below the threshold, or
-   They work 30 hours or less and income does not preclude payment

ABSTUDY customers

There is no IMP imposed on ABSTUDY customers.

For ABSTUDY customers who receive a lump sum termination payment
(remuneration related) including leave entitlements on or after the date
of grant, the lump sum is apportioned over a 12 month period in 52
weekly amounts. Lump sum termination payments received prior to the date
of grant are not taken into account. The procedure, Treatment of lump
sums, contains further information.

Family assistance customers

Family assistance and income support reporting obligations are
different. Service Officers must discuss income reporting requirements
at every opportunity and ensure actual income and income estimates for
family assistance payments are both updated when required.

For customers not in receipt of income support, family assistance paid
as fortnightly instalments is calculated on an income estimate.

For income support customers with employment income, the actual income
must be coded and assessed correctly. An estimate for family assistance
is not used to calculate income support entitlement. To reduce the risk
of overpayment, income support customers and their partners must satisfy
their reporting requirements for declaring employment income. See
Recording and correcting employment income details for more information.

If either member of a couple is receiving family assistance, their
estimate must include taxable income support payments, tax-free
pension/benefit amounts, employment income and any other components of
adjusted taxable income (ATI) received or expected for the whole
financial year for both members of the couple. If either member of the
couple is eligible for income support payment, the expected payments
must also be included in the estimate for family assistance.

The Resources page contains a table listing each scenario and how the
cessation of income is assessed and recorded.

Related links

Treatment of lump sums

Restoration of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Start day

Exempt income and assets for Centrelink payments

Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Paid leave and redundancy payments (advised before 19 April 2010)

Leave and termination payments paid by an employer

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Working Credit

Earnings and reporting tool

Reporting screens

Business has ceased to operate or has closed

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
