
Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset 108-04130010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on real estate that may have an asset
value and is subject to the Assets Test. This can be, but is not limited
to, an investment property, holiday home, timeshare, a business
conducted from the principal home. Property owned under a timeshare
arrangement is assessed differently from other real estate.

The principal home

The residence where a customer spends the greatest amount of time is
their principal home. The principal home and the private land
(curtilage) adjoining the home are usually not considered assets under
the Assets Test. A separate procedure explains how to assess house and
curtilage.

Customers who leave their principal home due to illness and have to
enter care may have their home exempted from the Assets Test.

Value of real estate

If the customer owns or is paying off any other real estate, including
overseas real estate (that is, holiday home, house, unit, flat, vacant
land or land not allowed as curtilage), to determine the assessable
asset value, consider:

-   the net market value of the property (and its contents)
-   the customer's share of ownership in the property
-   any outstanding loans secured against the property
-   any other encumbrance the property may be subject to, such as life
    interests

Damaged assets

When an asset has been damaged, its current market value is affected.
The market value of the asset must be revised. The revised asset value
is now the current market value. This current market value should be
assessed irrespective of any insurance that may be payable.

The assessable value of an asset is reduced by the amount of any
outstanding charge or encumbrance over the asset. However, a charge or
encumbrance cannot be deducted if:

-   it is for the benefit of a person other than the customer or the
    customer's partner
-   it is a collateral security
-   the asset it is secured against is an exempt asset

If a charge or encumbrance is secured against:

Both an exempt asset and an assessable asset, the amount of the
outstanding charge or encumbrance is shared between the assets in
proportion to the asset values. To determine the amount of the loan to
be deducted as a liability:

-   (value of secured loan X value of assessable property)/value of all
    properties (assessable property plus exempt property plus any other
    properties covered by the secured loan). Accept the customer's
    estimated value of the exempt asset, for example, the principal
    home, in most circumstances. If it appears the value is completely
    unreasonable, undertake normal valuation processes

More than one assessable asset, the amount of the outstanding charge or
encumbrance is shared between the assets in proportion to the asset
values. To determine the amount of the loan to be deducted as a
liability against each assessable property:

-   (value of secured loan X value of assessable property)/value of all
    properties (the total of all assessable properties covered by the
    secured loan)

Tenants in common

Customers who own real estate as 'tenants in common', will have their
share assessed based on the agreed ownership percentage, for example, if
a customer owns 40 per cent of the property, use 40 per cent of the
whole property value. This differs from customers who own real estate as
'joint tenants' with 1 or more people, in which case the property is
assessed in equal proportions. Any applicable home and curtilage will be
exempt from the Assets Test in both these cases if the real estate is
considered as the principal home.

Partially constructed home

A partially constructed home is assessed as an asset if:

-   the customer is building a new principal home from the proceeds of
    the sale of their former family home and the allowable period of 12
    months had elapsed, and an extended exemption period of up to an
    additional 12 months has not been granted, or
-   the customer is building a new principal home because they
    demolished their former home and the temporary absence period of 12
    months has elapsed, and an extended exemption period of up to an
    additional 12 months has not been granted, or
-   the customer is building a home and neither the sale of home
    provisions nor the temporary absence provisions apply

If the partially constructed home is to be assessed as an asset, obtain
the customer's estimate of the value of the property.

If the customer advises they have made progress payments, obtain the
following information:

-   amount and frequency of progress payments
-   amount of the progress payment which represents the labour costs
-   the customer's revised estimate of the property value
-   how long before the property will be fully constructed
-   if the property will become the customer's principal home
-   the source of the progress payments

If the property will not become the customer's principal home, note a
review for when the property is expected to be completed. A formal
valuation may be needed to determine the value of the fully constructed
home.

Documents required for valuations

Information for assessing real estate is collected from the Real Estate
details (Mod R) and supporting documentation. Relevant documents may
include evidence of any mortgage on the property, latest council
rates/valuation notice, certificate of title or any other title
document.

Centrelink International Services (CIS) may accept alternative source
documents for overseas real estate instead of a valuation (for example,
Italian tax returns).

Real estate owned via shares in a private company

Real estate owned via shares in a private company is assessed via trust
and company rules.

Capital gains

If the customer makes a capital gain when they sell their property, no
income will be assessed for income support payments. Capital gains may
be assessed when a private trust or private company makes a capital
profit. A capital gain in an unincorporated business, such as a
partnership, is not usually assessed, unless it forms part of the normal
activity of the business, for example, property development.

Property Options for Pensioners and Investors (POPI)

The procedure, Valuation of real estate and other assets at new claim,
contains details of when a valuation is required.

See Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records for
details about real estate already recorded on the customer's record.

A homeowner (the seller) enters into a call option agreement with a
buyer for the sale of their principle residence. Being a call option,
the buyer has the right, but not the obligation, to purchase when the
option agreement is triggered into action.

The option agreement is unique in that it has no end date allowing it to
continue long term. Trigger events are used in order to bring the option
agreement into action. There are 2 trigger events which are centred
around events in the life of the seller, that is, death of the seller
(or nominated resident for those couples where both are not on the
title) or the desire of the seller to sell. A seller may leave the
property and not trigger the option agreement. It is also allowable in
the agreement for the seller to rent the property if they wish.

The agreement sets out the ultimate purchase price the buyer will pay.

The seller receives an upfront option fee on execution of the agreement.

The seller also receives an ongoing option fee. This ongoing option fee
is payable monthly by the buyer to the seller via a trust account for up
to a maximum of 20 years. These payments reduce every 5 years; for
example, a house with an initial value of $400,000 would receive around
$9,000 per year for the first 5 years.

If a trigger event occurs within the first 3 years, the buyer has the
option to request a full refund of all payments made without any
interest added.

Assessment for customers:

-   the amount received is not income
-   they are assessed as homeowners and the house is their asset until
    they have sold their home
-   there is no deprivation if they have entered into an arm's length
    commercial arrangement

This procedure does not apply to family assistance or Paid Parental
Leave (PPL) as they are not asset tested. However, check impact on the
customer's Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI)

The Resources page contains more information and examples of real estate
assessment, and links to relevant forms and the Mortgage Apportionment
Calculator.

Related links

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Address recording for real estate

Assessing house and curtilage

Selling a home

Loans and liabilities against assets

Exempt Assets

Assessing asset attribution

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Business revenue

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Permanent vacation of principal home

Purchasing another residence

Primary production aggregation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
