
MIN/SIN Database Maintenance and Updates 108-04090010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the details of when customers receiving income
support payments have their financial investments reassessed on 20 March
and 20 September of each year, during a review of customer circumstances
or at the customer's request.

When values are applied

The latest available values are applied to:

-   any new claim
-   review, or
-   when a customer requests a revaluation

Updated values are also applied to customer records twice yearly in
March and September.

Note: if the automatic bulk update for 20 March or 20 September has been
loaded onto the customer's record, it will show an Event Date in the
future.

For example:

-   today's date is 15 March, and
-   the event date for the investment shows 20 March

In these cases, the workaround for MIS/SIS updates immediately prior to
20 March or 20 September must be followed.

Customer's request for revaluation of their financial investments

A customer's request for a revaluation of their financial investments
can occur at any time. Whenever a revaluation is done, all of the
customer's listed shares and market linked managed investments are
automatically updated using the latest market values held on the
Services Australia’s databases.

Some customers apply for a revaluation when particular investments lose
value only to find that they still have a rate reduction. This is
because the value of their total portfolio:

-   has increased in value, or
-   fluctuations that occur in the financial market for these products
    could be either higher or lower than the values held on the agency’s
    database at any given time

In the long term however, the variations in the market price and the
agency's price do even out.

Until such time as increases in asset values are applied (for example,
at customer request or at required update), customers will benefit from
any lower prices that the agency holds. If customers do request a
revaluation, they may still notice a lag between the agency's values and
the market. This depends on what point in the fortnightly and monthly
cycle of value updates the request is made.

Note: a trial revaluation is recommended with the Service Officer
advising the customer of the potential result of the revaluation before
the activity is finalised.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Securities Exchange
(ASX) website, the agency's online account and the Level 2 Policy Help
Desks - Online Query Form for the Financial Industry and Network Support
(FINS) Helpdesk.

Related links

Updating shares and securities

Share traders

Managed investments - adding a new investment

Managed investments - updating existing investments

Revaluing managed investments, shares and securities

Managed investments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
