
Managed investments - updating existing investments 108-04090030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process an update to managed investments
owned by a customer or an entity such as a private trust or private
company.

Online option

Customers can update their managed investment details online.

Updates before 20 March or 20 September

If the bulk update for 20 March or 20 September has been actioned the
event date may show as a date in the future when updating a managed
investment.

For example, today's date is 15 March and event date for investment
shows 20 March.

In these cases, follow the workaround for MIS/SIS updates just before 20
March or 20 September.

Funds managed by Public Trustee

A Public Trustee may be appointed as guardian or administrator to manage
the personal affairs of someone who is unable to do this for themselves.
It is similar to a power of attorney arrangement.

A Public Trustee may also be appointed as trustee of a trust fund set up
to hold assets on behalf of a beneficiary. Some examples are
testamentary trusts, statutory trusts set up by the courts and
protective trusts set up for children.

To determine the correct treatment of these funds, see Managed
investments - adding a new investment.

The Resources page contains links to forms, the FINS Bulletin and
Helpdesk contact details.

Related links

Income and assets options online

Using Centrelink self service

Managed investments - adding a new investment

Verifying income and assets

Deeming provisions

Managed investments

Revaluing managed investments, shares and securities

Updating shares and securities

Superannuation

Income streams

Indexing, recording and reviewing organisations

Address recording for real estate

MIN/SIN Database Maintenance and Updates

Loans and liabilities against assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
