
Notional income on unrealisable assets 108-04120070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for notional ordinary income and
how notional income is calculated.

On this Page:

Determining income under the hardship provisions

All property disregarded under the hardship provisions (except household
contents, personal effects and motor vehicles) is deemed to produce
income which is the lesser of:

-   2.5% of the value of the property
-   the amount that could reasonably be obtained by commercial
    application of the property (the commercial lease value, which will
    generally be the market rental value)

Determining Notional income

When determining notional income, the commercial lease value advised by
an approved valuer must be reduced by any interest expense relevant to
the disregarded assets.

The 2.5% value of the property and the commercial lease value is
compared separately for each item of property being disregarded. Note:
any income actually received by the customer from the property is
deducted from this deemed amount.

The overall financial situation of the family member will be taken into
account in determining what rent, if any, that family member could
reasonably be expected to pay if:

-   residential premises are disregarded when occupied by a near
    relative or long term tenant with low income, or
-   a farm is being operated by a family member, and
-   it is not reasonable to expect the property to be used for any other
    purpose

Real estate other than a farm

If real estate other than a farm is occupied by a family member or a
long term tenant with low income, then for the purposes of calculating
the notional income, 20% of total income of the occupant (and partner)
of the property, is to be assessed. This would include all income and
allowance sources, for example, basic rate of pension, Energy
Supplement, Pension Supplement, Rent Assistance, Mobility Allowance and
Pharmaceutical Allowance etc.

The rationale for these provisions is that customers should take all
reasonable steps to fully utilise their resources before looking for
support under the hardship provisions.

Farms

If the property is being worked to its full capacity by the customer,
partner, or family member, no notional income may be assessed. See the
Resources page which contains more information.

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) uses a similar rule for
notional income. If the partner of a social security customer is a DVA
customer affected by the notional income rule, it will be necessary to
liaise with DVA to ensure that the rule is applied the same way by both
Departments.

The notional income rule also applies to assets disposed of on or after
1 June 1984 where a delegate has disregarded the application of the
disposition provisions of subparagraphs 1129(1)(b)(ii) (pensions) and
1131(1)(d)(ii) (benefits) of the Social Security Act 1991. In these
cases, notional income is assessed as if the asset were still in the
customer's possession (subsections 1130(9) (pensions) and 1132(7)
(benefits) of the Social Security Act 1991).

The Resources page contains examples of the calculation of the notional
income to be assessed on unrealisable assets.

Related links

Unrealisable assets under the Assets Test hardship provisions

Severe financial hardship under the Assets Hardship Test provisions

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
