-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines situations where an actuarial valuation is
required. The Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) will refer relevant cases
to the Australian Government Actuary (AGA) for a formal valuation if
required.

Actuarial valuation required

The following situations may require an actuarial valuation to be
completed:

-   value of a life interest created by a person, their partner or upon
    the death of their partner
-   value of a reversionary, remainder or contingent interest created by
    a person, their partner or upon the death of their partner
-   value of a surrendered life interest for disposal purposes
-   value of a purchased (private) annuity or annuity received on
    transfer of property for disposal purposes, not an annuity purchased
    from a financial institution

From 27 October 2011, actuarial valuations are no longer requested to
assess asset-test exempt lifetime and life expectancy income streams for
deprivation or return of purchase price. CAOs calculate the return of
purchase price and deprivation is assessed from commencement of the
income stream.

Actuarial valuation request

An actuarial valuation is used to discount future benefits of a life,
remainder, reversionary or contingent interest created by the person,
partner or upon the death of a partner, taking into account such factors
as life expectancy and the projected effects of inflation. An actuarial
valuation request should be referred to a CAO. The CAO will determine if
an actuarial valuation is required based on whether the customer is
likely to be affected by the Assets Test once an actuarial value of the
life interest is calculated and applied.

If there is no effect on a customer's rate under the Income Test or
Assets Test, then there is no need to obtain a formal actuarial
valuation.

Before a formal valuation is requested from the AGA, the CAO will
calculate an approximate value based on income multiplied by life
expectancy using life expectancy quasi tables. For customers under 50
years of age the CAO will refer to the appropriate life expectancy
table. For the purposes of this calculation, income is defined as
follows:

-   actual income
-   potential income from the asset or another asset if sold and
    re-invested

Where a life or remainder interest is assessable and is likely to impact
the customer's rate of income support payment then it should be valued
by the Australian Government Actuary.

Private annuity

Private annuities are assessed under the ordinary Income Test and Assets
Test. They are not subject to the Income Streams Initiative, which took
effect on 20 September 1998.

-   A private annuity is an arrangement between two parties, where one
    party provides an income in exchange for payment, or other valuable
    consideration. They are not subject to prudential regulation. To be
    classed as a private annuity this arrangement must be in the form of
    a legally binding contract between the two parties
-   Each private annuity is a separate contract that must be assessed on
    its particular merits

Recent examples of private annuities have included arrangements where a
landowner, usually operating in the rural industry, exchanges title to a
farming property for a series of payments over a defined period of time.

An actuarial value of a customer's private annuity is required to
establish its value for Assets Test purposes. This is because private
annuities are usually family arrangements and are not traded in the
market. The valuation is also required to determine whether or not the
annuity is adequate consideration for the purchase price or whether the
deprivation rules apply.

An initial valuation should be obtained when:

-   an income support payment is claimed, or
-   the private annuity is purchased

Further valuations are generally required when:

-   the number of annuitants (those receiving payments) changes
-   terms and conditions of the annuity change
-   the amount paid by the annuity changes
-   the annuity is wholly or partly commuted

Obtaining an actuarial value for a private annuity

The AGA can supply an actuarial value. The AGA must be supplied with all
the relevant details of the annuity including:

-   payment rate
-   indexation rate (if any)
-   date of birth of each annuitant
-   ability to commute the annuity (if any)
-   a copy of the contract

Asset Test exempt (ATE) income streams

From 27 October 2011, AGA valuations are no longer requested for ATE
lifetime and life expectancy income streams paid from Self Managed
Superannuation Fund (SMSF) and Small APRA Superannuation Fund (SAF). The
request can only be made by a CAO. The AGA previously undertook two
calculations for the Department:

-   present value of the future payments from the income stream
-   dollar amount of payments from the income stream (return of purchase
    price)

CAOs will undertake an approximate calculation of the return of purchase
price based on the term of the income stream product, multiplied by the
gross annual income of the income stream product.

The Resources page contains examples of actuarial valuation calculations
and a link to information about the cost of an actuarial valuation.

Contents

Referrals for actuarial valuations

Documentation required for actuarial valuations

Related links

Life interest in an asset or income

Income streams

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Reviewing actuarial certificates for lifetime or life expectancy asset
test exempt income streams from Self Managed or Small APRA Super Funds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
