
Assessing returned gifts 108-06010020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment and coding of a returned gift.

Notifiable event

The return of a gifted asset is a notifiable event. It may occur where:

-   the gifted asset has been returned
-   although not expected at the time of the gift, the recipient has now
    provided the donor with adequate remuneration
-   a customer gifts an asset to a person and then inherits that
    specific asset from the estate of the deceased person
-   although the customer still does not have the asset, both parties
    agree it is again the property of the original owner and will be
    returned

Gifts returned scenarios

In most cases, customers are better off after deprivation is assessed as
there is a free area, the value of the asset no longer increases, and it
is not counted at all after 5 years. Therefore, returns of gifts should
not be common. However, some customers may wish to have a gift returned
because they:

-   actually need the assets Services Australia is maintaining as
    deprived
-   gifted more than the free area last year, but by having the excess
    returned now, they can then re-gift it and have another free area
    applied
-   are in fact worse off. This can happen if they are income tested and
    they gifted a non-financial asset thereby increasing their deemed
    income, or if they gift an exempt asset such as their home (and do
    not have the gift disregarded under the granny flat provisions)

If the person who returns the gift is also a Centrelink customer then
they will not be assessed as depriving themselves of an asset when they
return the gift.

Gifts returned prior to 18 October 2007

Prior to 18 October 2007, where a disposed of asset was returned to a
customer, the amount of the gift could not be disregarded and it had to
be maintained for 5 years. This meant if it was returned, the customer
would be assessed with the returned asset value and the deprivation
amount.

Gifts returned after 18 October 2007

From 18 October 2007, policy was amended (and supporting legislation was
passed) which allowed a gift to be disregarded from the date of return.
This policy also applies to gifts which were returned prior to 18
October 2007, although that is the earliest date the period of
deprivation can be ended. For the period between the gift and its return
(or 18 October if later), it is still to be assessed under the gifting
rules, that is, for its value less the allowable threshold, and deemed.

Coding method

The Centrelink customer record system was only designed to automatically
end date deprivation after 5 years. Therefore, an alternative coding
method has been devised.

However, because the amount coded is the same as the assessed amount of
deprivation, there should be no arrears or overpayments. Nevertheless,
it is possible the customer's rate may change when a returned gift is
coded as:

-   the recorded value of the asset will not be reduced by the gifting
    free area
-   the asset's value may have changed, or
-   the customer may take steps to make the asset exempt, for example,
    by making it their home again

The Resources page contains some examples of how the return of gifts
should be assessed.

Related links

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
