-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure that explains how to assess and key
pooled lifetime income stream products.

Pooled lifetime income stream

Pooled lifetime income streams:

-   are defined by the Social Security Act as an asset-tested income
    stream (lifetime)
-   have a purchase date of on or after 1 July 2019
-   are guaranteed to be payable for the owner's lifetime and ceases
    upon their death. The purchaser, (primary beneficiary), can nominate
    a reversionary beneficiary. Following the purchaser's death payments
    continue to be made to a reversionary beneficiary for the rest of
    their lifetime
-   cannot be paid from a Self-Managed Superannuation Fund (SMSF) or a
    small APRA
-   can be purchased with superannuation money or ordinary savings known
    as non-superannuation money
-   can be purchased with a lump sum or in instalments
-   allow customers to delay or defer the commencement of payments for a
    period of time after purchase. They may be referred to as a deferred
    lifetime income stream

Pooled lifetime income streams are assessed under new means testing
rules.

Note: lifetime income streams purchased before 1 July 2019 are
grandfathered. They are assessed under the assets and income test rules
that applied at the time of purchase.

Assessment day

A pooled lifetime income stream will have an 'assessment day'. If the
customer defers the start of payments from the income stream, it can
delay the assessment day.

The assessment day can vary:

-   due to the customer's age, and
-   if the income stream was purchased with superannuation or ordinary
    money

The assessment day for the pooled lifetime income streams purchased with
superannuation money is the later of:

-   the date the customer meets the condition of release for their
    superannuation and payments have started. Conditions of release
    include where the customer has a terminal or permanent medical
    condition, or because they have retired or turned 65
-   the day the first amount was paid for the income stream, for example
    the purchase date
-   the day the person acquired the income stream (reversionary income
    stream)

The assessment day for pooled lifetime income stream products purchased
with non-superannuation money is the commencement day of payments if
earlier than Age Pension age, or the later of the day the:

-   first amount was paid for the income stream, for example the
    purchase date
-   person reaches Age Pension age
-   person acquired the income stream (reversionary income stream)

Some simple rules to use as a guide

the assessment day is the purchase date where the product is purchased
or acquired after Age Pension age

For deferred lifetime income streams purchased with:

-   superannuation money - the assessment day will be age 65, or earlier
    if the person meets a condition of release (such as commencing
    regular income payments
-   non-superannuation money - the assessment day will be Age Pension
    age, or earlier if the person meets a condition of release (such as
    commencing regular income payments)

Pre assessment day value

The value of the income streams which are yet to reach their assessment
day increases annually by the upper deeming rate.

Pooled income streams are purchased with a lump sum or through
instalments. Both the initial purchase price, and the value of any
instalments increase on their respective anniversary dates. This will
continue until the income stream reaches its assessment day.

For example:

A customer purchases a pooled lifetime income stream with 2 instalments:

-   $100,000 on 1 Jan 2020, and
-   $100,000 on 1 Jul 2020
-   Total value $200,000

1 Jan 2021 is the anniversary date of the first instalment:

-   On that date, the value of the first instalment will increase at the
    upper deeming rate, for example, 3.25% or $3,250
-   The new value of the income stream as at 1 Jan 2021 is $203,250.

The value of $203,250 remains until 1 Jul 2021. This is the anniversary
date of the second instalment. The value of the second instalment will
increase by 3.25% on 1 July 2021.

The system will review each instalment on its 12-month anniversary until
the product reaches its assessment day.

Asset testing the value of the income stream before the assessment date

If the income stream is purchased with:

-   superannuation money, the amounts recorded are exempt from the
    assets test
-   non-superannuation money, the amounts are assessed as managed
    investments. Note: although the product is assessed as a managed
    investment, they are keyed as an income stream and not on the
    managed investment screen

Determining the value on the assessment day

From the assessment day, the new means test rules for pooled lifetime
income streams apply.

If the initial purchase price, or any instalments were paid before the
assessment day, their value is re-assessed on the assessment day. The
upper deeming rate is applied for the number of days since the:

-   last anniversary of the payment if it was made more than a year ago,
    or
-   date of the payment if it was paid within the last year

The purchase price of a pooled lifetime income on the assessment day is:

-   the total of the amounts after the calculation described above
-   less any commuted amounts

From the assessment day, deeming does not apply. The value of the
purchase price (initial payment plus any instalments), will only
increase if the customer makes another instalment.

Unlike other income streams, the calculated purchase price is not the
amount used as the asset value of the income stream product when the
assessment day is reached.

Assessment of income and asset value after assessment day

Income

After the assessment day, 60% of the gross payments is assessed as
income.

Asset value

After the assessment day, the assessed asset value is the same for
income streams purchased with superannuation or non-superannuation
money.

From the assessment day to the threshold day, the asset value is
assessed at 60% of the purchase price if the income stream meets limits
on how much capital can be accessed by:

-   the person if they surrender the income stream product, or
-   their estate if they die

Limits on the amount of capital that can be accessed are imposed on
income streams from superannuation funds by the Capital Access Schedule
(CAS). The CAS is under the Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
Regulations 1994.

For pooled lifetime income streams which exceed the CAS limit, the asset
value is the greater of:

-   60% of the purchase price
-   any current or future surrender value above the CAS, or
-   any current or future death benefit above the CAS

Threshold day

The product’s threshold day is the later of:

-   the day before the customer’s 84th birthday (the current relevant
    birthday), or
-   the last day of the 5 year period starting on assessment day

Note: the relevant birthday is specified in a legislative instrument. It
is based on the life expectancy of a 65-year old male. The threshold day
may change for new products if the life expectancy for 65-year old males
changes.

The asset value of the income stream changes on the threshold day. If
the product complies with the CAS limit, the asset value reduces to 30%
of the purchase price.

For pooled lifetime income streams that exceed the CAS limit, the asset
value on or after the threshold day is the greater of:

-   30% of the purchase price
-   any current or future surrender value above the Capital Access
    Schedule, or
-   any current or future death benefit above the Capital Access
    Schedule

Income stream schedule

The income stream providers must provide details of the income stream on
a Details of income stream product (SA330) or similar schedule.

Commutation

Commutations from pooled lifetime income streams may be allowed by the
income stream provider. A commutation would reduce the purchase amount
for assets test purposes.

Jointly owned income streams

Customers must use non-superannuation or ordinary money to purchase a
pooled lifetime income stream if it is to be in joint names. Each owner
of the joint income stream receives a payment. An income stream that has
a single owner with a reversionary beneficiary is not a joint income
stream.

The purchase price and the gross income must be split according to the
percentage each person owns. The separate amounts are recorded on the
customer's and the record of the other joint owner, for example, the
partner's record. The relevant number is the same for both income
streams.

If the income stream is jointly owned it will have ‘Jointly owned’ in
the product name field.

Reversionary income stream

The person who purchased an income stream can nominate a person to
receive the income after their death, for example their spouse or
partner. This person is the reversionary beneficiary.

On reversion to a reversionary beneficiary the income stream is assessed
from the date the reversionary beneficiary is entitled to receive the
payments. This will be the day after the death of the primary
beneficiary. If the assessment day had been reached, the reversionary
income stream is treated as a continuation of the original income
stream.

If the lifetime income stream was originally purchased before 1 July
2019, it will continue to be assessed under the pre-1 July 2019 means
test rules.

There may be a gap between the death of the original beneficiary and the
date the reversionary beneficiary starts to receive payments. A lump sum
arrears payment is made to the reversionary beneficiary to cover the
gap. The lump sum is assessed as income from an income stream for the
period to which it relates. This may result in a debt if the person has
been receiving an income support payment.

Waiver provisions came into effect from 9 May 2018:

-   where the lump sum arrears results in a debt during the bereavement
    period for the surviving spouse, and certain conditions are met
-   only debts within the 14 week bereavement period can be waived under
    these rules

The 9 May rules are not retrospective. Any of these debts that occur
before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived using these rules.

See the References page for a link to the legislation

Online updates

Customers can advise of new pooled lifetime income streams using their
Centrelink online account. The customer must still provide a Centrelink
schedule or Details of Income Stream Product form (SA330). The system
generates a manual handoff to check the customer has uploaded their
schedule. A DOC is recorded in Customer First with the keyword OIAICS,
and a work item for staff manual action will be generated on the
customer's record containing the details provided by the customer. Staff
can select the work item to process the update in Process Direct.

Customers cannot make changes to existing lifetime income streams
online.

Challenger CarePlus product

This product consists of a lifetime income stream component called
CarePlus Annuity and an insurance component called CarePlus Insurance.
These are assessed and coded separately. See the Resources page for a
link to the FINS Bulletin for more details.

The Resources page contains links to the Details of income stream
product form (SA330), the Level 2 Policy Help Desk Online Query Form and
the FINS Bulletin.

Related links

Updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a defined benefit income

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Assessing lifetime income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation
Funds (SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Income stream reviews

Income stream indexation review

Reviewing actuarial certificates for lifetime or life expectancy asset
test exempt income streams from Self Managed or Small APRA Super Funds

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Application to be allowed to commute all or part of an asset-test exempt
income stream due to extreme financial hardship

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

Waiver of debts resulting from the assessment of lump sum arrears of a
reversionary income stream

Income and assets options online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
