-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the assessment for Centrelink
purposes of Home Equity Conversion Loan or Reverse mortgage agreements.

On this Page:

Home Equity Conversion

A Home Equity Conversion Loan Agreement is a mechanism that allows a
homeowner to convert all or part of the equity locked up in their home
into cash or a stream of income. A key feature of a home equity
conversion agreement is that the loan (including interest) is generally
not repayable until the homeowner moves out of their home or dies.

Do not assume that because the lending institution has named a loan a
Home Equity Conversion Loan it will meet the policy definition for Home
Equity Conversion (HEC) loans. If a customer is thinking of applying for
one of these loans, refer them to a Financial Information Service (FIS)
officer.

Customers with a HEC arrangement are still homeowners for assessment
purposes.

HEC agreements should not be confused with sale leaseback agreements,
which are a commercial arrangement where a person sells their principal
home but continues to live in the home for a contracted period, often
for life.

Reverse Mortgages

Reverse mortgage products are usually available to residential property
owners aged over 60 living in their own home. The loan is secured
against the customer's home or investment property. The customer can
typically borrow up to approximately 45% of the value of the property.
Borrowers are not required to make any repayments until the home is
vacated permanently or in some cases until it is sold. All interest and
fees are rolled into the loan balance, to be paid at the end of the
contract. The amount borrowed is paid to the customer as a lump sum or
as a series of monthly payments. The asset value of the first $40,000
borrowed is exempt from the asset test until it has been spent, or for a
maximum of 90 days. All funds received are subject to deeming until they
have been spent. Any funds which have not been received are not an
asset. For Centrelink purposes, only an account with a positive balance
can be assessed as an asset. A mortgage has a negative balance and is
not an assessable asset.

Until recently, Reverse Mortgage products on the market required
repayment of the mortgage if the customer permanently vacated the
principal home the mortgage was secured against. Some new products allow
customers to access the equity in their own home but move without the
loan becoming repayable immediately.

If a customer accesses the equity in their principal home through a
Reverse Mortgage, then leaves the principal home without being required
to repay the mortgage, Home Equity Conversion rules can be applied.

There is also a type of Reverse mortgage, which allows the customer to
borrow a percentage of the current value of their home. The customer is
advanced a lower amount and the remainder is retained by the bank in
lieu of fees and interest. The bank then receives the full percentage
borrowed from the eventual sale price, for example, the customer is
approved to borrow 20% of the value of their home. The customer may be
advanced 11% of the current value of their home, the bank retains the
remaining 9% in lieu of interest and charges. When the home is sold, the
bank will receive 20% of the eventual sale price.

Note: it is important for the customer to supply the documentation
relating to their loan to correctly determine the exact type of loan
agreement the customer has taken out.

Reverse Mortgage secured against investment property

Several organisations are also marketing Reverse Mortgage products that
allow customers to access the equity in their unencumbered investment
property, rather than their own home. The Department of Social Services
(DSS) has advised a Reverse Mortgage on an investment property cannot be
assessed under the Home Equity Conversion rules under section 8(1) of
the Social Security Act 1991. The References page contains more
information. However, such a mortgage would reduce the asset value of
the investment property it was secured against. The lump sum paid to the
customer may be an assessable asset, depending on the purpose it was put
to. The lump sum paid to the customer is not assessed as income as it is
a return of capital.

The Resources page contains scenarios regarding how Reverse Mortgages
are assessed.

Related links

Loans and liabilities against assets

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
