-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the required documents when a customer has
financial circumstances that require an actuarial valuation to determine
their entitlements. All actuarial valuation requests are made to the
Australian Government Actuary (AGA) and can only be made by a Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO).

On this Page:

Annuity purchased from a source other than a financial institution

An annuity is a periodic payment purchased with a lump sum for a
specified period, usually from a Life Office. This period may be a set
number of years (term certain annuity) or for life (lifetime annuity).
Annuities can be purchased with ordinary or rollover monies.

Private annuities are not assessed under the income stream rules. This
is because they do not meet the requirement in the rules for prudential
regulation. They are usually family arrangements and are not traded in
the market. Private annuities are assessed under the ordinary income and
assets tests.

Where a customer purchases an annuity from a source other than a
financial institution, for example, from a relative or friend, then it
is necessary to establish whether the customer has received adequate
financial consideration for the purchase price or whether the
deprivation rules apply. In these cases, the capital value of the
annuity must be determined.

The AGA determines the capital value by methods of calculation based on
assumptions linked to interest rates, mortality tables and economic
factors. If adequate financial consideration has not been received, then
the difference is treated under the deprivation provisions.

Arrangements made outside the 5 year period for disposition are not
required to be valued for adequate financial consideration.

Transactions similar in nature to an annuity, for example, customer
transfers property to a child in return for an income stream, are
treated in the same manner as annuities purchased from relatives and
must be examined to ensure the customer has received adequate financial
consideration. The 5 year rule will still apply.

Referral to the AGA for assessment of sale agreement and private annuity valuations

The following information must be included by the CAO in a referral to
the AGA:

-   contact details (that is, email address and direct phone number) of
    the requesting officer in case further information is needed
-   full name of the customer and Centrelink customer reference number
    (CRN)
-   date of birth of the customer
-   valuation date required (date of the agreement will be used unless
    otherwise stated)
-   purpose of the valuation, for example, deprivation following sale
-   basic terms of the agreement, for example, instalment amounts and
    due dates
-   treatment of annuity on death of purchaser
-   age of annuitant
-   payment rate
-   indexation rate (if any)
-   ability to commute the annuity (if any)
-   details of any other relevant factors

Documents required for referral to the AGA for assessment of a life
interest are a copy of the sale agreement or private annuity agreement,
if available. If not available, provide the basic terms of the
agreement, for example, instalment amounts, due dates, treatment of the
annuity on death of annuitant.

Note: see Resources Useful contact information - Australian Government
Actuary for contact details.

Life interest

A life interest is generally an exempt asset, however a life interest
created by the customer, the customer's partner or on the death of a
customer's partner is an asset which must be valued for Centrelink
assessment purposes (unless the asset which is the subject of the life
interest is an exempt asset such as the principal residence). Life
interests in exempt assets are also exempt assets and do not need
valuation unless surrendered. Life interests that are assessable as
assets must be actuarially valued if it is likely the asset value will
affect the customer's rate of pension or allowance.

The value of a life interest is determined by the AGA. The AGA, in
valuing the life interest, will generally take into consideration the
terms attached to the life interest, the age and gender of the customer
granted the life interest, and the type of asset in which the customer
has the life interest. To determine if an AGA valuation is required,
calculate the approximate asset value of the life interest.

If a customer surrenders a life interest the value of the income and/or
asset must be looked at in terms of disposition. An actuarial valuation
may be required to ascertain the amount of deprivation to be maintained.
The 5 year rule in regard to disposition applies.

Reversionary in property and or investments

Reversionary, remainder or contingent interest in property and or
investments (creation of life interest).

The value of a reversionary, remainder or contingent interest is an
exempt asset except where the interest was created by the customer or
partner.

A reversionary interest occurs when a titleholder of an asset grants
another party a life interest or interest in the asset for a specified
time including the beneficial use of the asset for life or the specified
time. The use of the asset reverts back to the titleholder on expiration
of the other party's interest.

A remainder interest is created when a person grants a life interest in
an asset to one party but gives title to the asset to another party. For
example, the first party has the use of the property for life or a
specified term, and the second party has the remainder interest on
termination of the first party's interest.

A contingent interest is one which depends on or is contingent to a
particular occurrence which may or may not occur.

Reversionary, remainder or contingent interests created by a customer or
partner must be actuarially valued, and the actuarial valuation
maintained as an asset. The deprivation rules must be considered in
cases falling into the 5 year provision.

Referral to the AGA for assessment of a life interest, reversionary, remainder or contingent interest

The following information must be included by the CAO in a referral to
the AGA:

-   full name of the customer and Centrelink customer reference number
    (CRN)
-   date of birth of the customer
-   whether the customer lives in an aged care facility
-   valuation date/s required (date of the letter will be used unless
    otherwise stated)
-   purpose of the valuation, for example, income support payment
    assessment, deprivation following surrender

The following documents and supporting information are required for
referral to the AGA for assessment of a life interest:

-   details of all assets the customer has a life interest or remainder
    interest in as at the valuation date/s. See Resources page for
    details of assets and required documentation
-   will (if the life interest was initially inherited by the customer)
-   deed of arrangement
-   income tax return
-   in the case of remainder interest, also provide the date of birth of
    the person who has a life interest and whether they live in an aged
    care facility
-   statement regarding any other relevant factors

Note: customers are not required to provide medical or other health
details and if provided will be attached to the customer's file with
other documentation.

For cases not specified above and where it is considered an actuarial
valuation may be needed, Service Officers must contact a CAO before
referring the case.

For all cases, it is the responsibility of the Service Officer to
collect all information and documents required before referral to the
CAO.

See Australian Government Actuary for contact details.

The Resources page contains a list of assets and the information
required when a referral to the AGA is made.

Related links

Actuarial valuations

Referrals for actuarial valuations

Life interest in an asset or income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
