
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the allowance income and
assets tests. The income and assets tests aim to provide financial
support to customers who most need it, and to reduce that support in
line with increased capacity of customers to provide for themselves.

The Income Test

Under the personal Income Test for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (YA) job seekers, all income earned in each fortnightly period
must be declared to Services Australia. Income below $150 is in the
income free area. Income above that threshold reduces a customer's
allowance entitlements at tapered rates.

The Income Test has different applications for some job seekers,
dependent on their marital status and whether their partner receives a
pension. Students or Australian Apprentices on ABSTUDY or YA also
receive different treatment as they have a higher income free area and
may have an Income Bank.

For children born or entering care on or after 1 October 2016, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) are counted as ordinary
income for calculating the rate of payment for income support payments.

Working Credits

Customers of workforce age (not including students, Australian
Apprentices or those receiving Special Benefit) are entitled to Working
Credits, which may enable the customer to keep some of their income
support payment while they are working. If the customer's income reduces
their fortnightly rate to nil and some of that income is employment
income, the customer's payment may remain current and will enter an
employment income nil rate period and the customer may retain certain
benefits. Working Credits accrue up to a maximum of 1000 credits for
allowance customers the exception being for YA job seekers who can
accrue up to a maximum of 3500 credits.

The Assets Test

The other test used to determine payments for customers is the Assets
Test. All assets owned by customers must be declared although some may
be treated as exempt assets. If the value of customer's assets exceeds
the Assets Test limit, they do not qualify for payment. There is a
distinct cut off point dependent upon marital status and whether or not
they are homeowners. Hardship provisions may apply if a customer is in
severe financial hardship, but limits are not increased for dependent
children.

The Assets Test presumes that people with substantial assets which
produce little or no income should rearrange their financial affairs
before seeking financial support from the community. The intention of
any such rearrangement should be to increase their income if possible.

Exempt income and assets

An exempt asset, irrespective of its value, is one that is disregarded
under the Assets Test but may have assessable income. For example, the
proceeds from the sale of the principal home are an exempt asset but the
proceeds when invested are deemed for income (interest earned).

There are four broad categories of exempt income. Although exempt income
is disregarded as income, the amount received may be an assessable asset
and if the funds are invested, deeming provisions apply.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds from the National
Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) are received periodically or as a
lump sum, including interest accrued. They are:

-   deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of managing
    the customer's NDIS
-   exempt from the Income and Assets Tests and deeming
-   not required to be reported or, if reported, should not be taken
    into account in the income and asset assessment

International Agreement payments

Customers who are granted a payment under an International Agreement may
be subject to a direct deduction Income Test if they are receiving
income from that agreement country.

Contents

Income Test for single allowance customers

Income test for partnered allowance customers

Personal Assets Test for allowances, Austudy and independent Youth
Allowance or ABSTUDY customers

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income and assets tests

Related links

Personal/Partner Income Tests for students, trainees or Australian
Apprentices

The Parental Means Test

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of other ordinary income for Centrelink payments

Working Credit

International Social Security Agreements

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
