-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the assessment of
caravans, boats and park homes. If a customer resides in a campervan,
park home, caravan or a boat which they own (or are purchasing), they
are considered to be a homeowner and the lower assets limits apply. Rent
Assistance (RA) can be paid if the customer does not own the land the
dwelling is situated on and is paying site or mooring fees.

Customers living alone

Single customers living alone in a caravan, boat or park home are exempt
from the sharer's provisions for RA, even if they are sharing a major
area of accommodation in the park or marina.

If a customer lives in a park home they own, they are treated the same
as if they live in a caravan they own, that is they are homeowners but
may be paid RA when they do not own the land the dwelling is situated on
and pay site fees.

Travelling around Australia

If a customer decides to travel around Australia and leaves their
principal home temporarily for up to twelve months, RA is not payable.
They are a homeowner of their principal residence which they have
temporarily vacated. However, if they are absent for more than twelve
months, RA may be payable. The home is then classed as an asset as it is
no longer their principal home. The customer may then be eligible for RA
for site or mooring/marina fees paid in respect of their caravan, mobile
home or boat, which would then be classified as their principal home.

For more details see Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers.

Lifestyle villages, park homes and over 55 villages

A caravan park, mobile home (transportable home), or a lifestyle park
may promote itself as a retirement park or village by using a name which
gives this impression. Although it may restrict occupancy to residents
over a specified age, and have similar facilities to a retirement
village, there are factors that need to be considered to determine the
correct accommodation type.

Rent Assistance (RA) may be payable for service or site fees paid.

Factors to consider:

-   Names of these facilities may refer to themselves as lifestyle
    villages, park homes, mobile park homes, over 55 villages etc.
-   Even if the dwelling is not moveable, it is still assessed as a park
    home. These homes are usually built off the ground
-   The customer may own the dwelling but have a lease for the use of
    the land it sits on, that is pays site fees
-   If the customer moves to other accommodation, what happens with the
    dwelling (in most cases these are sold to the next resident)
-   If state legislation covers the facility. A retirement village is
    covered by state retirement village legislation. A copy of the
    customer’s contract will show if the home is covered by the relevant
    state legislation

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesks -
Online Query Form.

Related links

Permanent vacation of principal home

Temporary vacation of principal home

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Rent Assistance (RA)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Retirement villages

Supported Residential Services (SRS)

Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
