
Calculation of Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA) 108-03060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Defence Force Income Support Allowance
(DFISA) payment is calculated.

Calculating the rate of DFISA for periods before 1 January 2022

If a customer's social security pension or benefit is reduced because of
income received from a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Adjusted
Disability Pension, a calculation automatically takes place on their
record to assess entitlement to DFISA, which is paid by DVA.

From 1 January 2022, Adjusted Disability Pensions became exempt income
under the Social Security Act 1991 for income support payments. As such,
DFISA is no longer required.

Calculation of DFISA is still required for customers who are
retrospectively granted an Adjusted Disability Pension before 1 January
2022 or for reassessments of DFISA already paid to customers.

A person's rate of DFISA is equal to the difference between the actual
rate of social security pension or benefit the person receives, and
their notional rate, which is the rate they would receive if the
Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA is:

-   exempted from the pension or benefit income test, but
-   included as income in the assessment of Rent Assistance (RA)
    entitlement (that is, the DVA disability income rent test is
    applied)

DFISA rate = notional rate minus actual rate

A manual DFISA calculation will be needed for customers who are on a
manual rate of payment for their pension or benefit, or where the system
cannot perform an automatic rate calculation. Manual DFISA calculations
are done by the DVA Clearance Team.

For information on how to calculate DFISA, see the Process page.

Changes to the rate of DFISA

DFISA will be automatically recalculated whenever there is a change in
circumstances that could affect a customer’s rate of pension or benefit.
New DFISA rates are transmitted to DVA at the end of every business day,
where they are updated on the customer’s record. DVA will generally pay
DFISA fortnightly, and any change to a customer’s DFISA rate may result
in a debt or arrears payment with DVA.

It is important to note the rate of DFISA can change even when a
customer’s pension or benefit rate has not changed or is a nil rate
(current zero rate (CZR)). It is therefore essential any change in
circumstances is accurately recorded, as this will directly affect the
rate of DFISA.

Current zero rate (CZR - DFISA)

When a customer's income precludes entitlement, their pension or benefit
is normally rejected or cancelled. Before 1 January 2022, if a customer
or their partner are paid an Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA, a
DFISA calculation will be done before this occurs. If DFISA is greater
than zero their pension or benefit is held as Current Zero Rate (CZR
DFISA). These customers were regarded as receiving the pension or
benefit for which they qualify and are entitled to the associated
benefits and concessions relevant to their payment.

CZR DFISA customers must have continued to qualify for their pension or
benefit, and meet the obligations associated with their particular
payment. Customers will cease to be CZR-DFISA from 1 January 2022 as
Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA will no longer be assessed under
the income test for income support payments.

Stimulus reporting customers who receive DFISA

DFISA payments for stimulus reporters were calculated and transmitted to
DVA when the customer reported their income at the end of every
entitlement period up until 1 January 2022. This was to ensure all
income is taken into account when DFISA is calculated, and to reduce the
risk of overpayment. DVA will pay DFISA for the entitlement period
retrospectively.

A zero DFISA rate was then transmitted to DVA at the start of every
entitlement (reporting) period. This occurs in the background.

The Resources page contains an example of how DFISA rates will display
for reporting customers.

DFISA and the Home Equity Access Scheme

The Home Equity Access Scheme allows older Australians and their
partners to supplement their fortnightly income with a government funded
loan. The amount of DFISA affects the amount of loan a person can
receive each fortnight.

DFISA and Lump Sum Bereavement Payment, Pension Bonus and Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment

There will be instances when a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment, Pension
Bonus or Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment has been reduced due to the
inclusion of an Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA. In these instances
a DFISA Lump Sum Bereavement payment, a DFISA Pension Bonus payment or a
DFISA Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment will also be calculated and
transmitted to DVA for payment.

For information on the calculation of these amounts, see the Process
page.

DFISA and partnered pension customers

Pension customer partnered with an allowance customer, or both
pensioners

When a couple includes at least 1 pensioner, their incomes are combined
and then halved to establish their assessable income. Their respective
rates are calculated using this income information. These rules remain
unchanged with DFISA, meaning half the total combined DVA Adjusted
Disability Pension is assessed as income against each customer for
periods before 1 January 2022.

For pension/allowance couples with Rent Assistance (RA), the RA is paid
to the pension customer. To establish the amount of DFISA payable, the
notional rate of pension and notional RA are added together to obtain
the pension customer’s total notional rate. The notional RA amount is
calculated using the DVA disability income rent test, in which the
couple’s combined Adjusted Disability Pension income is halved in order
to obtain the RA reduction amount used in the calculation.

Partner excess income and DFISA

Allowance customer partnered with a Parenting payment customer, another
allowance customer, an ABSTUDY customer, or partner not on benefits

When a partner’s ordinary income exceeds the Partner Income Free Area
(which is the cut-out point where the partner’s benefit is no longer
payable), it reduces the rate of allowance payable to the customer. To
calculate the amount of partner excess income to deduct from the
customer’s fortnightly payment, the Partner Income Free Area is deducted
from the partner's income and multiplied by 0.6. See the Process page
for further information.

A partner’s compensation direct deduction excess income is treated as
ordinary income for the customer.

For the calculation of DFISA, all steps in the calculation of a
customer’s rate must be mirrored in the notional rate calculation, for
example, if there is compensation direct deduction excess in the actual
calculation, this must be included in the notional calculation.

The exceptions to this are the notional partner excess income and
notional rent assistance calculations, which require special treatment
as described below.

Notional partner excess income

If a customer’s fortnightly allowance is reduced by their partner’s
excess income, and the partner also receives an Adjusted Disability
Pension from DVA before 1 January 2022, the notional partner excess
income must be included in the customer’s DFISA calculation.

To obtain the notional partner excess income amount, the partner’s
Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA is simply excluded from the
calculation of partner excess income. This calculation does not include
the partner’s Rent Assistance or the DVA disability income rent test.

The notional partner excess income amount is included in the notional
rate calculation for the customer, where it is applied as a direct
deduction after the customer’s notional income test has been applied. If
the customer receives RA, see below as a further step is required to
obtain the customer’s notional rate.

Notional Rent Assistance calculation for partner with excess income

The partner’s Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA excess income must be
included in the calculation of notional Rent Assistance (RA) for the
customer.

Partner Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA excess income is obtained
by subtracting notional partner excess income from the actual partner
excess income.

The resulting amount is subtracted from the customer’s notional RA as a
final step in the DVA disability income rent test.

Once the final notional Rent Assistance amount has been calculated, the
full notional calculation can be done for the customer.

The full notional calculation for cases involving partner excess income
is:

-   add the partner’s final notional RA to the customer’s maximum basic
    rate
-   apply the notional income test (by excluding the DVA Adjusted
    Disability Pension income)
-   deduct the notional partner excess income amount

The result will be the final notional entitlement.

Effect of DFISA when determining whether transitional rules apply

From 20 September 2009 changes to the pension income test were made as a
result of the Pension Reform. As part of this reform, transitional rules
were put in place to ensure no pension customer was worse off following
the introduction of the new income test.

To qualify for their payment to be calculated under the transitional
rules, a customer must have been on a relevant pension payment and been
payable as at 19 September 2009, and have had no break in entitlement.
They will continue to be paid under transitional rules until they are
entitled to an equal or higher rate under the new rules implemented on
20 September 2009. Once this occurs they move to the new income test
rules permanently.

The DFISA rate must be included when the comparison is conducted between
the rate payable under transitional rules and the rate payable under the
new rules (that is, the current income test), as DFISA is part of the
total income support payment received by the customer.

These rate comparisons will be made by the system. Where an automatic
calculation cannot occur a manual rate calculation will be completed by
staff within the DVA Clearance Team.

Payments that attract DFISA and were eligible for transitional rules
are:

-   Age Pension
-   Bereavement Allowance
-   Carer Payment
-   Disability Support Pension (except for customers under 21 years who
    have no affecting income and/or no dependent children)
-   Widow B Pension
-   Wife Pension

The Resources page contains an example of how DFISA rates will display
for reporting customers, how to calculate notional rent assistance using
the DVA disability income rent test, calculation of DFISA Bereavement
Lump Sum and contains a link to information to assist with coding on the
DFISA Calculation Details screen.

Historical Note:

The DFISA-attracting payment Community Development Employment Project
Scheme Participation Supplement ceased on 30 June 2015. In respect of
Newstart system (NSS) customer partnered with Parenting system (PGA)
customer, or both NSS customers, or partnered to an ABSTUDY customer
excess wages were treated as ordinary income or employment income, for
the partner, not as direct deductions.

Related links

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Veterans' Affairs payments income and assets tests

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA) screens

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)-like payments

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Income Test for partnered allowance customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
