
Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services 108-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to record and update income and asset details
for new and existing income support payment customers, aged care means
test assessments and certain concession cards.

It covers general information and processes for coding changes of
circumstances and new claims. For help with assessing and coding a
specific asset or type of income, see the relevant Operational
Blueprint. Some are listed in Related links below.

Asset definition

The Social Security Act 1991 defines an asset as 'property'. Property is
not defined, but has an established common law meaning - any possession,
belongings or property owned solely or partly. It includes beneficial
interests, and debts owed to a person.

Assets are assessed at their net market value. This is the amount likely
to be received by selling the asset. On review, a revised value of the
asset will become the current market value.

Customers are not asked to get professional valuations. If considered
necessary, Services Australia will arrange for specific items to be
valued by an approved valuer.

If the asset is owned with another person, the asset value for a
customer is determined using the proportion of their interest in the
asset.

Recording details

The income and assets of a customer (and their partner) must be recorded
when:

-   a claim is made
-   an aged care means assessment has been requested
-   a current customer has a change to their circumstances. Note: where
    there is a small change to asset values, determine whether the
    customer is required to notify

Update the details once all information needed for the update is
available. Income and assets updates for a claim for payment are to be
completed within the new claim activity. Refer to the relevant
Operational Blueprint for details of how to locate and process claims.

Changes to a customer's income or assets are applied from the date of
event (DOV). Generally, this is the date the change actually happens,
for example, when:

-   shares or other assets are purchased or sold
-   there is a change to the customer's bank account
-   the customer makes a gift

Some instances, such as a customer depreciating their assets or the
application of relevant legislation, may result in a different DOV. See
Process and Reference tabs for further information about coding changes
and dates of event.

Do not delete the details unless it is clear that they were recorded in
error, for example, doubled-up.

Date of event, date of receipt

To ensure payment correctness with a change in income and assets:

all changes related to the event should be updated in the same activity,

use the date of receipt the agency first became aware of the event. See
Date of receipt

use the same date of event (DOV) for all related updates

-   For example: A managed fund is closed on 04/09/2019 however proceeds
    are not deposited into a bank account until 10/09/2019. Code the DOV
    as 10/9/2019 for both closure of the managed fund and update to the
    bank account balance

Income being maintained for 52 weeks, for example, lump sum
remuneration, must not be zeroed until the 52 weeks has passed, even if
the source of income has ceased. If recorded as type 'OTH' with a
frequency of ANN on the Other Income (OINS) screen, the system will set
it to zero after 52 weeks.

The auto-review is only for Pension customers. For other customers:

-   Code a review for the applicable date in the future to review or
    delete the income, using a review reason of INC on the Review
    Registration (RVR) screen
-   For example, if the income was received on 1 May 2017 and is to be
    assessed for 6 weeks, the review should be set for 12 June 2017 to
    zero off the income at the end of the 6 week period

For more information, see Verifying and recording other income on the
Other Income (OIN) screen.

If the customer still owns the income and/or asset and they are advising
of a change, see the Process page for coding details.

Some fields will not allow coding of decimals. In this case, round down
to the nearest whole number. Complete any calculations using the total
amounts before rounding down. For example, when apportioning mortgage or
loans only round down the result.

For new claims, customers with:

a partner who is a current Centrelink customer, the DOV of event is the
date of the change

a partner who is not a current Centrelink customer, or does not have a
partner, the DOV is the date of grant

-   EXCEPTION: for early claims, DOV is the date of receipt (DOR)

Changes since the date of grant are coded from the date the change
occurred.

Information required

This depends on the payment or service the customer is claiming or
getting, and the type of income or asset being updated.

Verification of income and asset information may be required. See
Verifying income and assets changes or Documents required for Centrelink
new claims.

If more information is needed to complete the update, see Requesting
information.

These processes will generate a letter and update the activity status
and the customer's online account.

Exempt income and assets

An exempt asset is one that is disregarded under the assets test. Its
value does not matter.

An exempt asset is disregarded but may have assessable income. For
example, the proceeds from the sale of the principal home are an exempt
asset but the proceeds when invested are deemed for income purposes.

There are 4 broad categories of exempt income. Although exempt income is
disregarded as income:

-   the amount received may be an assessable asset, and
-   if the funds are invested, the deeming provisions apply

While exempt for income support payments, certain assets such as the
principal home and the Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD) for
example, are not exempt for aged care means assessments.

Bank accounts/investments held in trust

For details on how to assess and record bank accounts or investments
held in trust, see Trusts.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights, and record an application for
    a formal review of the decision if required

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

Resources contains a link to the Redbook website.

Related links

Adding shares and securities

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Assessing income from seasonal work

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

Compensation payments

Date of Receipt

Deeming provisions

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Exempt income and assets

Financial investments

Foreign income and assets

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Income streams

Managed investments - adding a new investment

Partnerships

Real estate

Requesting information (CLK)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Sole Traders

Superannuation

The Working Credit Initiative

Trusts

Verifying income and asset

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
