
Assessing superannuation 108-05070010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess superannuation investments. This
document does not cover the assessment of adjusted taxable income for
family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments.

What is superannuation?

Superannuation is an investment to provide financial resources during
retirement. On retirement, the money can remain in the superannuation
investment or it can be used to start an income stream.

Employers, employees and self-employed people contribute to
superannuation funds. Sometimes the government will add to it through
co-contributions.

This procedure does not apply to the assessment of adjusted taxable
income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments.

Overseas superannuation-like investments

Overseas superannuation-like investments do not meet the definition of a
superannuation fund in Section 9(1) of the Social Security Act. This
means overseas superannuation-like investments are treated as overseas
managed investments for social security purposes, provided the person
can access the funds.

If a person cannot access the funds for example, because they do not
meet a condition of release such as reaching a certain age, the asset
value is not assessed as a managed investment.

For more information, see Foreign income and assets.

Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSF)

Customers can set up their own superannuation funds. They are known as
Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSF) or Small APRA (Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority) Superannuation Funds (SAF). Most SMSFs
and SAFs can be identified by their name. Often the name of the SMSF or
SAF will include the customer's family name.

SMSF:

-   has less than 5 members
-   all members are trustees of the superannuation fund or directors of
    the trustee company if a corporate trustee exists
-   are regulated by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

SAF

-   has less than 5 members
-   has a corporate trustee who is approved by APRA
-   are regulated by APRA

Note: a SMSF or a SAF must comply with the Superannuation Industry
Supervision (SIS) Regulations. If it doesn't comply, it is considered a
private trust and is assessed under the trust and company rules. For
further information, see the definition of a superannuation fund in
Section 9(1) of the Social Security Act

Accessing superannuation

Following retirement from the workforce, a person is able to access
their superannuation. They can:

-   make lump sum withdrawals, or
-   convert part or all of their investment into regular ongoing
    payments from an income stream product such as a superannuation
    pension or annuity

Where superannuation assets are used to purchase or to commence an
income stream, it is assessed under the income stream rules.

Generally, accrued superannuation benefits are not accessible until the
fund member leaves the workforce and reaches preservation age. However,
the superannuation trustee does permit early release of preserved
superannuation benefits in limited circumstances.

Note: regular withdrawals from a superannuation fund are not an income
stream see, Assessing withdrawals from superannuation.

There are different types of superannuation investments. They are not to
be confused with income stream products like superannuation pensions and
annuities.

Assessment under the Income and Assets Tests

Customers at or over Age Pension age:

-   All superannuation investments are assessed under the Income and
    Assets Tests
-   Superannuation is assessed under deeming provisions and is coded as
    a managed investment
-   The Minister for the Department of Social Services (DSS) has the
    delegation to exempt superannuation investments if they are
    inaccessible and certain conditions are met

Customers under Age Pension age:

A superannuation pension or income stream is assessable under the income
and asset rules

Australian superannuation investments not being used to receive a
pension or income stream are exempt under the Income and Assets Tests.
Information about them is not to be obtained or recorded

If the customer advises their assessable assets are less because they
have moved money into superannuation:

-   ask to see proof but do not code any of the superannuation details
-   record on a DOC that the money has now been invested in
    superannuation

Unallocated reserves held within SMSF

SMSFs or SAFs may have reserves that are set aside within the fund. They
are 'unallocated reserves', that is, they are not part of any individual
member's superannuation interest in the fund.

The reserves have different names but the most common are investment
reserve and miscellaneous or general reserve. These are to be attributed
to each member based on the contribution each member has made towards
the accumulated reserves. That is, those members with more assets in the
fund are likely to have made a larger contribution to generating the
unallocated reserves. This may change over time where members make
contributions or withdrawals.

Where it is not possible to attribute the reserves on the basis of each
member's interest in the fund, the unallocated reserves will be
attributed equally to each member of the fund. They are treated as
superannuation assets and the assessment will depend on whether the
person is either under Age Pension age or of Age Pension age.

Disability benefits from superannuation- Total and Permanent Disability benefit (TPD)

This is also known as Invalidity benefit.

It is paid when a member satisfies the permanent incapacity condition of
release, usually before age 65 and the member may not have reached the
normal retirement age

It is usually paid as a one-off lump sum payment, but it may also be
paid as an invalidity lifetime pension

It generally includes the member's accrued superannuation benefit and an
insurance benefit

The invalidity lifetime pension paid from a defined benefit fund is
assessed as a defined benefit income stream. There may be a deductible
amount (also known as tax free component). There is no asset value to
assess

Where a member is granted an invalidity lifetime pension and where the
amount of the income stream the recipient will receive is not able to be
calculated immediately:

-   it is common for the member to receive a lump sum payment of arrears
    prior to commencing the regular ongoing payments
-   assess the lump sum arrears as income from the date of the
    notification from the superannuation fund that the person's
    Invalidity or TPD pension has been approved. It is not the date they
    applied for it

Where a member is paid the TPD benefit as a one-off lump sum payment, it
is treated as a lump sum withdrawal from the superannuation fund

Disability benefits from superannuation- Total and Temporary Disability benefit (TTD)

This is also known as Salary Continuance benefit, Income Protection
benefit or Disability Income benefit. It is paid for a temporary and/or
partial disability

They are:

-   insurance payments paid under a contract of insurance between the
    superannuation fund and the insurance company
-   a percentage of the member's former salary
-   paid for up to 2 years or 5 years depending on the contract, or even
    until the person turns 65 years of age
-   subject to a waiting period before the payments commence
-   usually paid as regular ongoing payments, but may also be paid as a
    lump sum arrears for a specified period
-   usually offset against workers compensation payments, Centrelink
    payments and other disability insurance benefits received by the
    member
-   The payments may stop if the member's employment is terminated or if
    they are reclassified as being permanently disabled and are paid a
    TPD benefit

Regular ongoing payments:

-   Payments are assessed as ordinary income
-   The assessable amount is the gross income less any adjustment for
    the offsets applied by the insurance company
-   The superannuation fund may also make a superannuation contribution
    to the member’s account at the same time as the regular ongoing
    payments. If needed under the Superannuation Guarantee for the
    customer, it is not assessed as income. It must not be included in
    the ongoing payment amount. If the contribution is voluntary, it is
    assessed as income and included in the ongoing payment amount

Lump sum payment of arrears

Lump sum arrears can be paid for the period prior to the commencement of
regular payments.

The assessable income is the gross amount less any adjustment for
offsets applied by the provider.

Treatment of the lump sum arrears depends on when the person has present
legal entitlement to the arrears payment. This is the date that the
person could reasonably expect to receive the payment.

If present legal entitlement exists for the period the arrears payment
covers:

-   the lump sum payment is assessed as income over the period the
    arrears relates to, and
-   may result in a debt if the person or their partner has been in
    receipt of an income support payment.
    Example: On 1 August 2017, Peter applies to his superannuation fund
    to start his income stream. Peter is eligible to receive his income
    stream from that date. The superannuation fund starts Peter's
    ongoing payments on 1 October 2017 and pays him lump sum arrears of
    $4000 for the period 1 August to 30 September. The $4,000 is
    assessed as income over the period from 1 August to 30 September

If present legal entitlement only exists from the date the payment is
made:

-   the lump sum is apportioned forward from the day the person receives
    the payment
-   the payment is apportioned evenly over a period equal to the period
    that the arrears represents, up to 52 weeks.
    Example: On 1 August 2021, Dom is paid a lump sum arrears payment
    from his income stream provider after being underpaid for a period
    of 6 months due to administrative error. Dom could not have
    reasonably expected to receive the payment as Dom had no knowledge
    of the underpayment occurring. The lump sum payment is apportioned
    over 6 months from 1 August 2021 which means the lump sum is added
    to Dom's other assessable income for the next 6 months

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk -
Submit an enquiry online form, and Income and Assets table.

Related links

Superannuation

Assessing withdrawals from superannuation

Early release of superannuation benefits on financial hardship grounds

Assessing income streams paid from Self-Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Exemptions of income and assets tests for superannuation investments

Managed investments - adding a new investment

Income streams

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

Adding or updating an account based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Adding or updating a pooled lifetime income stream

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
