-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for calculating the correct payment
of Parenting Payment Single (PPS) for a customer under the PPS Income
Test and the benefits Assets Test (also known as the allowance Assets
Test).

On this Page:

PPS Income Test

Under the PPS Income Test, a customer's PPS rate is reduced if their
assessable income is above the income limit for PPS. Their payment will
cease when the income tested rate reaches the income threshold. For the
PPS income free area, see Parenting Payment (PP) - income test.

If the customer is workforce age and has income from employment, apply
the Working Credit rules to the total ordinary income before applying
the Income Test.

If a person receives a payment under an international agreement the rate
calculation may be affected by that agreement.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) is not counted as
assessable income for PPS for children born or entering care prior to 1
October 2016.

PPL and DAP is counted as ordinary income for PPS for children born or
entering care on or after 1 October 2016.

Where an income support customer is also in receipt of PPL, their PPL
details can be viewed on the PPL Claim Details (P1RCD) screen.

DAP payments made to the customer can be viewed on the One Off Payment
(OOP) screen.

The customer does not have to report their PPL or DAP payment.

Additional income free area

Children may attract an additional income free area if they meet the
definition of a dependent child, but this is not always the case. In
some cases a child who does not meet this definition may still attract
an additional income free area. This is explained in a separate
procedure which covers the definition of a dependent child under social
security law. Income received by or on behalf of a child reduces a
customer's additional free area for a child unless it is exempt child
income.

PPS Assets Test

PPS is paid under the benefits Asset Test (also known as the allowance
Assets Test). The allowance assets thresholds are indexed (and may
change) on 1 July each year. For the Allowance assets threshold, see
Assets test - Allowance (Independent).

A person's principal residence is not included in the calculation of
assets. Assets are assessed as either a primary production asset or a
non-primary production asset so that negative net primary production
assets can be offset against other primary production assets; primary
production aggregation rules.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds received from the
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), (whether received
periodically or as a lump sum, including interest accrued), which are
deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of managing the
customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from the Income and Assets Test and
deeming. They are not required to be reported or if reported should not
be taken into account in the income and asset assessment.

The Resources page contains examples of applying the Income and Assets
Tests for PPS and additional information on screens.

Related links

Assessment of assets (CLK)

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of other ordinary income for Centrelink payments

Assets hardship for income support payments

Exempt income

Rates and Thresholds

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

Rates of Parenting Payment (PP)

Income, assets and rates of payment

Working Credit

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
