
Single Touch Payroll (STP) 108-22070738

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how Single Touch Payroll (STP) data is used by
Services Australia. It explains how employment details and income
components are received, displayed and calculated.

 

What is Single Touch Payroll

Single Touch Payroll (STP) is an Australian Government initiative where
employers report payroll information via STP enabled software to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) each time employees are paid. This STP
reported payroll information is known as a pay event and can occur
weekly, fortnightly, monthly or other frequencies.

Payroll reporting of PayEvent 2020 data via STP-enabled software was
mandatory from 1 January 2022. The ATO has, however, taken a flexible
approach based on the readiness of the business and their software
provider. This will mean that Services Australia will continue to see
growth in the number of customers with STP data.

Not all payroll data reported to the ATO is required by Services
Australia to administer the Social Security system. Services Australia
accesses and prepares only the required data in near real time to
pre-fill in customer and staff-facing tools. Pre-filling means customers
do not have to provide information that is already known by the
government and provides a simple, helpful, respectful and transparent
experience.

Single Touch Payroll data

Services Australia can access the STP data of customers who are a mutual
client of the ATO and Services Australia. The data can include, but is
not limited to:

-   employer name and ABN/WPN
-   employment commencement date
-   employment status (full time, part time or casual)
-   salary and wages
-   allowances
-   bonuses and commission
-   voluntary superannuation deductions
-   salary sacrifice deductions
-   reportable fringe benefits
-   workers compensation
-   leave and redundancy payments
-   employment cessation details

This information helps Services Australia to better support customers
when claiming income support payments, when reporting employment income
and in determining family income estimates, through payment accuracy.

STP Service Profiling

When an STP employer reports employment income data for a customer
receiving an income support payment (ISP), service profiling will
automatically place the customer onto 2 weekly statement reporting. This
can be viewed on the Reporting Regime Summary (RPRS) screen, where the
reason will show as STP.

If a customer advises they do not work after being placed on reporting
for the STP reason, Service Officers are not to take the customer off
reporting until the STP Employer Update Workflow in Process Direct has
been run, to check for any employer details. If an STP Employer is
presented, discuss this with the customer and either accept or reject
the employer details and complete the update. Note: where there is no
pre-filled STP employer details available, cancel the activity.

Service profiling can also take some customers off reporting. Customers
with no mutual obligations and with no other employment income, will be
taken off reporting or reverted back to their prior reporting
requirements:

-   6 fortnights after confirming their STP cessation details including
    the cessation date, or
-   if there is no STP cessation details, after having no STP pay events
    for 6 consecutive fortnights.

If customers are automatically taken off reporting for the above
reasons, or manually by a Service Officer and a subsequent STP pay event
is available, the customer will be placed back onto 2 weekly statement
reporting.

STP Confirmation Service

When STP data is available when reporting through self service channels,
the customer is advised there is information reported by their employer
through Single Touch Payroll. This means the reporting task will be a 2
step process.

First step: Customers are directed to the STP Confirmation Service in
the Report Employment Income (REI) workflow to review, accept or change
the pre-filled STP data and submit the information with the STP
Declaration. Once submitted, they are unable to make any additional
changes to the confirmed STP data, however they can add further pay
details that may not have pre-filled yet for the STP employer. If there
is more than one STP employer, the customer will need to review the STP
data for each employer separately. The STP income details will then
update to EAPP/IMPS.

Second step: After submitting the STP data, the customer will enter the
REI service of the workflow to continue with their reporting. They will
see the confirmed STP data pre-filled into their report. They can then
add employment income for non-STP employers, income for their partner
and report any hours worked, if required. The fortnightly report is only
finalised once the customer also submits the REI Declaration.

After the customer submits the REI Declaration, a DOC will generate with
the captured STP data and other details. If the customer exits the
reporting service after only submitting the STP data at the first step,
a DOC will generate with the STP data only. If a Service Officer assists
the customer to complete their reporting, a separate DOC is generated.
This DOC may show ‘no income declared’ if no further income details are
reported because the customer has already confirmed STP data and will be
viewable on EAPP and EMGI.

Reviewing and confirming STP data

STP data is presented to customers when they report through their
Centrelink online account, Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or though
Interactive Voice Response (IVR). When claiming certain income support
payments and benefits, STP data will present through their Centrelink
online account or via an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Service Officers can access STP data when using the following in Process
Direct:

-   Earnings and Reporting workflow
-   STP Employer Update workflow
-   STP Interventions workflow
-   manual navigation to the STP Employer Update (EMCF) or STP Employer
    Wage Items (EMGI) screens (view only)

STP Employers

When STP data is available at the time a customer is reporting or
claiming certain income support payments and benefits, the employer’s
name and ABN/WPN will present for the customer to review and either
confirm or reject that they are working for the STP employer.

When confirmed, the customer can link as a New Employer or merge with an
existing employer where it matches on the record, to avoid any
duplication of employers

-   The customer only needs to confirm each STP employer once
-   if linked as a New Employer, it will pre-fill to EAPP with a pay
    event of 0.00 with DOV that the update is being made

If rejected, the STP employer details are added to EMCF with a status of
‘Rejected’

-   If STP data is available when next reporting, the STP employer name
    and ABN/WPN will present again for the customer to review
-   If the customer rejects the employer a second time, an STP
    intervention activity will be created for follow up by compliance
    staff

Note: when an STP employer has been confirmed on EMCF and linked to an
existing employer from EAPP, the pre-filled ABN will override the
Employer ABN field of the linked employer. If an incorrect employer was
selected from EAPP, the STP Employer Update workflow must be run to
reject the status. Once the activity is completed, the Employer ABN
field of the incorrectly linked employer will revert to its previous
status. See Process tab.

STP Employment income

Once a customer confirms an STP employer, each pay event that occurs in
the customer’s entitlement period pre-fills when reporting, for the
customer to check, confirm or change. The pay event data may include
more than one type of income component. Where there are multiple STP
employers, the STP income must be reviewed and accepted separately.

There may be instances where pre-filled STP data may not match the gross
figure of what was paid in a customer’s reporting period. Remind the
customer that if the information does not match their payslip details,
the amounts can be adjusted before accepting the data.

Service Officers who are assisting the customer with their reporting
through the Earnings and Reporting workflow in Process Direct can add
notes about any variations made before finalising the activity.

Once STP data is confirmed and accepted by the customer, it is
automatically loaded onto the appropriate screens on the customer’s
record. The Employment Income Paid Details (EAPP) screen will display
each assessable employment income component under the one employer name
with a frequency of LOP and DOV of when it was paid. See Recording and
correcting employment income details.

If STP data has not pre-filled at the time of reporting, customers can
manually add the pay components, by selecting ‘add pay event’. Manually
added pay events on EMGI will update to EAPP with a verification code of
‘NVE’.

The EMGI screen displays Gross STP Income reported by the STP employer
and Gross Income Reported by the customer. Income Variation will advise
whether income has been varied downward, varied upward or not varied.

Note: Salary Sacrifice components will pre-fill for display purposes
only and will not be used in the PayPP calculation, as the amount is
already included in the Gross Income. Reportable Fringe Benefits will
pre-fill with the non-grossed up amount, however the grossed-up amount
will map to EAPP without Service Officers needing to make any
adjustments. See Resources for examples.

Early and holiday reporting

When a customer is required to report earlier than their usual reporting
day due to a public holiday or overseas departure, any available STP
data will pre-fill. If the employer has not yet run their payroll, the
customer will be required to manually add any components that they
expect to be paid for the reporting period. See Resources.

Correcting confirmed STP data amounts

STP data that has been reviewed and confirmed by the customer will
display on EAPP with a source code of STV and on the IMPS screen with a
source code of STP. If any of these confirmed amounts need to be
updated, evidence must be provided before corrections can be made by
Service Officers. Do not manually make any updates directly on EAPP or
IMPS.

Corrections to these confirmed amounts must be made using the Earnings
and Reporting workflow in Process Direct, selecting Update past periods
and then Yes to wanting to ‘Update income for a past period’. After
selecting the relevant periods from the Past Period Range, the EMGI
screen appears. Each reporting period will display one at a time and
once the corrections are made and Accept Income is selected, the changes
will update the coding on EAPP or IMPS.

When updating a past period where employment income was manually coded
on EAPP, but STP data is available and hasn’t been accepted, the
workflow will navigate to EMGI to check, confirm or change the STP
details. The confirmed STP data will update to EAPP, so the manually
coded income will need to be deleted. This is because updates to EMGI
will only update the relevant reporting period that had previously been
mapped to EAPP.

Where a customer has confirmed and accepted pay events which have been
duplicated, Service Officers will need to Update past periods and zero
out each duplicated pay component on EMGI so that only the singular pay
event remains. Once Accept income is selected, the Gross STP Income
field will display the duplicated total and the Gross Income Reported
field will show the correct singular total for the reporting period.
Service Officers will need to delete the duplicated components when
navigated to EAPP as system functionality doesn’t allow a correction of
$0 to be inserted.

Note: if the Earnings and Reporting workflow task in Process Direct is
not selected, the edit option on EMGI will not be enabled so Service
Officers will only be able to view the STP data.

Cessation data

When a customer ceases work with an STP employer, cessation data will
pre-fill and include:

-   the date they stopped working
-   the reason they are no longer working
-   whether any unused leave and/or a redundancy payment has been paid

Customers will be asked to provide an explanation when:

-   they are subject to mutual obligation requirements during statement
    reporting or in a new claim
-   STP cessation data is pre-filled, and
-   the STP employer advises the cessation reason is dismissal or
    voluntary

An unemployment failure will need to be generated for PST-skilled
Service Officers to investigate.

When leave and redundancy payments are reported with cessation data, the
customer is asked to provide the amount of days the leave covers or
their average weekly wage, to determine the duration of any potential
Income Maintenance Period (IMP). Service Officers must ensure that the
leave period is reasonable.

For example, for an unused leave payment of $900 (annual leave), 2 days
would be considered unreasonable but 5 days would be reasonable.

The customer will not need to supply an Employment Separation
Certificate (SU1) when there are no changes made to the cessation data.
However, if there are changes to amounts paid or there is any doubt
about the number of days of the leave or termination payments, an SU1,
final payslip or letter from the employer will be required.

Note: some employers may pay their employees Unused leave on Termination
with no cessation date or reason being pre-filled. If this occurs, the
customer will be asked if they are still working for that employer and
may need to provide an SU1 where they confirm they have ceased working.
This may occur for the following scenarios:

Transition to Phase 2 PayEvent 2020 (PE2020)

In situations where an employment relationship terminates prior to the
employer transitioning into PayEvent 2020, it is possible that after
they transition to PayEvent 2020 the employer may still make a payment
of unused leave to the individual. That may result in cessation date and
reason being unavailable within the payroll system, as the timing of the
termination was prior to transition, during phase 1. Unused leave and
terminations payments will update to IMP. An SU1/letter from employer
will be required for payments subject to mutual obligation requirements.

Employment basis changes from permanent to casual

An employee may change from a permanent employment status (full time or
part time) to casual. When paid, these entitlements are correctly
classified in STP as unused leave on termination but because the
individual remains a casual employee of the same employer the payment is
assessed as a lump sum and coded on EAPP.

Reinstatement

An employee may leave their employment, be paid their entitlements, and
later be reinstated. Commonly, this can occur in wrongful termination
situations and the effect of the reinstatement is that the cessation is
taken to have never occurred. The instruction for employers is to remove
the cessation date. However, the reinstatement does not change the fact
a payment for unused leave was made, and so it must remain in the STP
reporting. The STP reporting will, as a result, show amounts present as
Unused Leave on Termination without a cessation date or reason. If the
customer advises they are still working for that employer, the payment
is assessed as a lump sum and coded on EAPP.

Pay Per Period (PayPP) amounts

Services Australia uses the STP data from Pay Events to calculate a Pay
Per Period (PayPP) amount. This is done by comparing the gross YTD (Year
to Date) figure of all income components from the previous Pay Event
with that of the current Pay Event. The difference between these amounts
is the PayPP amount, and displays as Gross STP Income .

When presented with pre-filled STP data, customers must review and
either confirm or change the PayPP information before the system will
code and apply the amounts. Assessable PayPP amounts that have been
confirmed are used to calculate a customer’s entitlement and are
indicated under Used in PayPP Calculation.

For further information about the different types of income components
refer to Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments.

Income components that are assessable and included in the PayPP
calculation are displayed to customers when they are reporting through
their Centrelink online account or the Express Plus mobile app. See
Resources to view which allowances are assessable.

When a customer reports through self service channels and has the
allowance type Other allowances, they are asked if the allowance is a
reimbursement of a work related expense. This will determine whether the
amount is assessable or not. Service Officers using the Earnings and
Reporting workflow in Process Direct need to

select the pencil icon for the Other allowances component

select the twisty for Additional Information and then

select the option the customer advises

-   Other Allowances - Not Reimbursement of employment related costs
-   Other Allowances - Reimbursement of employment related costs

Compensation payments reported via STP

Customers who are paid worker’s compensation payments by an STP
employer, will have these amounts pre-filled as Paid leave - worker’s
compensation.

When compensation payments are reported through STP, the system will
check the Compensation Management Summary (CMS) screen for a previous
assessment by the Compensation Recovery Team (CRT). Where this has
already been assessed and is coded on CMS, the amounts reported through
STP will not be applied to the record, unless the amounts have changed.

Where there has not been a previous assessment of the worker’s
compensation, the pre-filled Paid leave - worker’s compensation amount
will automatically load onto the EAPP screen for at least 2 fortnights.
The customer will need to complete a MOD C - Compensation Details form.
This can be completed verbally during the customer contact, or via a
paper form.

STP Interventions

A compliance team manages intervention activities that trigger when
customers make certain variations to their STP data.

There are currently 8 STP intervention activity types to address where a
customer:

-   rejected an STP employer twice
-   varied first income for a STP employer
-   varied income down in two consecutive fortnights by more than $299
-   varied income down in two non-consecutive fortnights across 6 months
    by more than $299  
-   manually declared income however the Single Touch Payroll data
    varies by more than $299
-   is receiving JobSeeker Payment and rejected full-time ongoing status
    in two consecutive fortnights for a new employer
-   is receiving Disability Support Pension or Carer Payment and
    confirmed full-time ongoing status (carer customer is not receiving
    ex-wife pension (XWP))
-   is receiving Disability Support Pension or Carer Payment and
    rejected full-time ongoing status in two consecutive fortnights

The purpose of STP interventions is to prevent underpayments and
unnecessary overpayments for our customers with early education
regarding correct reporting of employment circumstances.

Resources contains a link to the STP Programme intranet page and tables
detailing how certain Pay Per Period (PayPP) amounts are calculated for
various scenarios.

Related links

Mutual Client Register (MCR)

Mutual Client Register (MCR) for Service Delivery staff

Mutual Client Register (MCR) for Business Support staff

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Reporting employment income online

Using Centrelink self service

Centrelink digital support products

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
