
Updating shares and securities 108-19092734

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on updating existing public company
shares and securities owned either by a customer, or an entity such as a
private trust or private company, the customer is involved in. This
includes updating the value of unlisted shares for 20 March or 20
September Manual Follow-up reviews.

Asset share value

The asset value of the customer's shares is their net market value. The
market value is determined by the latest available end of day sale price
of the shares multiplied by the number of shares held. This applies for
shares listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX). The agency
holds the share process on the Securities and Investment (SIN) system,
also known as the Shares database.

As the system calculates the value of the customer's shares, customers
only have to advise the number of shares they hold in each company.

If a customer has a dividend reinvestment plan, the customer needs to
advise the agency of the additional number of shares or securities
acquired.

Share updates immediately prior to 20 March or 20 September

The value of shares and securities listed on the Australian Stock
Exchange (ASX) are automatically updated on 20 March and 20 September
each year. The updates are loaded onto the customer's record before 20
March and 20 September but do not take effect until those dates.

When the automatic update is loaded, it appears on the customer's record
with an Event Date in the future. For example, today's date is 15 March
and the Event Date will show as 20 March.

If the automatic update has already been loaded and an update is needed
before it takes effect, special coding will be needed. The instructions
in workaround for MIS/SIS updates immediately prior to 20 March or 20
September must be followed.

Manual Follow-up activities for revaluation of unlisted public shares/securities

Unlisted Australian and overseas public shares and securities are not
automatically revalued. They are coded on the Unlisted Public Securities
(SIUS) screen.

On 20 March and 20 September, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity is
automatically created on all customer records that contain one or more
Australian unlisted securities. Overseas unlisted securities are not
included. The MFU has the keyword PNSIUSRV. Service Officers must
manually reassess the value(s) by following instructions in Revaluing
managed investments, shares and securities.

Deleting shares

Do not use the delete function unless the customer and/or their partner
never owned the shares listed on their record. Using delete removes the
investment from the customer’s record and assumes the customer never
owned the investment. This has serious implications, as the system may
undertake a reassessment, which could generate an arrears payment. The
correct procedure is to zero off the number of shares or the asset value
in the case of unlisted shares.

The Resources page contains information on the FINS Bulletin. It also
contains links to the unlisted shares FINS template; FINS Helpdesk
Online Query Form; margin loan information; FINS Bulletin; and the
Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) and Sydney Morning Herald websites.

Related links

Adding shares and securities

Revaluing managed investments, shares and securities

Deeming provisions

Indexing, recording and reviewing organisations

Managed investments - adding a new investment

MIN/SIN Database Maintenance and Updates

Loans and liabilities against assets

Assessing assets at their net market value

Share traders

Using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
