
Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 108-02020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure when parental income increases or
decreases for Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme Additional Boarding Allowance.

On this Page:

Parental income increase

The appropriate tax year for applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) is
usually the base tax year. However, an assessment of combined parental
income may be based on the tax year immediately following the base tax
year when combined parental income for the current tax year exceeds
both:

-   125% of the base tax year income
-   125% of the Parental Income Free Area (PIFA). For the Parental
    income free area, see the Parental Income Test (PIT) - Youth
    Allowance (YA) link on the Rates and thresholds page.

Where parental income has increased by at least this amount, the rate of
payment is reassessed on current year income:

-   for Youth Allowance (YA), from the first payment period ending after
    30 September (the entire period of the first pay period ending after
    30 September is affected)
-   for ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme, from
    1 October

For AIC Scheme Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA), this process is
known as 'Reverse Current Income'. This phrase is not used, however, in
either the legislation or policy relating to YA or the Policy relating
to ABSTUDY.

An increase in parental income may result in a customer or applicant no
longer being exempt from the PIT. The parent may lose entitlement to a
Centrelink allowance or benefit that enables an exemption to apply.

Other categories of parental income (including net investment/business
loses, reportable fringe benefits and superannuation contributions) need
to be included in parental income for the current tax year and base tax
year records.

Parental income decrease

An assessment of combined parental income may be based on the tax year
immediately following the base tax year (known as the current tax year),
when:

-   combined parental income substantially decreases in the current tax
    year, and
-   the decrease is likely to last for at least two years from the later
    of 1 January of the current tax year, or the date of the decrease

For YA customers

If a decrease in parental income occurs before 30 June, a current income
assessment could apply from the start of the payment period the customer
requests one, whether or not the customer makes that request before 30
June or later in the same calendar year. For example, if a customer, or
their parent/guardian, request a current year assessment on 1 February
and the customer’s payment fortnight is 22 January to 4 February, and
they meet the requirements for the current year assessment, the current
tax year income is applied from 22 January.

For ABSTUDY and AIC

If the decrease occurs before 1 January in the year for which assistance
is being claimed, a current tax year income assessment will apply from 1
January. If the change occurs on or after 1 January and before 1 July in
the year for which assistance is being claimed, a current tax year
assessment will apply from the date the decrease occurred.

For YA, ABSTUDY and AIC ABA

If a decrease in parental income occurs after 1 July, this decrease
would not need a current tax year assessment for YA/ABSTUDY. This is
because the decrease occurs in the financial year after the current tax
year. There is no provision in legislation or policy to allow an
assessment in a calendar year for a financial year that is 2 years after
the base tax year.

If the customer applies for a current tax year assessment before 31
December, and:

-   they are claiming/receiving YA, the current tax year assessment
    could only apply from the start of the YA payment period that
    includes 1 January, as this is when the base and current tax year
    changes. Service Officers should record the event date as 1 January
    and the system will apply the income with an effect of the
    Entitlement Period Start Day (EPSD),
-   they are claiming/receiving ABSTUDY, the current tax year assessment
    would apply from 1 January

If the customer applies for a current year assessment after 1 January,
the date of event would be the date of the request for YA, or 1 January
for ABSTUDY.

-   For YA, the new income will take effect from the EPSD immediately
    prior to the date of event coded
-   For ABSTUDY, the new income will take effect from the date of the
    request

This procedure does not apply on the basis that the reduced parental
income entitles the parent/guardian/person(s) deemed to be a parent for
the purposes of the parental means tests, or their partner, to a Low
Income Health Care Card (LIC). In the case of ABSTUDY and AIC customers,
this includes an auto issue Health Care Card (HCC) on the basis of
receiving maximum rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms and to the Advise
Parental Income online service.

Related links

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card Options online

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Assessing and coding parental income estimates for ABSTUDY, Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme and Youth Allowance (YA)

Parent commences to receive income support, Low Income Health Care Card
or Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Raising Parental Income Test (PIT) debts for Youth Allowance (YA) and
ABSTUDY payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
