
Suppression of quarterly supplement payment 108-08030010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 20 March 2017, Energy Supplement grandfathering arrangements will
apply for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders. Only CSHC
holders who are grandfathered for Energy supplement will receive the
payment from 20 March 2017 onwards.

This document outlines the suppression of the quarterly supplement paid
to Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders who are grandfathered
for Energy Supplement. This procedure provides details on how to action
requests from customers who do not wish to receive payment of the
quarterly supplement.

On this Page:

Quarterly supplement payment options

The quarterly supplement is a payment made each quarter that is an
optional payment paid in arrears but calculated on a daily basis.

CSHC holders who are grandfathered for Energy Supplement will have the
option of one of the following:

-   receive payment of the quarterly supplement into their nominated
    bank account (quarterly supplement cannot be paid by cheque)
-   decline payment of quarterly supplement and be paid out any accrued
    payment
-   decline payment of quarterly supplement and not receive any accrued
    payment
-   For more information about grandfathering for Energy Supplement, see
    Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders.

Payment of quarterly supplement

Payment is made quarterly in arrears on or soon after the test day which
is the 20th day of March, June, September and December. If the customer
is eligible on the test day, the amount of quarterly supplement paid may
vary because it will be calculated on a daily rate (annual rate divided
by 364) multiplied by the number of days in the quarter.

If the customer is eligible for the quarterly supplement on the test
day, payment will be made for all days eligible up till and including
the 19th. For example, for the December quarterly supplement, the first
day of the quarter is 20 September and the last day is 19 December.

Action to be taken when a customer declines payment of quarterly supplement

CSHC holders who are grandfathered for Energy Supplement can choose not
to be paid the quarterly supplement at any time and, if they wish, be
paid out any accrued quarterly supplement.

The customer will be entitled to payment from the last quarterly
supplement (test day) to the day prior to the quarterly supplement being
declined.

If customer requests not to be paid any quarterly supplement (this
includes any accrued component), this should be recorded on a DOC.
Inform the customer that they will not be able to reverse their decision
in the future. Declining to be paid the quarterly supplement will mean
the customer will lose their grandfathered status for Energy Supplement.

Customer can no longer elect to receive quarterly supplement after declining

From 20 March 2017, any grandfathered CSHC holders who declines to
receive quarterly supplement will not be able to elect to receive the
quarterly supplement at a future date. The customer will lose their
grandfathering status from the date they decline to receive Energy
Supplement.

CSHC holders who were not receiving quarterly supplement because they
had declined to receive the payment prior to 20 March 2017 will not be
grandfathered and can never again elect to receive quarterly supplement.

The Resources page contains a link to the payment rates for quarterly
supplement on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Quarterly supplement

Energy Supplement

Payment rates and thresholds

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
