
Payment of Telephone Allowance (TAL) to customers suspended or cancelled due to employment income 108-08100030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on qualification for Telephone
Allowance (TAL), including the higher rate payable for eligible
customers who subscribe to a home internet service, when a customer's
record is suspended or cancelled due to employment income. This is an
automated process.

Issue with TAL payments

Note: a problem has been identified where a small number of TAL payments
have not been paid to eligible customers due to the payment not being
stripped. This issue is predominantly associated with stimulus
customers. Service Officers need to refer affected records with unpaid
TAL payments to the appropriate team.

Qualification for TAL

A customer can maintain qualification for TAL for 6 months after their
income support payment is suspended or cancelled, because either they or
their partner began employment, or have an increase in employment
income. The customer must continue to meet the qualifications for TAL.

Exception to six month qualification for TAL

The exceptions are:

-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers, who are under 21 with no
    dependent children, and JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
    (YA) (job seeker) customers who have a partial capacity to work, who
    maintain payment for 12 months after suspension or cancellation due
    to employment
-   Parenting Payment (PP) customers who have a partial capacity to work
    due to a disability will be eligible for a 52 week extension of TAL,
    on or after 1 January 2008, when their and/or their partner's
    employment income cancels them from payment, providing they remain
    eligible for TAL
-   Customers in receipt of the Pension Supplement, the transitional
    rate of pension or the transitional rate of JSP are not eligible for
    TAL, and are therefore not eligible for a TAL extension if their
    payment is suspended or cancelled for an employment related reason
-   Changes in circumstances during the extension period, or
-   For a DSP customer, under 21 with no dependent children, who is
    eligible for the higher rate of TAL, their rate of TAL may change
    during the extension period. For example, during this period they
    may either become or cease to be a home internet subscriber.

The Resources page provides a table summarising the payments eligible
for an extension of Telephone Allowance (TAL) when cancelled.

Related links

Telephone Allowance (TAL)

Updating telephone details and/or paying Telephone Allowance (TAL)

Suspension of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Using the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
