
Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA) 108-08080010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Rent Assistance (RA)

RA is an add-on payment. Customers can only get RA when they receive
another payment. The RA start day for new claims will generally be the
same as the start day for the primary payment. Rent and accommodation
details are recorded on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen.

An A-Z of all Rent Assistance terms and codes is in Rent Assistance
(RA).

RA qualifications

For RA, rent means amounts paid or payable:

-   on a regular basis
-   by the customer, or their partner
-   as a condition of occupying their principal home in Australia

RA is payable to a qualifying customer (or their partner) who:

-   is receiving an income support payment (including Austudy from 1
    January 2008)
-   is receiving more than base rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
-   would receive FTB Part A except that they have care of a Regular
    Care Child
-   is receiving ABSTUDY Schooling B and Tertiary Awards

RA not payable

RA is not payable to customers who:

pay less than the rent threshold according to their family circumstances

pay government rent to a state or territory housing authority. The
exception is defence force housing. View the definition for Government
rent to see a list of the state housing authorities.
Note: the National Rental Affordability Scheme (NRAS) is an Australian
Government initiative but it is not government rent. Non-government
organisations own and manage these properties

are assessed as a homeowner and are living in the home they own

homeowner temporarily absent from the principal home and does not meet
the eligibility for RA for their temporary accommodation

reside in an Australian Government subsidised bed in an accredited aged
care home

paying rent as part of a 'rent to buy' scheme

receive either Age Pension (blind) or Disability Support Pension (DSP)
(blind) when income and assets have not been assessed

receive their entire payment as a loan under the Home Equity Access
Scheme

receive (or whose partner receives) Incentive Allowance

receive (or whose partner receives) Second Home Allowance

are excluded because of eligibility rules that apply to some young
single customers without children when they are living in the principal
home of a parent. This depends on the payment type received and their
age. See Process page for more information

receive ABSTUDY Schooling A, Part-time, Testing and Assessment, Masters
and Doctorate, Student in Lawful Custody Awards

receive FTB Part A rate reduced to the base rate due to income or
maintenance income. Note: customers will lose access to RA if their FTB
Part A is precluded or prohibited due to:

-   non-payment of FTB instalment payments to zero entitlement customers
    measure
-   prohibition of FTB instalment payments (PIP)

are in a payment preclusion period

Calculation rate

RA is paid at the rate of 75 cents for every $1 of rent paid over the
rent threshold, up to the maximum RA rate relevant to the customer's
circumstances. That is, subtract the threshold from the rent amount and
multiply by 0.75. Include cents. Round the total up to the nearest cent
and compare with the maximum RA rate.

When a customer pays for board and lodgings, if the amount for lodging
cannot be identified, two-thirds of the total amount is considered to be
for rent.

If the customer shares their accommodation, the rate can be reduced.

Means testing

The income and assets test that applies to the primary payment also
applies to RA.

When RA is paid with an income support payment, the hierarchy of
reductions is applied reducing the basic pension or benefit first under
the means test, then other components including RA.

When a customer has excess income or maintenance income affecting their
rate of FTB Part A, each component (including RA) is reduced
proportionately. For more information, see Apportionment of
income/maintenance reduction for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A.

Rental relief schemes and subsidies

Assistance offered through rent relief schemes can impact on payability
of RA. Generally, RA is payable only on the amount of rent paid or
payable by the RA recipient (and/or their partner) net of any subsidies
or payments from other tenants.

There are a few exceptions to this for specified rental relief schemes
where the RA recipient (and or their partner) will qualify for RA on the
amount of rent nominated on their lease and any subsidy they are
provided is disregarded. However, if part of the rent is covered by
payments from other tenants, these amounts are not disregarded.

See the Process page for more information.

Community housing organisations

Customers paying rent to a community housing organisation are entitled
to RA. For more information about community housing organisations,
search Community housing and OHO in the A-Z of Rent Assistance terms and
codes. Community housing organisations include (but are not limited to):

-   Transitional housing programs - generally short term housing for
    people who are homeless
-   Housing co-operatives
-   Disability housing
-   Aboriginal housing organisations

Note: customers in Victoria who have a lease with the Transitional
Housing Management (THM) program are paying government rent and are not
entitled to receive RA.

Temporary accommodation

RA may be payable, in certain circumstances, to customers who live in
temporary accommodation.

RA reviews

In general, all customers who receive RA may now be selected for a Rent
Assistance (RA) Profile review.

Ineligible homeowner

A homeowner who is not eligible for RA is known as an ineligible
homeowner. Some exemptions apply.

The Resources page contains scenarios and frequently asked questions
(FAQs).

Contents

Customers receiving Rent Assistance (RA) with their primary benefit
instead of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers

Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers

Rent Assistance (RA) portability

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Independent and dependent customers living together

Related links

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) verification

Rent Assistance (RA) historical and savings provision information

Rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
