
Exempt Assets 108-04080020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document which assets can be exempt from assessment under the
Assets Test. Not all assets held by a customer are assessed under the
Assets Test.

Exempt assets

An exempt asset is one that is disregarded under the Assets Test,
irrespective of its value. All assets, other than those specified as
exempt, are assessable.

Care must be taken when assessing a customer's entitlement, in that the
exempt assets are disregarded but may have assessable income. For
example, the proceeds from the sale of the principal home are an exempt
asset, but the proceeds when invested are deemed for income (interest
earned).

Pre-paid funeral expenses

Pre-paid funeral expenses can also be exempt from the Assets Test. A
pre-paid funeral is an advance payment by a customer for funeral
services agreed by contract, with no limit to the amount a customer may
invest. If the customer has a pre-paid funeral and a funeral bond, only
the pre-paid funeral is exempt.

Refer to Exempt Funeral Investments (Funeral Bonds) for assessment of
pre-paid funeral expenses and funeral bonds.

ACT and NSW Government Buybacks

Payments to customers for homes purchased under the ACT Government
Loose-fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme or the NSW Voluntary
Purchase and Demolition Program (for example homes insulated by MR
Fluffy using loose fill asbestos) are to be considered compensatory. The
customer must be advised that the lessor of the sum received and the
amount they are intending to spend on a replacement will not be assessed
as an asset or deemed to be earning income. This applies until they have
replaced the property subject to a 12 month limit (unless there is a
valid reason for taking longer).

The Resources page contains examples and further information on exempt
assets, contact details, and a link to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Exempt Income

Exemptions from income and assets test for superannuation investments

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Exempt lump sums

Income streams

Exempt Funeral Investments (Funeral Bonds)

Loans

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

Assessing house and curtilage

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
