
Verifying and recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen 108-05020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about coding other income on the
Other Income (OIN) screen. Income recorded on OIN is income received
from sources such as Scholarships, Gifts, and Income protection from
superannuation, royalty or commission payments. It does not include
employment income, and foreign income, pensions and investments.

On this Page:

Customers eligible for Working Credit or Work Bonus

For customers eligible for Working Credit, accrual and depletion of
Working Credits depends on income being identified as employment income
or other ordinary income. Total ordinary income is made up of employment
income and other ordinary income. The effects of employment income on a
customer's income support payment can be reduced by Working Credits.

For customers eligible for the Work Bonus accrual and depletion is only
effected by eligible income, which is:

-   employment income and
-   self-employment income earned through personal exertion

The effect of eligible income on a customer's income support payment can
be reduced by the Work Bonus.

Work Bonus will be able to be applied to royalty or commission payments
(type ROC) recorded on OIN.

The effect of other ordinary income cannot be reduced by depletion of
Working Credits or the Work Bonus.

The exception to this is customers who are undertaking full-time study
or who are an Australian Apprentice and are in receipt of ABSTUDY,
Austudy, or Youth Allowance. These customers have access to Income Bank
credits for any personal income earned.

Income types recorded on OIN/OINS screen

The following income types are recorded on OIN/OINS screen:

income from boarders and lodgers

deprived income, when not deprivation of assets

ex gratia payments

exempt lump sums

gifts received

grants or scholarships

life interest

some leave and termination payments

compensatory payments, when not paid from superannuation. These are
treated as ordinary income, for example:

-   income protection policies
-   sickness accident policies

salary continuance or Income protection payments from superannuation
(Total and Temporary Disability Benefit (TTD))

royalty or commission payments which are not:

-   paid by an employer
-   part of regular sole trader or partnership income

certain lump sums. See Treatment of lump sums

Income types not recorded on the OIN screen

The definition of other ordinary income includes the following payment
types, which are not recorded on the OIN screen:

Employment income paid to the customer as an employee

Investment income from:

-   financial assets recorded on managed investment screens and
    securities screens (deemed income)
-   income streams
-   superannuation recorded on managed investment screens (deemed
    income)
-   real estate (in Australia and overseas) - the customer must identify
    the location of any real estate or business site they own or have an
    interest in
-   loans (deemed income)

Foreign pensions and superannuation received from Government and
non-Government bodies in other countries

Attributed and distributed income from a customer's beneficial interest
in private trusts and private companies

Income from other business structures such as sole traders and
partnerships, excluding wage and salary payments

Other government payments and programs such as:

-   Dairy Structural Adjustment Program (DSAP)
-   Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) payments (in some cases)
-   Farm Help

Note: income received from all other sources in Australia is recorded on
the OIN screen.

The Resources page contains tables showing examples of assessment of
lump sum arrears payments.

Related links

Address recording for real estate

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assessing and coding the Income and Assets Mod iA

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Assessing scholarship income

Assessing Superannuation

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Exempt Income (ex gratia payments)

Exempt lump sums

Financial Investments

Income from boarders and lodgers

Life interest in an asset or income

Personal Income test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Treatment of lump sums

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
