-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assessing life interest in a
home.

Use of a home for life

A customer may have a right to the use of a home for life. Where a
customer has such a life interest in the accommodation in which they
reside, the value of that interest is exempted as the principal home and
the customer is considered a homeowner. If a customer has created a life
interest or a right of occupancy in a private home for their own
benefit, the granny flat provisions apply.

Discretionary trust

Take care to ensure that a person who states that they have a life
Interest is not in fact the controller of a discretionary trust. If a
person who has a life Interest has the ability (under the trust deed of
a will) to use trust capital, the person does not have only a life
interest. A discretionary trust exists which is subject to trusts and
companies legislation.

Admission to permanent care where the customer's home is a life interest

If the customer only has a right to accommodation for life, the customer
is not entitled to rent out the house. No further asset exemption would
apply.

If the customer has a life interest in the income of the home, the
customer would be able to rent out the home and receive the asset
exemptions.

If the customer only has the right to accommodation but the home is
still rented out, the customer can qualify for the asset exemption if it
is proven the rent goes directly to them. However, if the home is being
rented by someone else (for example, a deceased estate) and the estate
is passing the rent to the customer, then the asset exemption would not
apply. A determination must be made about how to treat this income.

Note: normal vacation of principal home due to illness provisions apply
first. Once the exemption period ends, an actuarial valuation from the
Australian Government Actuary (AGA) would be required.

Related links

Purchasing another residence

Selling a home

Determining homeowners and non-homeowners

Life interest in an asset or income

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Retirement villages

Aged Care

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
