
This document outlines how an estimate of Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI)
affects a customer's payment.

Payments affected by ATI

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Annual estimate for ongoing FTB/CCS

A customer's annual family income estimate is used to work out their
ongoing rate of FTB and CCS. Some customers do not need to provide an
estimate.

After the end of the financial year, family assistance payments are
reconciled. The customer's correct FTB/CCS rate is worked out using
their Actual Adjusted Taxable Income (AATI). If they received more than
their correct rate due to underestimating their family income, they will
need to pay the money back.

To help reduce the risk of overpayment, at every contact, prompt the
customer to revise their estimate. Explain to the customer:

they must provide a reasonable estimate

the reconciliation process

they can reduce the risk of debt through:

-   FTB claim options and payment choices
-   increasing their CCS withholdings

their FTB fortnightly payments may cancel if, for a previous year, they
or their partner:

-   fails to lodge a tax return or
-   fails to contact to advise they do not need to lodge

[] customers may update their estimate any time online or by phone

[] Ask the customer to use self service to complete the update unless:

-   the service is not working (confirmed by Network News Update (NNU)
    Newsflash and Bulletins), or
-   they cannot use self service this time

After the end of the relevant financial year, customers can:

-   advise if they or their partner do not need to lodge a tax return
-   confirm their or their partner's income for the previous financial
    year

Six month estimates for SBP claims

Customers claiming SBP need to provide an estimate of their ATI.

This must be for the 6 months starting on the day the child was born.

Customers who have a partner on the date they claim must provide an
estimate of their partner's income.

Previous year estimates for PPL claims

Customers must provide an estimate of the primary carer's ATI.

This must be for the financial year before the date of:

-   their pre-birth/adoption claim, or
-   the child's birth or entry into care for a post-birth/adoption claim

Updating income details is a change of circumstances for PPL.

Previous year estimates for DAP claims

Customers must provide an estimate of their ATI. This must be for the
financial year before the date of:

-   their pre-birth/adoption claim, or
-   their claim or nominated start date (whichever is earlier) for a
    post-birth/adoption claim

Updating income details is a change of circumstances for DAP.

Contents

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Date of event (DOV) for family assistance income estimates

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Automatic Uplift of income estimates

Paid Parental Leave income test and previous financial year income
estimate

Recording return to work details and explaining eligibility for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine

Related links

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

New Financial Year Assessments (NFYA) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and
Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Customer notifies a change of circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Change in circumstances for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
