
Updating income estimates for the current financial year 108-05030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines updating income estimates for the current
financial year. For Family Tax Benefit (FTB), most customers have to
provide an annual income estimate that reflects their family's financial
circumstances for the whole financial year. All customers receiving
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) need to provide a family income estimate. If
the family's circumstances change, the estimate must be updated to
reduce the risk of having to repay an overpayment of FTB or CCS after
the end of the financial year.

Discussion with customer

The following customers are to review their family income estimate at
every contact:

All Child Care Subsidy customers

Partnered FTB customers:

-   not on an income support payment
-   on an income support payment and receiving FTB Part B fortnightly,
    or
-   one or both members of the couple are receiving an income support
    payment at nil rate due to employment income

Single FTB customers not on an income support payment who:

-   have had a previous reconciliation debt
-   are receiving an FTB Part A Health Care Card

Single FTB customers whose income support payment is nil rate due to
employment income

If the customer has Voice Print Authentication, the estimate may be
checked in the IVR. The income estimate instructions on Customer
Overview will confirm if the customer has indicated their estimate needs
updating.

Customer Overview will display cards with a green icon for successful
interactions that need no further action, that is:

-   the customer has confirmed their estimate is accurate in the IVR

Customer Overview will display cards with an amber or red icon if
Service Officer action is needed. Standard business imperative processes
apply, that is:

-   customer advised they would like to review or update their estimate
    for the current or next financial year, or
-   there was a technical error in the IVR

If the customer does not have Voice Print Authentication no card will
display regarding FTB income estimates within Customer Overview. This
will require staff to follow normal Business Imperative rules.

In addition, inform all income tested FTB customers who do not currently
have an FTB payment choice in place, of the payment choices available to
reduce the risks of overpayment.

[A self service option is available for customers.] Customers can view
and update their payment choice at any time via the self service
options:

-   telephone self service for FTB
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, or
-   online using the Payment choices option for FTB

Request for a revised estimate

A new estimate will be automatically requested from certain Centrelink
income support payment customers when they and/or their partner:

-   enter an employment income nil rate period for an income support
    payment (ISP)
-   are granted an ISP and the family's income estimate is unreasonable
    as it does not account for the ISP amount in the estimate
-   are identified as having an estimate that is less than their ISP
    amount paid to date
-   are now 'off income support' due to ISP cancellation or suspension

Customers who get a request need to provide an income estimate within 21
days to determine their rate of FTB. If they fail to provide the income
estimate by the end of the 21 day grace period, their FTB payment will
be cancelled. For further information, see Effect of income support
entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Updating estimates

[A self service option is available for customers.] If an FTB or CCS
customer contacts about updating their income estimates for the current
financial year, they must be referred to self service (online or Express
Plus apps) to complete the update unless any of the following apply:

-   self service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by NNU
    Newsflash and Bulletins), or
-   the Service Officer determines the customer is not capable of
    self-management in this instance

Customers with a FTB CAN-OIS (Off Income Support) or CAN-ENR (Estimate
Not Reasonable) status can update their estimate using the online
service and Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. An automatic restoration
will be attempted as part of the update.

[A self service option is available for customers.] Customers may update
their estimate at any time during the year by:

-   logging into their Centrelink online account via myGov
-   using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
-   calling the Families and Parenting line, or
-   visiting a service centre

See the Resources page for a link to the 'Services Australia website,
Phone us' page.

Low estimate or employment change electronic messages

Single Touch Payroll (STP) is an Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
initiative where employers submit payroll data to the ATO with each pay
event. Where a customer is a mutual client of Centrelink and the ATO,
the ATO will share the customer’s STP data with Services Australia.

STP data helps identify customers at risk of underestimating their
annual income. Electronic reminders (SMS or email) are sent to
identified customers prompting them to check the accuracy of their
family income estimate. This reduces the likelihood of a Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) overpayment at reconciliation time.

Customers who are confident their estimate is accurate do not need to do
anything. The messages are a prompt only.

A document will show on the customer's record if they received an
electronic message and detail the reason it was sent. A customer can be
selected for multiple reasons. Staff can view this document:

Customer First

-   CRN/BP link > Supercase for business partner > Notes

Process Direct

-   Notes icon > Notes

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments contains customer scenarios and electronic messaging
examples.

For more information, see Single Touch Payroll Programme.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

All customers assessed as eligible for CCS must provide an income
estimate, whether or not they get an income support payment. For more
information, see Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Customers must notify any changes to their income estimate to make sure
they get their correct CCS entitlement, and to reduce the possibility of
an overpayment at reconciliation. Customers can also choose to increase
their CCS withholdings to reduce the risk of an overpayment. If Service
Officers update an income estimate, ask the customer if there have been
any changes to their activity details. For more information, see
Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Accepting information from a third party

If the customer's partner or third party (for example, accountant)
contacts to provide a new estimate and could reasonably be expected to
do so, the estimate can be updated.

Service Officers must explain to customers and third parties:

-   The estimate must be as accurate as possible so their entitlements
    are correctly assessed, and to reduce risk of overpayment. Do not
    encourage them to provide false income estimates for any reason. The
    procedure, Helping families provide a reasonable annual income
    estimate for family assistance payments, has further information
-   What is included as Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI)
-   The reconciliation process
-   FTB fortnightly payments may be automatically cancelled if they (or
    their partner) fail to lodge a tax return or fail to contact to
    advise they do not need to lodge
-   All FTB payment choices. The customer is to make the choice. Service
    Officers must not persuade them in their choice or direct them to
    claim FTB via instalments. A payment choice cannot be applied
    without the customer's consent
-   When increasing an income estimate, they can choose to increase
    their CCS withholdings to reduce the risk of an overpayment
-   FTB and CCS payments do not need to be included as part of the
    income estimate

Change of income

Customers must advise any changes to their income estimate throughout
the year to recalculate any increase or decrease to their FTB or CCS
rate to help with reducing possible overpayments. This also applies to
those who have chosen to get FTB at nil rate (FTB/CZR-MCO) or who have
previously provided an income estimate that has reduced their Part A
and/or Part B to nil rate (FTB/CZR-ITH or FTB/CZR-IEU) .

The date of event to record for a revised estimate depends on when it is
provided and whether it results in an increase or decrease to the
customer's ongoing FTB rate. Using a DOV for FTB other than the date of
notification may result in an arrears or overpayment for CCS.

Where there is a potential overpayment of CCS, tell customers of the
option to increase their CCS withholdings to reduce the risk of an
overpayment at reconciliation.

If there is a potential overpayment of FTB due to revised income,
Mandatory Continuous Adjustment (MCA) may apply for the remainder of the
financial year to offset the overpayment.

Additional triggers

If revising an income estimate due to a change in income:

-   check eligibility for income support and other products (expected
    income support payments must be included in the income estimate for
    family assistance)
-   for FTB, check if return to work details need to be recorded for FTB
    Part B quarantine
-   for income support payment customers, check if earnings or reporting
    requirements need to be updated
-   where FTB has cancelled during the current or previous financial
    year, check if it may now be restored
-   tell the customer to review/update their payment choice for FTB
-   for CCS, check if activity details need to be updated as this may
    affect the number of subsidised child care hours a customer is
    entitled to receive

Income support payment customers

If the person or their partner gets, or is claiming, a social security
pension or benefit from Centrelink or a service pension, income support
supplement or veteran payment from the Department of Veterans' Affairs,
explain to them:

the effect of income support entitlement on the rate of FTB and/or CCS

their annual income estimate used for FTB/CCS must include:

-   all income support payments for the financial year (received and
    expected), as taxable income or tax-free pension/benefit amounts
-   the coronavirus supplement paid with taxable income support payments
-   all employment income for the financial year (received and expected)
    as taxable income

their annual income estimate used for FTB/CCS must not include FTB, CCS,
Carer Allowance (CDA) or the Economic Support Payments

their notification obligations for their income support payment are
different to those for FTB/CCS. For their income support payments they
must report their actual earnings, not just an estimate

if they are revising their annual income estimate due to a change in
employment income, review current earnings and reporting requirements
for income support payments

When a family income estimate does not include a person's full
Centrelink income support payment, it may be automatically flagged as
unreasonable and a review started. For more information, see Helping
families provide a reasonable annual estimate for family assistance
payments

The Resources page has links to relevant forms, online accounts,
information about payments for families, intranet links to the
Centrelink calendar, Level 2 Policy Helpdesk and reporting suspected
fraud, and a link to the 'Services Australia website, Phone us' page.

Related links

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Online estimator options

Using Centrelink self service

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

New Financial Year Assessments (NFYA) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and
Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of family assistance payments

Restoration of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
