
Income and assets tests for blind customers 108-03010080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when the Income Test and Assets Test are applied
to customers in receipt of Age Pension and Disability Support Pension
(DSP) due to permanent blindness. It also covers how to determine the
correct rate of payment if the Income Test and Assets Test are applied.

On this Page:

Applicable rates and tests

Customers who are blind are not affected by the application of the
Income Test and Assets Test for Age Pension and DSP unless they are
claiming Rent Assistance (RA). However, they can disclose their income
and assets if they wish.

If the blind customer has a partner who is not also permanently blind,
then the partner is subject to the relevant Income Test and Assets Test
dependent upon the payment type being claimed by them. In these cases,
the blind customer's income and assets must be provided to establish the
partner's entitlement. If a customer's RA is paid with Family Tax
Benefit, payability of RA will be determined by the Income Test for
family assistance and Paid Parental Leave additional income and assets
details will not be required.

Blind customer's entitlement for pension payment

A blind customer's normal entitlement for payment of Age Pension or DSP
consists of:

-   maximum basic pension
-   Pension Supplement
-   Remote Area Allowance, if applicable

If a blind customer wishes to test their eligibility for RA, their rate
is calculated in accordance with the pension Income Test and Assets
Test. In order to be paid RA, a blind customer must have their income
and assets coded on their record.

The rate of pension payable is the greater of:

-   The rate (including RA) that would be payable after applying both
    the Income Test and Assets Test as if the customer was not blind.
    Note: if eligible, the transitional rules for pension customers may
    apply.
-   The rate calculated under their normal entitlement (free of the
    Income Test and Assets Test) if they were not claiming RA.

Customer receiving Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA

If the customer is also receiving Adjusted Disability Pension from the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA), and the rate of pension is
affected by the Income Test, the customer may be entitled to receive
some Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA). The amount of DFISA
they are entitled to will be affected by the DVA rent test.

Blind customer with employment income

Blind pension customers with employment income who provide their income
details for the purpose of paying RA or to establish their partner's
entitlement may be entitled to extra deductions on their income:

-   If Age Pension age, and if eligible, apply the Work Bonus before
    applying the Income Test. The Work Bonus is required to be applied
    prior to any Working Credit calculations.
-   If under Age Pension age, the customer can accrue and deplete
    Working Credits.

Family Tax Benefit and any RA that is paid with Family Tax Benefit is
assessed normally.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. The transitional rules will apply as long as the customer
receives a higher rate of payment under the pre 20 September 2009 Income
Test with no Work Bonus applied compared to the Income Test in place
from 20 September 2009 which does include the Work Bonus. It is possible
for their partner's income support payment rate to be calculated under a
different income test, that is, the customer could receive a higher rate
under the old income test and their partner may have been granted after
20 September 2009 and therefore only eligible to be paid under the new
income test.

Compensation payments

Compensation is not exempt and generally affects payability of DSP and
Age Pension to blind pensioners in the same way as other customers.
Blind pensioners who receive compensation may be precluded from
receiving DSP or Age Pension and may need to repay past payments. DSP
Blind and Age Pension Blind payments will be reduced dollar for dollar
by any periodic compensation received. Lump sum compensation preclusion
periods also apply to blind recipients. However the Income Test
exemption still applies to compensation that is assessable as ordinary
(not compensation) income. This means a blind pensioner's rate of
payment will not be reduced if their partner receives compensation or
when a blind pensioner receives periodic compensation payments for an
accident occurring after they commenced receiving a compensation
affected payment (CAP).

International agreements

Age and DSP (Blind) customers granted under an international agreement
are not exempt from the direct deduction provisions. Where a payment is
granted under an agreement, foreign pension payments are a direct dollar
for dollar deduction from the rate of payment. This also applies for any
New Zealand government pension payments.

The Resources page contains examples of how the rate is determined for a
blind customer claiming RA and a link to the Module IA - Additional
Income and Assets (Mod IA).

Related links

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Compensation affected payments (CAP)

Income Test for single pension customers

Assets Test for single pension customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

Assets Test for partnered pension customers

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years with no dependent children

Payment rates and thresholds

Income, assets and rates of payment

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
