
Telephone Allowance (TAL) 108-08100000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility requirements for Telephone
Allowance (TAL). This is paid to help customers with the cost of
maintaining a telephone service.

Eligibility for Basic rate of TAL

Basic TAL is payable to a customer who is a telephone subscriber and who
receives:

-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) and is under 21 with no dependent
    children
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) and is under Age Pension age
-   Special Benefit (SpB), or Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) and is
    over 60 but under Age Pension age and has received income support
    payments continuously for 9 months
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and is
    over 60 and has received income support payments continuously for 9
    months
-   JSP, PPP or Youth Allowance (job seeker) and has a partial capacity
    to work as assessed by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
-   PPP and their partner is over 60 but under Age Pension age, receives
    JSP or FHA, and has received income support payments continuously
    for 9 months
-   JSP, YA (job seeker) or FHA and is a single principal carer of a
    dependent child
-   JSP, YA (job seeker) or FHA and is the principal carer of a
    dependent child, and their partner is over 60, receives JSP or FHA,
    and has received income support payments continuously for 9 months

Note: members of a couple may be eligible for different rates of TAL.

Eligibility for Higher rate of TAL

For DSP home internet subscribers

The rate of TAL payable to qualified telephone subscribers increases if
they also subscribe to a home internet service. For the higher rate to
be payable, the customer must:

-   be eligible for the basic rate (DSP customer under 21 with no
    dependent children), and
-   have a current home internet connection

For FHA customers

The higher rate of TAL is payable if customers:

-   qualify for the basic rate, and
-   have a current home internet connection

TAL payability

TAL payments are only paid if a person meets all eligibility
requirements and is a telephone subscriber on the relevant test day:

-   1 January
-   20 March
-   1 July
-   20 September

Customers with PhoneAway cards are only eligible for TAL if they are
also telephone subscribers. Some telephone services have short message
service (SMS) functionality, however TAL is not payable to customers
with SMS functionality alone.

TAL is usually issued on the customer's first Entitlement Period End
Date (EPED) that falls on or after the TAL test day.

Eligible phone services

For TAL, a telephone service (regardless of provider) includes:

-   landline - home phone
-   mobile phone - including any pre-paid service
-   facsimile (fax) machine
-   subscribers to InContact
-   customers in residential aged care who make a payment to their aged
    care provider for a private telephone line in their room

Customers not eligible for TAL

TAL is not payable to customers since:

-   20 September 2009, receiving Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
    quarterly supplement or the basic rate of Pension Supplement
-   20 March 2020, receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) at the transitional
    rate

See Process page for a comprehensive list of when TAL is not payable

Extended entitlement to TAL after income support payment stops

Payment is made automatically to eligible customers and a separate claim
is not required. Customers not entitled to the Pension Supplement can
maintain payability for TAL for 6 months after their income support
payment is suspended or cancelled because either they or their partner
commenced employment.

The exceptions are:

DSP customers under 21 with no dependent children, and JSP or YA (job
seeker) customers who have a partial capacity to work as assessed by an
ESAt, who maintain payment for 12 months after suspension or
cancellation due to employment. During this period the customer must
continue to meet the qualifications for TAL to be payable

PPP and PPS customers under Age Pension age who were granted on or after
1 July 2006 and

-   have an assessed partial capacity to work due to a disability as
    assessed by an ESAt and
-   their payments cancelled after their and/or their partner's
    employment income was sufficient to cancel their payment. They will
    have access to TAL for 52 weeks from the date of cancellation

Each eligible member of a couple may receive TAL at the single rate if
they are:

-   an illness separated couple
-   a respite care couple, or
-   temporarily separated

In these circumstances, each customer is treated as an individual, as
they are not living together.

Payment of TAL

Both members of a couple will get the member of a couple rate (that is,
half the single TAL rate) if they are eligible for TAL and are not:

-   an illness separated couple
-   a respite couple
-   temporarily separated couple

If one partner is not eligible, (that is, they do not receive a
Centrelink or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) qualifying payment)
the member of a couple rate is payable to the eligible customer.

With the introduction of higher rate TAL, it is now possible for members
of a couple to receive different rates of TAL.

It is possible for 2 non-partnered people living at the same address to
be paid full rate TAL on the same phone service if the phone is
connected in both names. This is because both customers meet the
definition of a telephone subscriber.

Payment of TAL may be delayed if an event such as an EPED or
relationship status change has occurred. TAL is always paid as a full
instalment - there is no daily rate.

TAL increases according to annual movements in the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) in September each year.

Customers who are eligible for Working Credit will still be paid TAL
during periods where the customer is in an employment income nil rate
period.

Note: fax numbers cannot be recorded on the Centrelink computer system
as fax, but can be recorded as the home phone number.

Unpaid TAL for eligible customers

A problem has been identified where a small number of TAL payments have
not been paid to eligible customers due to the payment not being
stripped. The issue is mainly associated with stimulus customers. If a
customer with an affected record contacts Services Australia about an
unpaid TAL payment, Service Officers must refer the record to the
appropriate team for correction.

See Process page for more information about unpaid TAL payments,
identifying affected records and referral details.

The Resources page contains links to Concessions, Allowances, Rent and
Payment Summaries, team intranet page, and mySupport.

Contents

Updating telephone details and/or paying Telephone Allowance (TAL)

How to pay Telephone Allowance (TAL) arrears

Payment of Telephone Allowance (TAL) to customers suspended or cancelled
due to employment income

Telstra Access for Everyone phone card program

Related links

Working Credit

Payment rates and thresholds

View/update address, accommodation or contact details option online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
