
Youth Allowance at pending status (YAL/PSA) and dependent siblings 108-02010120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff processing dependent Youth Allowance (YA) claims.

This document outlines when a claim for Youth Allowance (YA) is
finalised and it results in a status of pending (YAL/PSA) on the
customer's record. This is for staff processing Youth Allowance
apprentice, job seeker and student claims.

Change in family circumstance may impact entitlement

A change of circumstances for a dependent customer may have a
significant impact on the entitlement of their sibling(s) if they are
included in the family pool.

Some examples of change in circumstances include:

-   a customer's Rent Assistance increases or decreases
-   a customer becomes eligible for, or ceases to be eligible for, the
    away from home rate
-   a customer gains independence, or ceases to be independent following
    a review
-   a customer turns 18 years of age
-   a student ceases full-time study and no longer qualifies for payment
-   a job seeker finds full time work
-   a customer transfers to a payment other than YA, ABSTUDY or
    Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Note: Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and regular care children aged:

-   0-15, and
-   16-19 in full-time secondary study

may also be considered a dependant sibling for inclusion in the family
pool. Changes in their family circumstances may also have a significant
impact or ripple effect on the customer's entitlement.

How customer and dependent sibling claims are assessed

When processing a claim for a dependent YA customer who exceeds the
'parental income cut-off limit' for the Parental Income Test, the
customer's status will show as pending (YAL/PSA) for one day (until the
end of the next working day after the claim was processed) after
finalisation, unless the claim is manually rejected at the time of
assessment.

At the end of the second day, an automatic reassessment will occur
causing the pending status to change to rejected due to combined
parental income being too high for YA to be payable.

If a sibling's claim is subsequently processed, within the Pending
Status (PSA) review period and the parental income is at a level where
both the customer and sibling become payable, then the claims will grant
automatically. This includes the scenario of a sibling being recorded as
an FTB or regular care child.

If the parental income is at a level that requires 3 or more dependant
siblings for YA be payable, the PSA review timeframe will be reset for
the customer, to expire at the same time as their siblings' PSA review.

After the PSA review timeframe has elapsed the claims will reject. If a
third sibling claims within 13 weeks, the siblings' claims may be
reassessed.

[] The Online estimator options can be used to calculate a customer's
potential entitlement.

Related links

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Family taper for the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Online estimator options

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
