
Customers receiving Rent Assistance (RA) with their primary benefit instead of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 108-08080130

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

RA payable with a primary payment

When a person receives a social security payment or ABSTUDY (primary
payment), and FTB Part A, RA is usually paid with FTB Part A. However,
in some cases, RA can be paid with the recipient's primary payment
instead. This occurs if any of the following apply. The customer's:

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A reduces to the base rate due to the
Maintenance Action Test:

-   Rent Assistance (RA) is paid with the primary payment
-   If the customer takes maintenance action, RA is paid with FTB Part A

Rent is lower than the FTB rent threshold:

-   The customer is not eligible for RA with FTB Part A
-   The customer is paid RA with their primary payment under social
    security law as the rent threshold is lower than that used for FTB
-   Rent threshold is solely dependent on the customer's relationship
    status. In most cases, the amount of RA payable is very small. This
    is an unintended result of legislation and may be repealed in the
    future

RA not payable with a primary payment

Rent Assistance (RA) is not paid with a primary payment if the:

-   customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A rate is reduced to the
    base rate due to income including maintenance income
-   customer shares the care of a child for 14-34% of the time and does
    not apply for FTB. Customers with children in their care for less
    than 35% of the time are not entitled to the child related component
    of FTB. However, customers with a Regular Care Child should be
    assessed for RA through the FAO system
-   customer is subject to Prohibition of FTB Instalment Payments (PIP),
    or
-   customer's FTB has cancelled Off Income Support (OIS) due to not
    providing an estimate following an employment income nil rate
    period. FTB will maintain responsibility for the payment of RA for a
    12 week period from date of cancellation. When FTB is restored, RA
    will be paid with FTB arrears, if entitled

Prohibition of FTB Instalment Payments (PIP)

A customer subject to Prohibition of FTB Instalment Payments (PIP)
retains their entitlement to Family Tax Benefit (FTB), including Rent
Assistance (RA).

The rate payable to the customer while their FTB is prohibited is zero.
This means:

-   RA is not paid with their income support payment during this period
-   they are still entitled to receive RA through the FAO system

If PIP is deferred:

-   payment of FTB, including RA will recommence
-   arrears are paid once their non-lodgement issues are resolved and
    the prohibition is lifted

If FTB is cancelled due to PIP (status of CAN-L3Y/N3O/N3P/N3Y):

-   RA is payable with their primary benefit
-   the customer does not retain their entitlement to FTB

Customer receiving RA with income support payment claims arrears of FTB

The customer’s Family Tax Benefit (FTB) payment automatically adjusts
when they:

-   receive Rent Assistance (RA) as a component of their income support
    payment, and
-   then make a claim for arrears of FTB

The adjustment takes into account the amount of RA already paid. This
prevents the customer receiving a duplicate payment of RA.

Related links

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Payment rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
