
Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction 108-08130030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers in
terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction.

On this Page:

Terminating RDS deductions

Services Australia customers who participate in the Rent Deduction
Scheme (RDS) to pay Government Housing payments do so voluntarily, and
can withdraw from the scheme at any time without giving a reason. There
is no authority form that the customer needs to complete for the
deductions to be terminated.

This can be done in the first instance by the relevant Housing Authority
(HA) or by contacting the agency either in person or over the phone. All
Service Officers are able to terminate deduction instructions at the
customer's request.

Where the HA requires assistance with ending a current RDS deduction,
they will contact the National Business Gateway – Confirmation Services
helpdesk.

Following termination of RDS deductions, customers are required to
discuss alternative rent payment options or to sign a new Deduction
Authority to commence a deduction with the relevant HA.

The HA may terminate a deduction on behalf of a customer where they
identify the customer should no longer be paying rent.

Housing Transitions

Customers may also contact the agency regarding terminations related to
housing transitions.

Some State Housing Authorities (HA) have transferred the tenancy
management of properties to a (non-government) Community Housing
Provider.

This means that customers will no longer pay their HA rent liability via
the RDS. Their rent obligation will transfer to the Community Housing
Provider and be paid through Centrepay. These customers may also be
eligible for Rent Assistance.

Where a transition occurs, Services Australia is working with State
Housing Authorities and Community Housing Providers to end existing RDS
deductions, and commence new Centrepay deductions and Rent Assistance on
behalf of affected customers.

Allowing Community Housing Providers to commence Centrepay and Rent
Assistance on their behalf is voluntary, and some customers may choose
to contact the agency to apply for Rent Assistance or set up a Centrepay
deduction.

Customers who are being transitioned will receive an RDS cancellation
letter, and Centrepay/Rent Assistance commencement letters through the
transition period. If a customer contacts in relation to the transition,
including changes to their deduction arrangements or management of their
tenancy from a Housing Authority to a Community Housing Provider in
their state, they should be referred to their Community Housing Provider
to discuss.

Overpayments

Occasionally, overpayments are made to HAs. Customers should be advised
that it may take up to 8 days for their Government Housing deductions to
cease, although legally they cease from the day the customer withdraws
their authority. Occasionally, this will result in the HA receiving
extra payments from the customer, and any such overpayment is refundable
to the customer by the HA.

Note: RDS refunds are not to be made by Centrelink. Please advise
customers to contact their HA.

Grace period when payment ceases

When an income support payment ceases, a grace period applies to
deduction instructions for 13 weeks. If the payment is restored during
the grace period the deduction instruction remains valid.

Income Management for customers with RDS deductions

When a customer has an existing RDS deduction in place, and is placed
onto Income Management, the rent amount is deducted from the customer's
discretionary funds by default, not their income managed funds. The
agency needs to ensure that customers are engaged where possible to
determine whether they want to pay their rent from their discretionary
funds, their available income managed funds or a portion from both
available funds. Termination of the existing RDS deduction may be
required if the customer chooses to pay their rent payment from their
available Income Management funds.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the National
Business Gateway Confirmation Services helpdesk, links to the Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS), Third Party Programmes Team and National
Business Gateway intranet pages, and a link to the MoneySmart website.

Related links

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deductions

Commencing a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

Eligibility for Crisis Payment

Social Work Services

Centrepay

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
