-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how income and assets are
assessed for ministers of religion.

A minister of religion is under a contract for service

-   Someone who is under a contract for service is usually treated as
    self-employed, however a minister of religion is neither an employee
    nor self-employed, but a 'holder of a religious office'

See References for a link to the Guide definition of a minister of
religion.

On this Page:

Reimbursements and allowances for work related expenses

Allowances and reimbursements of ministry related expenses are deducted
from the minister's gross employment income. Reportable fringe benefits
(including exempt reportable fringe benefits), which are for the
minister's own private benefit are 'valuable consideration' and must be
included.

Reimbursements made to a minister of religion by the church or
organisation for out-of-pocket expenses paid by the minister for
directly related ministry work, are not counted as income. However, any
portion of reimbursements paid to a minister to meet expenses not
directly related to ministry work is counted as income.

Similarly, allowances paid to a minister of religion to cover expenses
directly related with the minister's work are not counted as employment
income. If the church or an organisation pays more than the amount
actually incurred by the minister, the extra is included as income.

Income for the minister's own use and benefit is counted under the
income test. For example, a stipend or reportable fringe benefit
provided to a minister to meet general living expenses such as grocery
items, private health cover or children's school fees is counted as
income.

Accommodation expenses

When a customer receives free accommodation or free board and lodging,
the value of the accommodation or board and lodging is not income for
social security purposes. This includes free accommodation provided by
an employer or provided to a minister of religion.

However, when an employer or other organisation pays the mortgage
repayments on a customer's property, the value of the mortgage payments
is assessed as income. In a targeted income support system it is not the
intention to help people to acquire assets.

If an employer or organisation pays an allowance to cover the costs of
private accommodation or pays the rent on accommodation leased by the
customer, the amount of the allowance or rent paid is income.

All personally owned assets of a minister are treated in the same manner
as assets personally owned by any other customer.

If there is a small change to asset values determine if the customer
needs to notify.

Employment income as a member of a religious organisation under a vow of poverty

When a person is employed as a member of a religious organisation, the
employing organisation sets the rate of pay, and pays the member. The
amount earned is treated as employment income for social security
purposes. The income amount earned, derived or received is paid for the
member's own use or benefit regardless of their subsequent divesting
themselves of the money after payment.

Sustentation Benefit, and payments from the Clergy Sustentation Fund and
Clergy Foundation, are examples of gratuitous payments made to members
of certain churches (both pastors/ministers and other non-pastoral
members of their church) based on the years of service to the church. It
is not classified as superannuation as the amount of the payment to the
member has no direct relationship to the amount paid by the member, if
any. It is assessed as other income for the income test and therefore
does not deplete working credits. Other ordinary income is coded on the
Other Income Summary (OINS) screen. Record payments made periodically
using a periodic frequency and lump sums using the frequency ‘ANN’ -
Annual.

An organisation employs a religious organisation to supply any member of their organisation

If an organisation employs a religious organisation to supply any member
of their organisation, the religious organisation sets the rate of pay
and the employing organisation pays the religious organisation, the
amount earned is income of the religious organisation and not of the
individual member.

The assessment of income for a minister of religion differs between
Family Tax Benefit and income support payments.

Fringe benefits

For Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS) purposes, the
amount of fringe benefits to be assessed is determined by the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO). Certain benefits received by a minister of
religion are exempt under section 57 of the Fringe Benefits Tax
Assessment Act. This means any fringe benefits received would not appear
on the Pay As You Go (PAYG) Summary or be declared to the ATO. As
certain fringe benefits are exempt for ATO purposes, they are exempt for
FTB and CCS assessment purposes.

FTB and CCS entitlement is based on a person's Adjusted Taxable Income,
which includes taxable income, adjusted reportable fringe benefits,
(including exempt reportable fringe benefits and other reportable fringe
benefits), foreign income, net rental property loss and tax free
pensions or benefits such as Disability Support Pension, less any
deductible child maintenance expenditure. For further information on
fringe benefits for family payments, see Adjusted fringe benefits for
family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments.

For income support payments the assessment of fringe benefits for a
minister of religion is different. Note: a fringe benefit is a benefit
received as part of employment conditions that is not a wage or salary,
this does not include reimbursement of work related expenses or
allowances for work related expenses. All fringe benefits are personal
income (valuable consideration) and must be declared for assessment
purposes. For further information on fringe benefits for income support
payments, see Assessing fringe benefits for Social Security income test
purposes.

As ministers of religion are not self-employed, they cannot claim
reductions of business income. Thus if a minister's salary package
includes any expense payments (for example, books, telephone calls and
petrol) it is in the minister's interests to have these payments
identified and excluded from assessment.

The Resources page has a table providing an example of which portion of
fringe benefits is personal and which portion is ministry related.
Ministers can use this as a guide when working out their own income.

Related links

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessment of income and assets

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Coding income and assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
