
Income Test for single pension customers 108-03010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how under the pension income test, a customer's
pension rate is reduced if their assessable income is above a certain
limit. This procedure is for single pension customers. The income limit
that applies to a customer and the rate at which their pension reduces
depends on whether the customer is single or partnered.

On this Page:

Pension income test

This procedure does not contain information for:

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers:

-   who are under 21 years, with no dependent children and with
    affecting income at 19 September 2009, or
-   who are under 21 years with no dependent children

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers

Application of the income test for different customers

The income test applies differently for each of the following customers:

-   single pensioners
-   partnered pensioners
-   partnered pensioners where the partner is on an allowance payment
-   pensioners separated due to ill health
-   pensioners with children - if the pensioner is paid under the
    transitional rules for pension customers at 20 September 2009 and
    the customer has children, an extra income amount per child may be
    deducted before the rate of pension payable is calculated

A separate rate is calculated under both the income test and the assets
test. The lowest rate calculated is the rate payable to the customer.

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or DSP (Blind) may be exempt
from the means test, but income and assets details are required if the
customer wishes to apply for Rent Assistance (RA).

International agreements and compensation

Customers who are granted a pension under an International Agreement and
are in receipt of a pension or superannuation payment from that
agreement country, may be subject to a direct dollar for dollar rate
deduction.

Certain compensation payments or New Zealand Pension payments may also
result in a direct deduction.

Income from employment and self-employment

Additional deductions may apply if the customer is of:

workforce age, apply the Working Credit rules before applying the Income
Test

Age Pension age and receiving an income support payment other than PPS.
Apply the Work Bonus to their eligible income which is:

-   employment income, and
-   self-employment income the customer has earned through personal
    exertion

If the customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and some
of that income is employment income, the customer's payment may remain
current at nil rate for up to 6 fortnights, known as the employment
income nil rate period. Customers also in receipt of Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A will be subject to the FTB Part A income test during this
period and will be required to provide an income estimate within 21 days
of commencing the period or their FTB payment will cancel.

Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

For children born or entrusted to care on or after 1 October 2016,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) is counted as
ordinary income for pensions. PPL and DAP for children who were born or
entrusted to care prior to 1 October 2016 is treated as exempt income.

[]The online estimator options can be used to estimate the effect of a
change in income on a customer's Centrelink payments.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. The transitional rules will apply if the customer receives a
higher rate of payment under the old Income Test (pre to 20 September
2009) with no Work Bonus applied compared to the Income Test in place
from 20 September 2009 which does include the Work Bonus. If the
customer's pension is paid under the transitional rules, the Work Bonus
is not used to determine their rate entitlement under the pre 20
September 2009 Income Test.

Exempt income and assets

An exempt asset is one that is disregarded under the Assets Test,
irrespective of its value. An exempt asset may however have assessable
income. For example, the proceeds from the sale of the principal home
are an exempt asset but the proceeds when invested are deemed for
income.

There are four broad categories of exempt income. Although exempt income
is disregarded as income the amount received may be an assessable asset
and if the funds are invested, deeming provisions apply.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds received from the
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), whether received
periodically or as a lump sum, including interest accrued, which are
deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of managing the
customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from the Income and Assets Tests and
deeming. They are not required to be reported or if reported should not
be taken into account in the income and asset assessment.

Note: Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) are not
treated as exempt income for children born or entrusted to care on or
after 1 October 2016. PPL and DAP are treated as exempt income for
children who were born or entrusted to care prior to 1 October 2016.

Related links

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years with no dependent children

Calculating frozen rate pensions for Department of Veterans' Affairs War
Widow(er) pensioners

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assets Test for single pension customers

Payment rates and thresholds

Income, assets and rates of payment

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

International Social Security Agreements

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
