-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to help Service Officers manually
key a rate of payment for customers who are being paid in the NSS
system.

Manually code rate of payment

Normally, the system automatically calculates the correct payment rate
for a customer. In some cases, this does not occur and staff must key
the rate into the system for the correct rate of payment to occur.

The Rate Component Override (RCO) screen may require coding in the
following circumstances:

-   Long Term Income Support customer (LTIS)
-   Assets Hardship provisions (assessed by Complex Assessment Officers)
-   Rent Assistance coding
-   Death of a dependent child
-   Self-Employment Assistance
-   SpB Australian Citizen or Permanent Resident children
-   Intertwined or multiple records
-   Approved overseas studies
-   Polygamy relationships
-   Approved system workarounds. For example, Operational Message or
    Network News Updated (NNU)

Consumer Price Index (CPI) Reviews

CPI reviews may be created by the system every year on the:

-   1st January
-   20th March
-   1st July
-   20th September

For NSS payments, changes in CPI may automatically update by the system.
However, a CPI review may be required when there is a manual amount
coded on the RCO screen.

Historical RCO coding during New Claim Processing

A customer may have historical RCO coding on their record if they
previously received a NSS payment. Investigate historical RCO coding to
ensure future payments are not changed by an incorrect manual rate.

Approved Workarounds

Code the RCO screen when directed by:

-   Operational Blueprint process
-   Operational Message (OM)
-   Current NNU

Do not to use the RCO screen to complete unapproved workarounds. Where
the system is not paying the correct rate of payment and/or arrears,
escalate through the appropriate channels. For example Local Peer
Support or MySupport.

Student Start-up Loans

Youth Allowance (YA) Student, Austudy and ABSTUDY living allowance
customers may qualify for a Student Start-up Loan (SSL). To receive SSL,
the customer must receive at least $1 of their income support payment
(or certain supplementary payments). See Student Start-up Loan (SSL).

Coding a zero manual rate on RCO can result in incorrect overpayments of
SSL. Further investigation may be required where a zero manual rate is
coded in the same period SSL has been paid.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Related links

Non NSS systems coding for manual rate of payment

ABSTUDY system coding for manual rate of payment

Recording and correcting employment income details

Rates and thresholds

Coding for approved Overseas Full Time Study (OFS) payments

Death of a dependent child of a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) customer

Special Benefit (SpB) for Australian Citizen Child (ACC) and Australian
permanent resident children

Assets hardship provisions for allowances

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Self-Employment Assistance

Initial remediation on a multiple or intertwined Centrelink Customer
Reference Number (CRN)

Assessing entitlement to the Long Term Income Support rate of Austudy
for students or migrants studying English language courses

Assessing entitlement to Youth Allowance (YA) special rate for Long Term
Income Support Student or migrants studying English language courses

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
