
Applying the assets test component of the non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test 108-03020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to make an assessment of the care receiver's
assets under the non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA)
test, and identify the persons whose assets and income are to be
included in the relevant tests.

On this Page:

Income Test and Assets Test

A non-customer care receiver is subject to an Income and Assets Test in
order for their carer to qualify for Carer Payment (CP). The
non-customer care receiver Assets Test includes assets within and
outside Australia and the value of the asset is the net market value.
The family home is not included.

Assets Test exemption

If a non-customer care receiver does not pass the care receivers assets
test limit, they may still be exempt from the Assets Test depending on:

-   the assets value
-   the liquid assets
-   the income amount

The effect of these exemption provisions is that a family with assets
over the assets limit will pass the Assets Test. They will still need to
meet the care receivers' income threshold. The detail section identifies
the persons whose assets and income are to be included in the relevant
tests. For care receivers income thresholds and asset limits see the
Carer Payment (CP) - Care Receiver Income and Asset Limits link on the
Rates and Threshold page.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds received from the
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), which are deposited into an
account used to manage the customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from the
Income and Assets Tests and deeming. This includes funds received
periodically or as a lump sum, including interest accrued. These funds
are not required to be reported or if reported should not be taken into
account in the income and asset assessment.

Assets that are obtained to assist the care receiver in respect of their
disability (that is, motorised scooters) are exempt from the assets
test. Where there have been modifications made to a car, the value of
the modifications are exempt however, the value of the car that does not
relate to the modifications is assessable. Service Officers need to
verify the value of the modifications and subtract this amount from the
final value of the motor vehicle. However, if the car is exclusively
designed for use by a disabled person, for example special wheelchair
access, special driving controls, other design features, then the whole
value of the car would be exempted.

Where a customer, their partner or dependent child is disabled and there
is an increase in the value of assets as a result of purchase or
modifications (that is, to a car or home) to accommodate disabilities,
these assets are disregarded when assessing the total value of the
asset.

The procedures, Exempt income and Exempt Assets, provide information
about assessing income and assets that is exempt from the Income and
Assets Tests.

Assets above assets value limit for care receivers

A family with assets above the assets value limit for non-customer care
receivers can only be considered to meet the Assets Test if:

their assets are in the Medium Range and:

-   their income is under the care receiver Income Test, or

their assets are in the High Range and:

-   their liquid assets are below the liquid asset limit and
-   their current taxable income is below the Special Income Test
    required for Assets Test exemption

Assets Test exemptions under the non-customer Care Receiver Income and
Assets (CRIA) test are covered in another procedure.

Related links

Applying the income test component of the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Assets test exemptions for the non-customer Care Receiver Income and
Assets (CRIA) test

Payment rates and thresholds

Coding the Care Receiver Income and Assets Details (CRIA) screen

Coding a claim for Carer Payment (CP) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Determining the appropriate tax year for the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
