
Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)-like payments 108-03060030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details of the Defence Force Income Support
Allowance (DFISA)-like payments.

DFISA-like payments

The Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA) was an allowance paid
by the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) to customers whose income
support payment under Social Security Law is reduced because of the
inclusion of DVA Adjusted Disability Pension as assessable income.

From 1 January 2022, Adjusted Disability Pensions became exempt income
under the Social Security Act 1991 for income support payments. As such,
DFISA was no longer required.

Calculation of DFISA is still required for customers who are
retrospectively granted an Adjusted Disability Pension before 1 January
2022 or for reassessments of DFISA already paid to customers.

Payments made under other Commonwealth Acts and regulations were not
covered by the DFISA legislation. Customers paid under these acts and
regulations received DFISA-like payments identical to DFISA payments,
rather than DFISA.

The Veterans' Entitlements (DFISA-like Payment) Regulations 2005
provides for DFISA-like payments. These payments commenced 20 September
2004.

Primary payments for the purpose of DFISA-like payments

ABSTUDY Living Allowance attracted DFISA-like payments up until 1
January 2022.

Prior to 1 July 2014 the following income support payments were also
known as primary payments for the purposes of DFISA-like payments:

-   Farm Help Income Support (FHIS)
-   Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment (ECRP)
-   Interim Income Support (IIS)
-   Sugar Industry Reform Program 2004 - Income Support Payment

These payments were administered by the Department of Agriculture, Water
and the Environment, and were superseded by the introduction of Farm
Household Allowance (FHA) on 1 July 2014. FHA does not include DVA
Adjusted Disability Pensions as income, so did not attract DFISA.

The taxable status of DFISA-like payments reflects the taxable status of
the basic rate of primary payment for which the person is qualified. As
all of the primary payments listed above are taxable, all DFISA-like
payments are taxable.

A person's rate of DFISA-like payment is calculated by Services
Australia and transmitted to DVA for payment.

Calculation of DFISA-like payments

The amount of DFISA-like payment received is the difference between the
notional rate of the primary payment and the actual rate of the primary
payment. The notional rate is the rate the customer would have received
if the DVA Adjusted Disability Pension was:

-   excluded from income in the assessment of the person's actual rate,
    but
-   included in the calculation of rent assistance (that is, the DVA
    disability income rent test is applied)

For more information, see Calculation of Defence Force Income Support
Allowance (DFISA).

Related links

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Calculation of Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA) screens

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
