
Exempt income 108-04080010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assessing income exempt from
the income test.

Exempt income categories

There are 4 broad categories of exempt income:

-   Allowances paid with employment income, for example, allowance for
    out of pocket expenses, amounts paid to the provider of
    accommodation for international students. Note: take care when
    assessing payments received to cover expenses because not all are
    exempt. The Department of Social Services (DSS) has confirmed
    payments received from My Place Foundation Inc. for reimbursement of
    expenses incurred in caring for a disabled person, will be assessed
    as ordinary income unless the carer provides evidence (receipts) the
    money is a reimbursement for expenses directly related to caring for
    the disabled person
-   Income received as special financial assistance, for example,
    natural disaster trusts, payments from medically acquired HIV trusts
-   Other legislated income exempt from assessment, for example,
    Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) for children
    who were born or entered care prior to 1 October 2016, child income,
    private health fund rebate, defence force reservist's income, a
    subsidy made by the Commonwealth, a state or territory or an
    authority of the Commonwealth or of a state or territory to or on
    behalf of the person who pays or who is liable to pay rent. See
    Resources for further examples
-   Other specifically approved income exempt from assessment, for
    example, approved scholarships awarded outside Australia, income
    from welfare reform pilots, UK Council Tax Benefit. See Resources
    for further examples

Note: although these types of income are exempt for social security
purposes, they may be taxable and must be included in a customer's
adjusted taxable income for family assistance payments. Recommend the
customer check with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) if their type
of income must be declared for taxation purposes.

Although exempt income is disregarded as income:

-   the amount received may be an assessable asset
-   if the funds are invested, deeming provisions apply

For example, if a customer receives funds covered by exempt income
provisions, for example, Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment
(AGDRP), the payment is not assessed as income. If the customer deposits
these funds in a bank account, the total balance of the account is
considered an asset and is deemed under the Income Test.

For customers claiming a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC), there are
certain payments that are assessable, whereas they are exempt for income
support customers. See also: Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income
test.

This procedure does not cover compensation for loss or damage of
principal home.

Assessing income from emergency recovery payments

The value of emergency recovery or similar assistance is exempt income.

The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster
Recovery Payment (DRP) is exempt under the Social Security Act 1991
section 8(8) (a) and section 8 (8)(c) exempts income received from
emergency relief or similar assistance.

Payments exempt under this section include:

-   State government financial assistance to victims of bushfires
-   Bali Emergency Relief
-   Drought financial assistance
-   Flood financial assistance
-   Funeral/memorial assistance
-   Income Recovery Subsidy (cannot be paid to a customer, but can be
    exempt for partner)
-   Victorian Government Emergency Personal Hardship Grant
-   Victorian Government Temporary Living Expenses Grant
-   Victorian Government Reestablishment Grant
-   Victorian Government Emergency Business Grant/Clean Up and
    Restoration Grant/Supplementary Grant
-   Charity Appeal Fund Compassion and Bereavement Payment
-   Charity Appeal Fund Initial Home Dislocation Payment
-   Charity Appeal Fund Severe Injury Payment
-   Permanently Impaired Gift
-   Financial Hardship and in Need of Permanent Accommodation Gift
-   Covid-19 Disaster Payment
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Note: this list is not exhaustive.

Some of these payments are also exempt from the Assets Test and deeming
as they are considered compensation for the loss of and damage to
buildings and personal effects. They are assessed in a similar way to
insurance payouts (see below). These include:

-   Victorian Government Reestablishment Grant
-   Victorian Government Emergency Business Grant, Clean Up and
    Restoration Grant, Supplementary Grant
-   Charity Appeal Fund Initial Home Dislocation Payment
-   Financial Hardship and in Need of a Permanent Accommodation Gift
-   Queensland Premiers Relief Fund

Insurance payouts

Insurance payouts received as compensation for the loss of or damage to
buildings and personal effects, are exempt as income.

If these payouts, grants or gifts when received are held as a financial
investment, the financial investment and any interest earned is not
deemed under the Income Test for up to 12 months after the person
receives the payment.

Under the Assets Test, the grant would be exempt under paragraph 1118(s)
of the Social Security Act 1991, which provides for exemption of
payments of insurance or compensation for the loss of or damage to
buildings and personal effects for up to 12 months, or longer.

The Income Test and Assets Test exemption may be extended past 12 months
if the person can show they intended to spend the compensation or
insurance payment on repairs within 12 months, but they were not able to
do so for reasons beyond their control.

Income received as special financial assistance

Some payments received are exempt from the Income Test, if received as
special financial assistance. Payments from trust funds that pay
assistance to people suffering losses from natural disasters, are
one-time relief payments and are not regarded as income for social
security purposes, for example the NSW Bushfire Appeal.

Note: concessional/low interest loans are not income.

Cash sale of an asset

Cash received by a customer from the sale of an asset is not assessed as
income, for example, a garage sale, firearms buyback scheme. The
customer's assessable assets may need adjusting due to the sale. Any
cash in bank accounts is subject to deeming provisions.

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Different rules apply to an approved SDT. A SDT's income is exempt from
the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt from the Assets Test if the
assets are not over the concessional asset limit, this procedure does
not cover SDTs.

Exempt scholarship income

Customers who receive Equity or Merit based Scholarships have a portion
of their total scholarship income exempt from being treated as income
under the personal and partner Income Tests for all social security
payments.

Relocation Scholarship paid by Centrelink is entirely exempt from the
Income Test.

The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

NDIS funds paid by the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA),
whether received periodically or as a lump sum (including interest
accrued), which are deposited into an account specifically for the
purpose of managing the customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from the Income
and Assets Tests and deeming. They are not required to be reported or if
reported must not be taken into account in the income and asset
assessment.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
International Program Contacts, and more information about different
types of exempt income.

Related links

Allowances paid with employment income

Exempt lump sums

Treatment of lump sums

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Income from boarders and lodgers

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assessing scholarship income

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Deeming provisions

Exchange Trading Systems (ETS)

Exempt Assets

Exempt Funeral Investments (Funeral Bonds)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
