
Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA) 108-02010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Policy

Step parents policy advice

Legislation

Policy

ABSTUDY

Links to the ABSTUDY Policy Manual and the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme guidelines go to pdf and docx documents. Select
the document and go to the reference(s) below.

ABSTUDY Policy Manual

-   58.1, Exemptions from the Parental Income Test
-   58.2, Whose income is assessed under the Parental Income Test?
-   58.3, Income for the purposes of the Parental Income Test
-   58.3 Foreign Income

Note: there is no legislation for ABSTUDY.

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme Guidelines

-   6, The Parental Income test

Note: there is no legislation for AIC.

Youth Allowance

Social Security Guide, 4.2.8.10, Dependent YA - Parental Income Test &
Limits

Social Security Guide, 1.1.A.170, Appropriate tax year (YA)

Social Security Guide, 1.1.B.10, Base year (YA)

Social Security Guide, 1.1.E.90, Employer provided benefit (YA)

Social Security Guide, 1.1.T.105, Total net investment loss (YA)

Social Security Guide, 1.1.F.160, Foreign income (dependent YA)

Family assistance

Family Assistance Guide, 2.1.1.10, FTB child

Family Assistance Guide, 3.2.6 Tax Free Pensions or Benefits

Step-parents policy advice

Note: the advice below is also the intention of ABSTUDY Policy and
applies to ABSTUDY customers.

Step-parent is the married or de facto partner of the parent who has
primary care and responsibility of the dependent Youth Allowance or
ABSTUDY customer. For Youth Allowance customers, the definition is found
in the Social Security Act 1991, section 5(1), Family relationships
definitions - children. For ABSTUDY customers, the term 'parent' is
defined in the Glossary of the ABSTUDY Policy Manual.

The income of the step-parent will be included in the Parental Income
Test for the purposes of determining the rate of Youth Allowance or
ABSTUDY Living Allowance for a customer where the step-parent lives with
the parent and the customer normally lives with the parent and
step-parent. The earliest that this may be applied is from the date that
the parent and step-parent normally live together and this may include
the event occurring while the customer is absent from the home but
normally lives with the parent.

Normally lives with means that the customer's normal home is the same as
the parent and step-parent. This includes customers who live away from
home:

-   for study
-   to search for work
-   to undertake other activities, and
-   do not establish their own permanent and separate home. That is,
    they intend to return home

Customers living arrangements are deemed temporary if they:

-   live in campus accommodation, and
-   must pack up their belongings and return home during semester break

For the purposes of the Parental Means Test, the step-parent's means
should not be included when the customer has:

-   ceased living normally with the step-parent
-   established a separate home
-   no intention of returning, other than for a visit
    Note: the customer's change of living arrangements must be verified

It is possible that over a period of time the customer may claim to move
in and out of the parent/step-parent's home on a permanent basis. If it
is properly verified, there is no reason a change in circumstances
should not be applied each time.

Legislation

Links to the Federal Register of Legislation site go to a 'Series' page.
Select the 'Latest' version.

Social Security Act 1991

-   section 1067G-A1, Method of calculating rate
-   section 1067G, Module F - Parental income test

Farm Household Support Act 2014

-   part 5 - Application and modification of the Social Security Act and
    the Social Security Administration Act

Social Security (Administration) Act 1999

-   section 192, General power to obtain information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
