-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines some of the types of loans customers may have
made.

Definition of a loan

A loan is something lent or furnished on condition of it being returned,
often with an amount of interest.

Examples of loans for deeming include:

-   Bonds
-   Bank bills
-   Commercial bills and promissory notes
-   Loans to family members (but not from one member of a couple to the
    other)
-   Loans to trusts and private companies
-   Loans to any other individual, group or corporation

All money loaned by a customer is an assessable asset, regardless of
when the loan was made.

The value of the loan is the amount still owed to the customer. Loans
are assessed as a financial investment so they are subject to the
deeming provisions.

Forgiveness of a loan is a disposal of an asset and may be assessed as
deprivation.

If there is a small change to asset values, check if the customer needs
to notify.

Referral to CAO

A referral to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) is required when the
customer advises a loan is:

-   to a private trust or company
-   a failed financial investment, or
-   irrecoverable

There are several situations where a loan is considered a failed
financial investment.

Exemption from the deeming provisions

The Minister for the Department of Social Services (DSS) can exempt
investments and loans from the deeming provisions. Applications are
processed by the Exemptions Officer in DSS.

Investments exempt from the deeming provisions are assessed for Income
Test purposes using the actual rate of return.

From 20 September 2001, Centrelink has the authority to exempt a loan
from the deeming provisions only if the loan is considered unrealisable
and therefore 'disregarded' under the asset hardship rules. Requests for
exemptions of loans from the deeming provisions must be referred to the
CAO.

Deed of Debt Forgiveness

Where a loan has been forgiven, a Deed of Debt Forgiveness may be
required to confirm the agreement made between the lender and borrower.
A deed is a formal document and should meet certain legal requirements.

The deed should

-   Include the terms of the agreement
-   Include the date the agreement was made
-   signed by the lender in the presence of an independent witness
-   signed by the borrower in the presence an independent witness
-   signed by the witness

If the provided deed does not meet the above requirements, forward the
case to the Income Support Means Test Team who will advise if the deed
can be accepted.

Changes for private trust and companies from 1 January 2002

From 1 January 2002, new rules were implemented for the way private
trust and private companies are treated under the Assets Tests. Where a
customer has made a loan to a private trust or private company, an
assessment must be made by a CAO.

See Loans and liabilities against assets for information about margin
loans.

The Resources page contains links to the Module PC - Private Company
(Mod PC) and Module PT - Private Trust (Mod PT).

Related links

Assessing a failed loan

Loans and liabilities against assets

Deeming provisions

Deeming exemptions

A-H Deeming Exemption Register

I-Z Deeming Exemption Register

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Assessing and coding the Private Company details from the MOD PC

Assessing and coding the Private Trust Mod PT

Complex Assessment Officers (CAOs)

Assessing deprivation/gifting

MIN/SIN Database Maintenance and Updates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
