
Assessing child care business income 108-04060000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the assessment of
self-employment for customers providing child care services. It is to
help with the calculation of income from child care, whether formally
through a family day care scheme, or informally through baby-sitting (in
the carer's home or the child's home).

On this Page:

Income from providing child care services

Income from child care is income from self-employment unless the
customer is an employee of a child care provider, for example at a child
care centre. As with all other forms of self-employment, this income
cannot be offset by the customer's Working Credit balance.

The income assessment is the same as for any other self-employment. The
rate of income to be assessed is the net profit: the gross amount
received less the allowable deductions necessarily incurred in running
the business. Deductions are only allowed for expenses the customer
would not have incurred had they not been providing a paid child care
service.

For full details on the assessment of business income and assets, see
Sole traders.

Carer/educator income

Under family assistance law, parents must be charged fees by the
approved child care service and not by the person caring for the child
to be eligible for Australian Government fee assistance, for example,
Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Many carers/educators collect money from families, but they are
collecting on behalf of the child care service/provider. Some providers
charge the parent an administration fee, for example, for arranging the
service, and the educator for administrative support. The fee collected
by the educator from the parent is not part of their income or expenses.
Only the administration levy charged by the provider to the educator is
an expense to the educator’s business.

Carers/educators should be able to provide documentation, an agreement
or contract outlining the amounts they are entitled to receive from the
child care provider for the work they have performed.

Documents required to assess net business income

The customer should provide a copy of the latest available business tax
return and financial statements (profit and loss statement and balance
sheet). If these are not available, or there has been a change in income
the customer should be asked to supply a profit and loss statement
(SU580) showing the current income, for example, a profit and loss
statement from the date of the change. The coordinating units of family
day care schemes which organise and support caregivers should not be
asked to confirm this kind of income.

Where Services Australia receives contradictory information from a
reliable source this should be used unless there is proof it is an
error. It is appropriate to discuss with the customer why Services
Australia is not using their figures.

The Resources page contains links to business assessment tools and an
example of using the formula to calculate deductions against child care
income when evidence of costs is not available.

Related links

Assessing and finalising MIC interventions

Business deductions

Documents required to assess a sole trader business

Income and assets from business structures

Sole traders

Assessing sole trader income

Steps to assess an interim profit and loss statement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
