
Exemptions from income and assets tests for superannuation investments 108-05070030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process when a customer requests an exemption
from the income and assets tests for their superannuation investment.

Superannuation investments that may be eligible for exemption

Superannuation investments are normally assessed under the income and
assets tests for customers of Age Pension age. Most funds allow
customers to access their investment, even if they are still employed.

Exception: some super funds restrict access to these investments until
the person ceases work for that employer or exits the scheme. These are
mainly super funds catering for government employees under a defined
benefit scheme.

Testing eligibility for exemption

Any customer who is over Age Pension age and currently employed by a
state or federal government should test their eligibility for the
exemption of their superannuation investment. There are also some
limited non-government employers with restricted access. These are
listed on the Resources page

Ask the customer to provide the most recent statement from their
superannuation fund.

In all cases, make a referral for the customer to speak to a Financial
Information Service (FIS) Officer.

Financial Information Service (FIS) Officers

The FIS Officer will help people through the superannuation exemption
application process

-   by explaining how the various superannuation products affect
    government payments
-   as the contact person for superannuation exemption enquiries
-   by reviewing applications and completing the FIS Officer checklist
    for superannuation investment exemption requests

Preserved benefits

Generally, preserved benefits must be retained in:

-   a superannuation fund
-   an approved deposit fund, or
-   a retirement savings account

This is until the member meets a condition of release with no cashing
restrictions under the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Act 1993.

Preserved benefits are most commonly paid when a member has reached
their preservation age and retired. Since 1 July 2005, a member who has
reached their preservation age can access their preserved benefits while
still working. The member is restricted to taking a non-commutable
complying income stream or a non-commutable account-based income stream.
These are known as transition to retirement income streams.

If a member has not reached their preservation age but has permanently
retired, a benefit can only be paid:

-   if the permanently disabled member is in severe financial hardship
-   for compassionate reasons, or
-   on death of the member

Generally, there are no restrictions on access to preserved benefits
when a member reaches age pension age.

Date of effect (DOE)

The earliest possible DOE is the date the customer enquired or applied.

In some cases, the date of application is the earliest date recorded
that the customer spoke to Centrelink about their exemption. This could
be before they submitted the application if there is a record of their
enquiry about the exemption.

The Minister for Social Services has the delegation to exempt
superannuation investments if they are inaccessible and the date of
effect. However, the Minister has delegated this authority to Services
Australia.

Appeals

The DOE of an exemption and rejection of an application for exemption
are not appealable decisions as they are Ministerial determinations.
However, if more information is provided following a rejection, another
application for exemption may be submitted.

Exemptions

An exemption exists for as long as the circumstances of the investment
make it inaccessible. If it appears the exemption was applied
incorrectly, it can be resubmitted for further consideration.

A superannuation exemption is only for a limited period. It stops when
the conditions under which it was granted are no longer met. In most
cases, this will be the customer ceasing work for the employer. In other
cases, it will be reaching age 70. These conditions are in the
determination advice and the letter sent to the customer.

The Resources page has links to more information for FIS Officers, forms
and definitions relevant to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), and a
link to the FINS Helpdesk.

Related links

Deeming exemptions

Assessing superannuation

Financial Information Service (FIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
