
Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction 108-08130020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to select staff from the National
Business Gateway on the action to be taken when a request to vary Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS) deductions is received by Services Australia.

Varying Deductions

Customers who participate in the RDS are entitled to vary the amount of
their deductions and they should be referred to their Housing Authority
(HA) office in the first instance to do so.

Service Officers cannot vary a customer's RDS deductions.

Note: ‘varying’ a deduction does not include terminating the deduction.
For more information, see Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS)
deduction.

Variation required immediately

Where the Housing Authority (HA) requires an instruction to take effect
immediately they will contact the National Business Gateway -
Confirmation Services helpdesk. A limited number of authorised officers
have access to perform this function. If a service centre receives a
request from the HA for a variation, contact the National Business
Gateway.

Income Management for customers with RDS deductions

When a customer has an existing RDS deduction in place, and is placed
onto Income Management, the rent amount is deducted from the customer's
discretionary funds by default, not their income managed funds. The
agency needs to ensure that customers are engaged where possible to
determine whether they want to pay their rent from their discretionary
funds, their available income managed funds or a portion from both
available funds. Variations to the existing RDS deduction may be
required to ensure that the customer has sufficient funds available to
meet their priority needs.

The Resources page contains contact details for the National Business
Gateway Confirmation Services helpdesk, and links to the Rent Deduction
Scheme (RDS), Third Party Programmes Team and National Business Gateway
home pages for relevant information and other contact details.

Related links

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deductions

Commencing a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) transaction codes

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
