
Interest in an estate 108-04020050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the assessment of an interest in a
deceased estate.

Interest in deceased estate

Any share in a deceased estate is disregarded until it is received or is
able to be received.

Where a customer notifies that they have an interest in a deceased
estate the extent and nature of the interest and the expected date of
distribution is to be obtained. Inquiries concerning estates should be
made with the executor or administrator of the estate. Contact with
solicitors, other than in their capacity as executor or administrator,
should only be made as a last resort (as the customers may be charged
for any contact with a solicitor).

Expected value of interest in estate

If the expected value of the interest will put the total assets of the
customer above the allowable assets limits, a manual review should be
noted for the expected date of distribution and the customer advised
that they must notify Services Australia within 14 days if there is a
distribution.

Where the expected value of the interest will not put total assets above
the allowable assets amount a review and notification by the customer
will only be required if income is received or derived from the
investment of a lump sum distribution. For a period of up to 12 months
following the death it should generally be accepted that an interest in
an estate which has not been distributed is not able to be received.

Joint ownership of assets

Where assets (other than partnership assets) are owned in joint tenancy,
such assets generally pass automatically on the death of a joint owner
to the survivor.

Where there are no claims against the estate, such assets can be
transferred to the survivor before the grant of probate. A remainder
interest also transfers automatically to the remainder man on the death
of the person holding the life interest. For example, John and Mary are
a couple. John owns $500 000 worth of farmland in his own name. When
John dies, his will states that Mary is to receive a life interest in
the farmland, with the beneficial interest in the farmland to pass
absolutely to the couple's son Oliver on Mary's death. This means that
Oliver will own the land in his own right when Mary passes away. Oliver
is the beneficiary of the remainder interest in the property. Oliver may
be referred to as the remainder man.

No current will

In cases where the deceased person did not make a will (that is died
intestate), enquiries may be made with the authority in the particular
state or territory responsible for the administration of the estate of
such persons.

Delays in the distribution of the estate

Where the estate has not been distributed after a period of 12 months
has elapsed, the question of whether an interest in an estate is able to
be received will need to be considered on the facts of the individual
case. The grant of probate does not mean that an estate is able to be
finalised. It is merely approval by the court of a person's will.

Estate debts have to be paid before an estate can be wound up. Once this
has occurred as a general rule the proceeds are able to be received. In
some cases the executor may set aside separate funds in the estate for
payment of debts. In these circumstances it may be accepted that the
remaining funds are available for distribution and, for assets test
purposes, that they are able to be received by the beneficiary.

Regardless of whether or not the customer is the executor and it appears
that there is nothing to prevent an estate being distributed the
executor should be asked if there is any reason for the delay before
including the customer's interest as an asset. Where the delegate is
satisfied that the customer has contributed to the delay, the interest
should be accepted as being available.

Where the customer is not the executor, or the executor has a
discretionary power under the will in relation to the distribution of
the proceeds of the estate and there is more than one beneficiary, the
case is to be referred to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) for
assessment of a testamentary trust under the assessment of trusts and
companies post 1 January 2002 rules.

Deprivation

Deprivation provisions will apply if the customer:

-   waives their right to their interest in the deceased estate, or
-   directs the executor of the will to distribute their interest in the
    deceased estate to a third party, or
-   gives their interest in the deceased estate to a third party after
    the estate has been finalised

Related links

Assessment of trusts and companies

Exempt lump sums

Life interest in an asset or income

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Deprivation

Treatment of lump sums

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
