-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess the income streams paid from
Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation
Funds (SAFs).

Self-Managed Funds

Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSFs) and Small Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) Superannuation Funds (SAFs) were
formerly known as 'Do-It-Yourself funds' or 'Excluded Funds'. This
procedure provides information about income streams paid from SMSFs and
SAFs.

Customers may set up their own superannuation funds, known as SMSFs or
SAFs. An SMSF is a fund with less than 7 members. All members are
trustees of the super fund or directors of the trustee company if a
corporate trustee is present. The fund could also have only one member.
See the References page for more information about these exceptions. The
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) regulates SMSFs.

Superannuation funds with fewer than 7 members that do not meet the
conditions to be classed as an SMSF are SAFs. SAFs differ from SMSFs
because they must have a corporate trustee approved by Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA). APRA regulates SAFs.

Most SMSFs and SAFs can be identified by their name. The name of the
SMSF often includes the customer's family name in the fund name however,
this is not necessary. The income stream schedule (SA330) also assists
in identifying whether the income stream is paid from an SMSF or a SAF.

Note:

-   from 1 January 2019, it is mandatory for income stream providers to
    report income stream information to Services Australia
    electronically, to update income streams during the income stream
    reviews. The automated income stream review process excludes income
    streams paid from an SMSF or SAF. The current letter reviews will
    continue for income streams from SMSFs and SAFs.
-   from 1 July 2021, the maximum number of members for SMSFs and SAFs
    increased from 4 to 6.

Income streams

These funds were originally able to offer the following income streams:

-   lifetime
-   life expectancy
-   market-linked
-   account-based income streams

Now, only account-based income streams and in some cases market-linked
income streams (MLI) can commence from these funds.

Account-based income streams

Account-based income streams (also known as allocated income streams)
are the most common type of asset-tested income stream customers would
receive from their SMSF or SAF.

Market-linked income streams (MLIs)

From 20 September 2004, SMSFs and SAFs can offer MLIs. They are also
known as Term Allocated Pensions. These are 50% ATE if purchased before
20 September 2007 and non-commutable, except in very limited
circumstances.

As of 20 September 2007, new MLIs cannot be purchased. The exception is
an existing asset-test exempt MLI can be fully commuted and directly
transferred (rollover) to a new MLI which complies with section 9BA.

An asset-tested MLI is also non-commutable, except in very limited
circumstances. Note: under the permanent debt relief conditions
available from 25 August 2011, an existing asset-test exempt lifetime or
life expectancy income stream can be fully commuted and directly
transferred to an asset-tested market-linked income stream.

Lifetime and life expectancy income streams

Asset-test exempt (ATE) lifetime or life expectancy income streams must:

-   meet all the characteristics of an ATE income stream, including
    actuarial certification, and
-   meet the documentation requirements

Note: MLIs are not required to supply additional documentation,
including actuarial certificate, which is required for ATE lifetime and
life expectancy income streams

Income streams commenced before 20 September 2004, which meet the
characteristics for asset-test exemption, are 100% ATE.

Income streams commenced in the period of 20 September 2004 to 19
September 2007, which meet the characteristics for asset-test exemption,
are 50% ATE.
Note: SMSFs and SAFs have not been permitted under the SIS rules to
offer compliant lifetime or life expectancy income streams since 1
January 2006.

All income streams purchased from 20 September 2007 are fully assets
tested. Exception: in a limited number of circumstances, certain ATE
lifetime and life expectancy income streams purchased before 1 January
2006 that are commuted and rolled over into certain types of post 20
September 2007 ATE income streams, retain a 100% or 50% asset-test
exemption (whichever is applicable), if certain conditions are
satisfied, see commutation rules below. These conditions include
commuting the income stream and purchasing an equivalent ATE income
stream with the same level of asset-test exemption. For more information
on the eligibility criteria and conditions for retaining ATE status, see
the References page.

Commutation and rollover of ATE income stream

Commutation of original ATE income stream and rollover to a new ATE
income stream on or after 20 September 2007

Lifetime and life expectancy ATE income streams that commenced before 1
January 2006 can continue to make payments, but if these income streams
are commuted, the assets can only be used to purchase certain types of
income streams. The type will depend on the commencement date of the
original income stream. It must also be an allowable commutation and the
conditions for retaining the ATE status must be met. The income stream
must be fully commuted and all assets including the reserves used to
purchase the new income stream for retaining the ATE status. See the
References page for more information on the eligibility criteria and
conditions for retaining ATE status.

Original lifetime or life expectancy ATE income stream purchased before
20 September 2004 (100% ATE income stream)

The commuted assets can only be used to purchase a lifetime or life
expectancy ATE income stream directly from a retail provider under the
conditions for retaining asset-test exemption. If the customer commutes
a 100% ATE income stream and directly rolls over the proceeds to a MLI
on or after 20 September 2007, the commutation is treated as a
non-allowable commutation. The original income stream should be treated
as if it had never been ATE and this will result in a debt being raised
under section 1223A of the Social Security Act 1991. The MLI should be
assessed as an asset-tested income stream as the purchase date is on or
after 20 September 2007. Note: the permanent debt relief is available
from 25 August 2011. This relief is not the same as the temporary (old
or enhanced) debt relief available in the 2009-2010 financial year.
Under the permanent debt relief, any debt raised because of the
non-allowable commutation can be waived under section 1237AB of the
Social Security Act 1991.

Original lifetime or life expectancy ATE income stream purchased on or
after 20 September 2004 and before 1 January 2006 (50% ATE income
stream)

The commuted assets may be used to purchase a market-linked income
stream (MLI) from an SMSF or SAF, or an ATE lifetime or life expectancy
or MLI directly from a retail provider under the conditions for
retaining asset-test exemption. Note: the permanent debt relief is also
available to customers with 50% ATE income streams from their SMSFs or
SAFs, who can restructure by a full commutation and rollover into an
asset-tested MLI, either from a retail provider or within their fund at
any time, regardless of whether they meet high probability requirements
or not.

Purchase price of an income stream paid from SMSFs or SAFs

The purchase price of an income stream paid from an SMSF or SAF is the
sum of the payments made to purchase the income stream, minus any
commutations.

The purchase price of an individual's income stream paid from the SMSF
or SAF is drawn from the member's beneficial interest in the fund.
However, the whole interest may not necessarily be used to purchase one
income stream. It is common for a member to have an ATE product and an
account-based product.

Defined Benefit Pension not a Defined Benefit Income Stream

A defined benefit income stream for social security purposes (section
9(1) of Social Security Act 1991) (SSA) is an income stream where
payments are defined by factors like:

-   years of service
-   final salary or final average salary over recent years, or
-   by criteria determined by the fund's governing rules

Payments are not defined by amount of funds used to purchase the income
stream.

Pensions (except allocated and market-linked pensions) paid from SMSFs
and SAFs are classified as 'defined benefit pensions' under section 228
of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) (SIS) Act 1993. However,
they are not defined benefit income streams for the purposes of the SSA.

Documentation required for assessment

Account-based income streams and market-linked income streams

A Details of income stream product form (SA330) or a similar income
stream schedule must be obtained from the customer. The form must be
signed by the Trustee of the fund (generally the customer), who may
obtain assistance to complete the details from their accountant or
financial adviser. Some SMSFs may have a retail provider as their
administrator, for example, AMP or MLC, who may complete the form.

Lifetime or Life expectancy income stream

A customer, or trustee of the fund (often the customer), receiving a
lifetime or life expectancy income stream from an SMSF or SAF wanting
ATE status for the income stream, must supply documentation about the
income stream to the agency. This allows assessment of whether the
product meets the requirements of section 9A or 9B of the Social
Security Act 1991 (SSA). Any deficiencies in the information provided
may delay the assessment of the income stream.

The trust deed or governing rules must specify the exact terms and
conditions of the income stream, including required characteristics of
an ATE lifetime or life expectancy income stream. If not, a contract or
other documentation (trustee letter, trustee resolution or minutes or
agreement) with a full and accurate description of the benefits
certified by the trustees of the SMSF or SAF is required. Specifying the
required characteristics in any of the documentation assists the agency
to determine if the product complies with section 9A or 9B of the SSA.
The required documentation provides the agency, with clear details of
the benefit provided by the superannuation fund to the individual.

Requirements for actuarial certificates

SMSFs and SAFs paying an asset-test exempt (ATE) lifetime or life
expectancy income stream are subject to annual actuarial review. A
customer has to provide a new actuarial certificate at the end of every
12 month 'in force' period of the certificate. Note: there is a grace
period of 6 months following the expiry of the previous actuarial
certificate, during which time a new certificate can be provided.
Actuarial certificate reviews are initiated in August. The actuarial
certificate must be referred to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) to
check if the certificate expresses a 'high probability' opinion that the
fund can make the income stream payments specified in the trust deed or
governing rules. This is necessary for determining the ongoing asset
test exempt status of the product.

Assessing deprivation

Previously, cases were referred to the Australian Government Actuary
(AGA) to assess asset test exempt (ATE) lifetime and life expectancy
income streams for deprivation. From 27 October 2011, this is no longer
necessary as deprivation is assessed from commencement of the income
stream and cannot have occurred in the last 5 years. Deprivation
occurred where the purchase price of an ATE lifetime or life expectancy
income stream was greater than the present value of the future payments
from the income stream. As the present value was not readily
identifiable, a valuation by AGA was necessary. To determine if
deprivation had occurred, the agency compared the present value of the
ATE income stream over its term or life (as calculated by the AGA) with
the purchase price. If deprivation had occurred, normal deprivation
procedures were applied, including allowable disposal rules.

A deprivation assessment could only be conducted after a customer
purchases an ATE lifetime or life expectancy income stream. The
assessment could not be reviewed or reassessed as it related to the
purchase of the ATE income stream, which could not be reversed.

AGA valuation

Since 27 October 2011, Australian Government Actuary (AGA) valuations
are no longer requested for ATE lifetime or life expectancy income
streams paid from SMSFs and SAFs for deprivation and return of purchase
price. Note: AGA valuations are not required for ATE market-linked
income stream (MLI).

Additional documentation is required if the product complies with
section 9A or 9B of the Social Security Act 1991. This documentation
should be sent to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) for assessment.

The Resources page contains links to the Details of income stream
product form (SA330) and a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk online
form.

Related links

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating pooled lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Income stream reviews

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

Assessing lifetime income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation
Funds (SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Assessing life expectancy income streams paid from Self Managed
Superannuation Funds (SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
