
Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) 108-03050010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to follow when a customer advises
they receive Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) income. It shows how
the different types of payments from DVA affect entitlement to payments
administered by Centrelink.

Customer with income from the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

The DVA Clearance Team:

-   has access to view the DVA customer database, which has details of
    most payments delivered by DVA
-   performs the clearance role for Centrelink with DVA, and
-   verifies and codes all DVA income and benefits declared by the
    customer on the Department of Veterans' Affairs Summary (DVAS)
    screen

Multiple entitlement exclusion

Payability of a benefit, pension, supplement or card, can be affected by
multiple entitlement exclusion. Customers may not be able to receive a
payment from both Centrelink and DVA.

Payments treated as income

Some DVA payments are treated as income for social security purposes.
These payments include:

-   War Widow(er)'s Pension (WWP) (paid under VEA) and Wholly Dependent
    Partner (paid under Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
    2004 (MRCA)) are treated as income for the customer's partner
-   Temporary Incapacity Allowance (paid under VEA). Only payable for
    periods of incapacity before 20 September 2011
-   Dependant Allowance (paid under VEA). Only payable for periods
    before 20 September 2009
-   Periodic Eligible Young Person payments (paid under Military
    Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA))
-   Adequate Means of Support. There have been no new grants for
    Adequate Means of Support since 6 June 1986, but a small number may
    currently still be in receipt of this payment

Payments treated as exempt income

Some DVA payments are exempt under the income test for social security
purposes. These include add on payments made by DVA, which are similar
to Centrelink payments and payments made to veterans for their
disabilities, such as:

Attendant Allowance

Clothing Allowance

Compensatory in nature lump sums:

-   Eligible Young Person
-   Other Dependant
-   Permanent Impairment
-   Wholly Dependent Partner

The Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence Related Claims) Act
1988 (DRCA) Supplement

Energy Supplement

Ex-gratia lump sum Prisoner of War (POW) payments

Gold Card Energy Supplement

Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA) Supplement

Pension Supplement

Prisoner of War Recognition Supplement (POWR Supplement)

Recreation Transport Allowance

Rent Assistance

Remote Area Allowance

Telephone Allowance

Vehicle Assistance Scheme

Veterans' Supplement

Victoria Cross Allowance

From 1 January 2022, Adjusted Disability Pensions are exempt income.
These include:

Disability Compensation Payment paid under the Veterans' Entitlements
Act (VEA) 1986. For example:

-   General Rate Disability Pensions (10% to 100%)
-   Special Rate Disability Pensions (Totally and Permanently
    Incapacitated (TPI))
-   Temporarily Totally Incapacitated (TTI))
-   Extreme Disablement Adjustment (EDA), and
-   Intermediate Rate (IWP)

Specific Disability Compensation Payment Allowances (Items 1 to 15)
(paid under VEA)

Periodic Permanent Impairment payments and Special Rate Disability
Pension (paid under MRCA)

Social security Age Pension (paid by DVA)

Veterans in receipt of a Disability Compensation Payment from DVA, who
are also eligible to receive a social security Age Pension (and their
partners who are eligible for Age Pension), have the choice of receiving
their Age Pension from either DVA or Centrelink. DVA acts as an 'agent'
for the Department of Social Services and any Social Security Age
Pension paid by DVA is assessed under social security law.

Until 20 March 2020, DVA could also make payments of Wife Pension to
eligible spouses.

Incapacity Payments treated as compensation

Incapacity Payments made under Military Rehabilitation and Compensation
Act 2004 (MRCA) and the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence
Related Claims) Act 1988 (DRCA) representing compensation for loss of
income or earnings, are treated as compensation payments for social
security purposes.

Education payments

DVA administers the Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES) and
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training
Scheme (MRCAETS). They are listed as prescribed educational scheme
payments.

When a student receives VCES or MRCAETS, payment of any other
Commonwealth income support or educational assistance is precluded under
DVA legislation. Legislation administered by Centrelink differs, as it
only precludes VCES and MRCAETS recipients from receiving Youth
Allowance (YA), Austudy and ABSTUDY. This allows VCES and MRCAETS to be
treated as income for some social security income support payments,
however these customers are ineligible to receive payments from both
Centrelink and DVA due to multiple entitlement exclusion rules in the
DVA legislation.

Notification of DVA income

Notification is usually received either from DVA or from the customer.
If a customer advises at the new claim stage that they are receiving DVA
income, confirmation of the type of income and amount must be sought
from the DVA Clearance Team.

DVA will notify Centrelink of a grant or change in DVA payments through
the DVA clearance process. This process advises Centrelink of the
payment types and amounts received by the customer. Adjustments to the
customer's records are then made.

Rates are automatically adjusted for CPI for:

-   DVA Disability Compensation Payment
-   Disability Compensation Payment Allowances
-   War Widow(er)'s Pension
-   Wholly Dependent Partner payment
-   Orphan's Pension, and
-   Veterans' Supplement

There is no automatic rate adjustment for other payments, for example:

-   Service Pension
-   Veteran Payment
-   Social Security Age Pension, and
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)

DVA income for YA, ABSTUDY and AIC Parental Income Test

A Parental Income Test (PIT) exemption may apply if a parent or guardian
is receiving certain DVA payments and:

receives or applies for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC), or

has a dependent child(ren) who receive or apply for:

-   Youth Allowance (YA), or
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance

The system will automatically apply the PIT exemption based on the DVA
payment recorded on the parent's record, if that payment provides for a
PIT exemption.

If the DVA payment does not provide a PIT exemption, it may be counted
as taxable income (if taxable) or a tax free pension/benefit (if it is
not taxable) under the Parental Income Test.

For further information, see Tax-free pensions and benefits for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments, and the Parental
Income Test for Youth Allowance, ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated
Children.

Family assistance

Some DVA payments are included in adjusted taxable income for Family
Assistance purposes.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A is not income tested for customer and/or
partners receiving:

-   DVA Service Pension
-   Veteran Payment
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS), or
-   Age Pension paid by DVA

These DVA payments must be coded and/or verified by the DVA Clearance
Team only. The coding of these DVA payments will attract the maximum
rate of FTB Part A. Incorrect coding of these payments may result in
overpayments.

Customers must also include these payments in the family income estimate
to determine the correct entitlement to FTB Part B and Child Care
Subsidy (CCS).

When receiving a VCES or MRCAETS payment, FTB:

-   is payable when a child is aged under 16
-   cannot be paid when a child is aged 16 or over. In some
    circumstances it may be more beneficial if the person caring for the
    child claims FTB payments

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) is income tested. This means all customers need
to provide an estimate of their annual income, even if receiving an
income support payment.

For further information on the treatment of DVA income for Family Tax
Benefit, see Updating income estimates for the current financial year.

Supplements

A number of supplements are available from DVA. They are mutually
exclusive with those available from Centrelink.

Non-Taxable DVA Supplements:

These supplements are non-taxable and exempt from the income test for
pensions and benefits. They are not included in the family assistance
income tests or the Parental Income Test.

-   The Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence Related Claims)
    Act 1988 (DRCA) Supplement - equivalent to Centrelink Pharmaceutical
    Allowance
-   Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA)
    Supplement - equivalent to Centrelink Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Veterans' Supplement - equivalent to Centrelink Pharmaceutical
    Allowance
-   DVA Energy Supplement - equivalent to Centrelink Energy Supplement
-   Gold Card Energy Supplement - equivalent to Centrelink Energy
    Supplement
-   DVA Remote Area Allowance
-   Pension Supplement (tax-exempt portion only)

Taxable DVA Supplements:

-   Pension Supplement - equivalent to Centrelink Pension Supplement;
    only payable with a qualifying income support payment, and includes
    a taxable component. Only the taxable component is included in the
    family assistance income tests.

A payment hierarchy for supplements is available from Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances.

The Resources page has information about the different DVA payments. It
has tables showing how DVA payments affect Social Security payments, DVA
codes used on the DVA screen and DVA Clearance Team (SCS) contact
details. There is also a link to the DVA website for their current
pension rates.

Related links

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances

Locating debts in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Income and assets tests for income support payments made by Centrelink

Calculating frozen rate pensions for Department of Veterans' Affairs War
Widow(er) pensioners

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment overview

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Tax-free pensions and benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments, and the Parental Income Test for Youth Allowance,
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children

Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Exempt income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
