
The Parental Means Test 108-02000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the scope and application of The Parental Means
Test.

On this Page:

Parental Means Test

The Parental Means Test applies to ABSTUDY Living Allowance, Group 2
School Fees Allowance, Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA) and Youth Allowance (YA) customers
considered to be dependent on another person (other than their partner)
such as their parent(s)/guardian(s).

The Parental Means Test is made up of two tests:

-   Parental Income Test (PIT), and
-   Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

From 1 January 2019, the MIT no longer applies to ABSTUDY Living
Allowance (under 16yrs), Group 2 School Fees Allowance and AIC ABA.
These payments are calculated based on the Parental Income Test.

From 1 January 2020, if FTB is being received in relation to a student
aged 16-19 yrs who is receiving a means tested ABSTUDY Living Allowance
or Group 2 School Fee allowance the MIT will not be applied to the
ABSTUDY payment. The MIT will apply to the FTB payment for the child.

These tests are calculated based on the parent(s)/guardian(s) financial
circumstances and reduce the customer’s rate of payment by one of the
following

-   PIT reduction amount, or
-   Maintenance Income Test Reducible Amount (MRA), or
-   Maintenance Income Test notional reduction (MITNR)

The parental means test does not apply to ABSTUDY or YA customers who
satisfy the independence criteria.

Application of the Parental Means Test

The Parental Income Test (PIT) reduction amount applies to:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance (under 16yrs), Group 2 School Fees
    Allowance and AIC ABA
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance (16-19yrs), Group 2 School Fee Allowance
    where FTB is being paid at the same time, or
-   Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY Living Allowance (16 yrs and over) where
    there is no maintenance income received in respect of the customer,
    or where the parental income test reduction is equal to or more than
    the Maintenance Income Test Reducible Amount (MRA)

The MITNR is calculated where maintenance income is received in respect
of the customer and the PIT reduction amount is less than the MRA. The
lower of the MITNR and the MRA will apply.

Note: for dependent customers who are subject to the personal income
test as well as the parental means test, the system will apply the test
that causes the highest reduction to the customer’s rate for that
fortnight.

Contents

Parental Income Test (PIT)

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA)

Related links

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the family pool for the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for Youth Allowance (YA)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
