
Leave and termination payments paid by an employer 108-07010100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment and coding of leave and
termination payments paid by an employer. Income tested Services
Australia payments may be affected by leave payments received while
still employed, or by accrued leave payments and termination payments
received upon cessation of employment. Treatment depends on the payment
type and whether the employment to which the payment relates is ongoing
or terminated.

Treatment of leave and termination payments

Leave and termination payments paid by an employer for a period
beginning before 20 September 2009 or advised before 19 April 2010 are
assessed differently.

Leave and termination payments received by an Interim Farm Household
Allowance or Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer or their partner
are to be treated and coded as if the person had been getting JobSeeker
Payment (JSP).

If a customer’s assets change as a result of receiving a leave or
termination payment, assets should be updated. See Coding income and
assets for Centrelink payments and services.

Types of leave and redundancy payments

Leave and redundancy payments can include:

-   Annual leave
-   Sick leave
-   Personal leave
-   Carer leave
-   Ancillary and Defence leave (paid for absences such as for
    Australian Defence Force, Emergency Leave, eligible Community
    Service and Jury Service)
-   Long service leave
-   Leave loading
-   Maternity or paternity leave
-   Rostered days off paid out after termination
-   Redundancy payment
-   Payment in lieu of notice
-   Gratuity or ‘Golden handshake’
-   Other payments received on termination of employment

Termination or leave payments from supported employment

Termination or leave payments received by customers through supported
employment including Australian Disability Enterprise, the Support Wage
System or another program of support, are assessed the same as leave or
termination payments received from open employment.

Employment ongoing or terminated

Assessment of leave depends on whether the employment to which the leave
payment relates is ongoing or terminated.

ABSTUDY customers

For ABSTUDY customers, who receive a leave or termination payment from
an employer, these payments are not Income Maintenance Period (IMP)
affected.

Effects on Working Credit and the Work Bonus

Working Credit allows certain income support recipients of workforce age
to offset income from employment against credits accrued during periods
of low or no income.

The Work Bonus is a discount applicable to the assessment of eligible
income earned by pensioners over Age Pension age. On 1 July 2019,
eligible income was extended to include self-employment income from
personal exertion. Work Bonus does not apply to Parenting Payment Single
(PPS) customers who are Age Pension age.

The Work Bonus or a Working Credit balance cannot reduce income assessed
under an Income Maintenance Period.

For students and Australian Apprentices, income bank can be offset
against income from paid leave.

Mobility Allowance

A customer receiving paid leave is considered employed for Mobility
Allowance (MOB) purposes during the period of leave.

Casual employees

If a customer is working casually, they are not entitled to leave
payment/loading.

The customer may receive a loading as part of their ordinary pay in lieu
of holidays or sick leave. This loading is included in their hourly rate
of pay and assessed as employment income. This loading is coded with all
other employment income.

Rostered days off/flex time - which does not change regular wage

Customers may have a regular rostered day off or work flex time, which
enables irregular hours or days off without changing their regular wage.

While they are employed, use the regular wage and frequency. If
employment terminates, a payout in respect of time owed is assessed
under Income Maintenance Period (IMP) provisions.

Purchased leave

An employee may earn income but choose to defer payment of the money.

Deferred salary schemes operate in 2 ways. The employee may:

-   take a reduction in salary on the basis they will be entitled to
    leave several years later
-   ‘purchase’ additional leave each year by having ‘leave without pay’
    deductions made from each fortnight’s salary

Although the person has deferred being paid the income at the time they
have worked, the purchased leave is assessed when it is paid within
their gross income.

PBS

If the customer or their partner is registered for the Pension Bonus
Scheme (PBS), the leave may affect their entitlement to the Pension
Bonus. Refer the case to the Senior Practitioner to consider if
entitlement to the Pension Bonus is likely to be affected. If so, a
Financial Information Service (FIS) is required.

Non-teaching support staff in NSW

In New South Wales, non-teaching support staff, are employees of the NSW
Department of Education. This includes teacher’s aides, library
assistants or other non-teaching staff. As they are unable to work
during term breaks, they receive a stand down payment based on them
meeting certain criteria. Treat this as ordinary employment income.

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

LIC customers are not subject to an Income Maintenance Period (IMP). The
treatment of lump sum leave and redundancy payments for LIC is different
to the way such payments are treated for income support payments. See
LIC income test for more information.

The Resources page contains examples of coding leave payments.

Related links

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Cessation of employment income

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Deeming provisions

Verifying income and assets

Treatment of lump sums

Assessment of other ordinary income for Centrelink payments

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Earnings and reporting tool

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of age pension age

Assessment of employment income for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
customers over age pension age

Paid leave and redundancy payments (advised before 19 April 2010)

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Recording and correcting employment income details

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
