
Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age 108-07010130

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and apply the Work Bonus and
balance for pensioners of Age Pension age. The Work Bonus is an
incentive for older Australians to work. It discounts eligible income
earned by pension customers of Age Pension age. It does not apply to
Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers.

Who the Work Bonus applies to

The Work Bonus applies to:

customers of Age Pension age receiving the following payments from
Centrelink

-   Age Pension
-   Carer Payment
-   Disability Support Pension

customers of Service Pension age receiving the following payments from
the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)
-   Service Pension (DVA)
-   Age Pension (AGC)

DVA customers qualify for Service Pension (Age) at an earlier age than
Age Pension customers.

Eligible income for Work Bonus

The Work Bonus applies to eligible income which includes:

-   wages paid in Australia and outside Australia
-   leave payments where the customer remains an employee of the same
    employer
-   director's fees
-   self-employment income from active participation earned through
    personal exertion. This includes sole trader and partnerships
-   attribution and distribution income from active participation earned
    through personal exertion from a private trust or private company

The Work Bonus is not applied to income from:

-   leave payments where the customer's employment has been terminated
-   investments or superannuation income
-   self-employment, attribution or distribution income which was not
    earned through personal exertion

Personal exertion

The customer must meet the personal exertion test before Work Bonus can
be applied to self-employment income.

Before 1 July 2019

From 20 September 2009 to 30 June 2011

Between the implementation date of 20 September 2009 and commencement of
the Work Bonus balance, the Work Bonus discounted half of the first $500
of gross employment income earned in a fortnight by an eligible Services
Australia or Department of Veterans' Affairs customer. Unused Work Bonus
amounts were not accumulated in a bank.

From 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2019

From 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2019, the fortnightly Work Bonus amount was
$250. The maximum Work Bonus balance a customer could accrue was $6,500.

Work Bonus top-up changes 1 December 2022 - 31 December 2023

From 1 December 2022 to 31 December 2023 inclusive, eligible pensioners
will receive a one-off $4,000 increase to their Work Bonus balance. The
maximum Work Bonus balance amount will be also be increased from $7,800
to $11,800.

Eligible pensioners include customers who:

-   are receiving a Work Bonus eligible payment as at 1 December 2022
-   are granted a Work Bonus eligible payment between 1 December 2022
    and 31 December 2023
-   are cancelled or suspended as at 1 December 2022 but whose Work
    Bonus eligible payment is restored between 1 December 2022 and 31
    December 2023

Receive Disability Support Pension or Carer Payment and turn Age Pension
age between 1 December 2022 and 31 December 2023

For eligible customers, the one-off $4,000 increase to their Work Bonus
Balance will apply from the Entitlement Period Start Date (EPSD) of the
period which includes 1 December 2022 or from the EPSD of the period in
which they are first eligible after 1 December 2022.

A customer can only receive the one-off $4,000 increase to their Work
Bonus balance once. The $4,000 is in addition to any Work Bonus balance
previously accrued.

The maximum Work Bonus balance amount will revert to $7,800 from the
EPSD that commences on or after 1 January 2024. Any Work Bonus balance
accrued above $7,800 will be removed.

Updates will be visible on the Eligible Income Assessment (EIA) screen
from 1 December 2022 onwards.

How the Work Bonus is applied

Work Bonus commenced on 1 July 2011. Customers become eligible for Work
Bonus on reaching Age Pension age. If they were already Age Pension age
on 1 July 2011, their commencement date for this measure was the start
date of the period that contained 1 July 2011. Work Bonus amounts
increased on 1 July 2019.

The Work Bonus at grant of a qualifying payment is nil. Eligible
customers are credited with a Work Bonus of $300 per fortnight which
will be used to discount their eligible income before the income test is
applied.

If the customer's gross eligible income for a fortnight is:

-   less than $300, the unused amount will be banked (Work Bonus
    balance)
-   $300 or more, their eligible income will be discounted by their Work
    Bonus balance

A customer's Work Bonus balance:

-   cannot drop below zero, or exceed $7,800
-   does not expire if not used. For example, if a customer's payment
    ceases and is later resumed, they will still have access to their
    Work Bonus balance previously accrued

This means that customers get the same benefit if they earn $300 each
fortnight ($7,800 per year), or if they earn $7,800 over 2 months and
have had no other employment income in the previous 12 months. In each
case, their pension is not reduced by that eligible income.

The Work Bonus when nil rate or cancelled

The Work Bonus is always included as part of the rate calculation. If
the customer is not payable for the whole period due to increased income
or assets (known as current zero rate or CZR) there is no change to
their Work Bonus balance over this period and no page will show on the
Eligible Income Assessment (EIA) screen. The Work Bonus balance at the
beginning of the next period will be equal the balance at the beginning
of the non-payment period.

In the next period, the Work Bonus and the Work Bonus balance are again
used in calculating the rate. If after this the customer is still
current zero rate for the whole period, the Work Bonus balance again
reverts to the balance at the beginning of the period.

If a customer's payment is cancelled for any reason, the Work Bonus
balance is frozen at its value on the date of cancellation.

Whenever the customer tests their qualification or payability again, no
matter how long since their payment was cancelled, the Work Bonus and
previously frozen Work Bonus balance are again used in calculating their
rate.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. If the customer's pension is paid under the transitional rules,
the Work Bonus is not used to determine their rate entitlement under the
pre - 20 September 2009 income test. A notional Work Bonus balance will
accrue and deplete based on the current income test rules. This notional
balance will be used for the purposes of calculating a customer's rate
under the current income test which will then be compared to the
transitional rate and used in their partner's income test if applicable.

The transitional rules will continue to apply if the customer receives a
higher rate of payment under that income test with no Work Bonus
compared to the current income test which includes the Work Bonus and
any notional balance.

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension
(Blind) may be exempt from the Means Test unless they wish to apply for
Rent Assistance, but income and assets details are required to determine
the partner's entitlement to payments. All Blind pensioners over Age
Pension age will accrue a Work Bonus balance (and deplete it if advising
enough eligible income). When determining the amount of the balance, it
is assumed that Blind pensioners who are not required to report have nil
eligible income.

The Resources page contains examples and further information on how the
Work Bonus is calculated.

Related links

Transitional rules for pension customers on payment at 19 September 2009

Income Test for single pension customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

Assets Test for single pension customers

Assets Test for partnered pension customers

Income Test for pension customers with partners on allowance

Income Test for illness separated or partner in prison customers

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests

Allowance income and assets tests

Assessing and coding employment income

Assessing attribution income

Recording attribution income

Assessing and recording distribution income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
