-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to assess and code account-based income
stream products.

How an account-based income stream works

An investment account is set up in the superannuation fund when a person
purchases an account-based income stream:

-   Additional funds cannot be added to the account
-   The balance will increase as investment earnings are added
-   The customer can access their money through regular payments (drawn
    down) or lump sum withdrawals (commutations)
-   The income stream continues whilst there is a positive account
    balance

Customers can select the amount of income (above a minimum limit) they
wish to withdraw each financial year. The Superannuation (Industry)
Supervision Regulations, known as the SIS Regs, sets the minimum limit.
There is no maximum limit unless it is a transition to retirement
pension.

A Percentage Factor (PF) is used to work out the minimum annual payment
limit each year. The account balance on 1 July each year is multiplied
by the appropriate PF and the result is rounded to the nearest $10. New
limits apply each 1 July based on the person's age and the balance in
their account.

From 1 January 2009 to 30 June 2011, the minimum drawdown limits were
reduced by 50% and from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2013 by 25%. From 1 July
2013, the original minimum drawdown limits apply.

As part of the government response to COVID-19 (novel coronavirus), the
minimum drawdown limits for account-based income streams under the
Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994 have been reduced
by 50% for 2019/2020, 2020/2021, 2021/2022 and 2022/2023 financial
years. Customers are able to reduce their gross annual income amount,
subject to the reduced minimum based on the existing 1 July account
balance.

Assessment of account-based income stream products

From 1 January 2015, account-based income streams were included in the
deeming provisions. A '9' identifies them in the Product Category field
on the Income Stream Details (SUPV) screen (Category 9 Asset Tested
(Long Term) Deemed).

Deeming provisions apply to account-based income streams meeting the
following:

Purchased from 1 January 2015, or

Purchased before 1 January 2015 if the account-based income stream is
owned by:

-   customers who start receiving an income support payment on or after
    1 January 2015
-   customers who did not receive a pension or allowance payment for at
    least one fortnight after 31 December 2014
-   non-customer partners
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) holders
-   customers who were granted a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
    on or after 1 January 2015
-   a CSHC card holder's partner who is aged 60 or more

Account-based income streams purchased before 1 January 2015 are
grandfathered and are assessed under the rules that were in place before
that date.

From 20 September 2018, deeming provisions apply to account-based income
streams held by customers receiving Carer Allowance (CA) or by their
partner, if they are 60 years of age or older. See Carer Allowance (CA)
income test - determining reference tax year and assessable income
components for more information.

Assets test for account-based income streams

Account-based income streams do not meet the required characteristics
for asset-test exemption in sections 9A, 9B or 9BA of the Social
Security Act 1991. This means they are never asset-test exempt (ATE).
They are assessed as asset-tested income streams (long term). The
current account balance is a financial asset.

Income test for account-based income streams

The income stream is subject to deeming. The current account balance is
added to the combined value of a person's other financial assets to
calculate the deemed income. The deemed income applies regardless of the
gross income amount being taken from the product.

Grandfathering may apply.

Transition to retirement pensions (TRIS)

A person who has reached preservation age can access their
superannuation through an income stream without having to retire. This
can be done through a non-commutable account-based income stream, known
as a transition to retirement income stream (TRIS). TRIS are assessed
like normal account-based income streams.

There is a minimum income limit for the financial year. A maximum limit
of 10% applies to TRIS pensions.

From 1 July 2017, the government removed the tax exempt status of
earnings for a TRIS where the customer has not retired from the
workforce.

Reversionary income streams

The person who purchased an income stream can nominate a person to
receive the income after their death, for example their spouse or
partner. This person is the reversionary beneficiary.

If the income stream automatically reverts (binding reversion) to the
nominated reversionary beneficiary upon the death of the primary
beneficiary, it will continue to have the original income stream:

-   same start date
-   purchase price
-   relevant number

If the income stream was grandfathered, it can retain that status in
some circumstances.

If there is no binding reversionary arrangement, reversion can occur at
the sole discretion of the trustee or because of an election made by the
reversionary beneficiary after the death of the primary beneficiary. In
this case, a new account-based income stream is created. The new
account-based income stream will have a new purchase date, new purchase
price, new relevant number and new gross annual payment.

There may be a gap between the death of the original beneficiary and the
date the reversionary beneficiary starts to receive payments. A lump sum
arrears payment is made to the reversionary beneficiary to cover the
gap. The lump sum is assessed as income from an income stream for the
period to which it relates. This may result in a debt if the person has
been receiving an income support payment.

Waiver provisions came into effect from 9 May 2018:

-   if the lump sum arrears results in a debt during the bereavement
    period for the surviving spouse, and certain conditions are met
-   only debts within the 14 week bereavement period can be waived under
    these rules

The 9 May rules are not retrospective. Any of these debts occurring
before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived using these rules.

See the References page for a link to the legislation.

Grandfathering applies to some reversionary income streams.

Commutations

A partial commutation changes the asset value and the deduction amount.
For an account-based income stream, the asset value after a commutation
is the new account balance.

If an income stream is fully commuted, it means the income stream must
be closed on the customer's record. The customer must:

-   supply evidence to support the full commutation, and
-   advise what they have done with the money, for example, cash or
    funds transferred to another investment or income stream

The Process page has information on adding or updating an income stream
if the customer is notifying a commutation.

A partial commutation does not change a grandfathered status.

Family law payment split

Part VIIIB of the Family Law Act 1975 allows splitting of an income
stream following a divorce property settlement in accordance with a
superannuation agreement or a court order. The income stream can be
commuted partially or fully to give effect to the split. This may result
in a new income stream starting for the income stream owner's
ex-partner.

If the income stream was purchased before 1 January 2015, grandfathering
rules may apply.

Successor Fund Transfer

A Successor Fund Transfer (SFT) is where all members of a superannuation
fund move to another superannuation fund. This includes members who have
an income stream. The transfer can apply to all types of income streams,
however it typically applies to account-based income streams.

For an income stream recipient, there can be no change to the terms and
conditions of the income stream product. The income stream will continue
to have the same purchase date, purchase price, relevant number and
total commutations since purchase date as the original income stream.
The only change would be to the provider name and possibly the product
reference number.

If the original income stream was grandfathered under the pre-1 January
2015 rules, and the customer continues to be receiving an income support
payment when the income stream is transferred, the income stream will
retain its grandfathered status.

Frozen assets

If the assets backing the income stream have been frozen, the income
stream will continue to be assessed. This is because although the assets
are frozen, they still exist and have an asset value. If the relevant
minimum income amount is not paid from the income stream for the
financial year:

-   it will still be assessed as having paid income at the relevant
    minimum amount for the financial year, or
-   the deemed income amount depending on the assessment rules for that
    particular product

This is because under superannuation rules, an existing income stream
must pay at least the relevant minimum payment for the financial year.

If the income stream cannot make at least one payment during a financial
year, the income stream stops to be assessed as an income stream and
will be assessed as a superannuation investment (managed investment)
from the earlier of:

-   the date when the customer is informed by their provider that no
    payment will be made from the income stream during the financial
    year, or
-   30 June for the financial year if no payment has been received

Grandfathering provisions

Before 1 January 2015, the income from account-based income streams was
assessed as follows:

-   Assessed income = gross annual income - deduction amount

A grandfathered income stream will continue to be assessed under the
pre-1 January 2015 rules for income support payment customers if the
recipient (including Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) income
support recipients):

-   was current at 31 December 2014, and
-   remains in continuous receipt of an income support payment since
    that date. The customer must receive at least $0.01 every fortnight
    on their regular payday. The system will end date the grandfathered
    status automatically when the benefit status changes from CUR to SUS
    or CAN or CZR (except CZR-DFISA and CZR-direct deduction to NZP)

Income support payment customers with a partner receiving an income
support payment from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) since 31
December 2014, who have an account-based income stream with a purchase
date before 1 January 2015, may also be grandfathered. DVA payments
include the following: AGE - Age Pension, ISS - Income Support
Supplement and SER - Service Pension.

Grandfathered status for an account-based income stream applies to that
product only. Grandfathered status will be lost if the account-based
income stream is fully commuted and directly transferred to another
account-based income stream.

A '2' can identify the grandfathered accounts-based income streams in
the Product Category field on the SUPV screen (Category 2 Assets Tested
(Long Term)). These products will also have a '2015 Saved Date' with a
grandfathering reason. If grandfathering stops, an end date will display
on the SUPV screen and the income stream will convert to a category 9
income stream (which means it is assessed under the deeming rules).

Note: the product category may display as '2' even though the product is
actually being deemed. This happens if the Event Date field on the
Income Stream Details (SUPV) screen is before 1 January 2015. Once an
update is made on or after 1 January 2015, the correct category will
display.

Reversionary beneficiary

An income stream that transfers to a reversionary beneficiary will
retain its grandfathered status for an income support payment if:

-   it was grandfathered under the pre-1 January 2015 rules, and
-   the reversionary beneficiary is in receipt of an income support
    payment at the time the income stream reverts

An account-based income stream will retain its grandfathered status for
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) if all the following conditions
are met:

-   It was grandfathered for the original owner under the CSHC pre-1
    January 2015 rules, and
-   The account-based income stream reverts automatically to the spouse
    on the original owner's death
-   The reversionary beneficiary (spouse) is the holder of a CSHC when
    they commence receiving the account-based income stream payments and
    continues to remain the holder of a CSHC

There are no changes to the original account-based income stream, that
is, the purchase date, purchase price and relevant number, all remain
the same. The system will apply grandfathered status if the reversionary
beneficiary has been in receipt of an income support payment since 31
December 2014. In other cases, an APS3 or above must intervene to
restore the grandfathered status on the reversionary beneficiary record.

Carer Allowance

Deemed income will be calculated on the current balance of account-based
income streams from 20 September 2018 under the Carer Allowance income
test. There are no grandfathering provisions.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) and Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC)

Grandfathering applies to customers who held a CSHC on 31 December 2014,
until they lose eligibility. Grandfathering will cease if the CSHC
holder loses entitlement to the CSHC for any reason, such as, having
their card cancelled due to a temporary absence from Australia for more
than 19 weeks. The account-based income stream will only retain its
grandfathered status if their CSHC is subsequently restored and
backdated, that is card entitlement recommences from date of
cancellation.

Account-based income streams purchased by CSHC holders on or after 1
January 2015 will not be grandfathered. Account-based income streams
held by a CSHC holder's partner who is 60 years of age or more and not a
CSHC holder will not be grandfathered regardless of when they purchased
the product.

Deeming will apply for the assessment of aged care fees for CSHC holders
even if they entered care before 1 January 2015. There are no
grandfathering provisions.

For LIC, deemed income will be calculated from the current balance of
account-based income streams from 1 January 2015. There are no
grandfathering provisions.

Family law payment split

If the original income stream was grandfathered, the ex-partner's new
income stream will retain its grandfathered status if:

-   at the time of the split, the ex-partner is receiving an income
    support payment, and
-   continues to remain on income support payment from the date of the
    split

If the original account-based income stream was grandfathered, the
ex-partners new account based income stream will retain its
grandfathering status if:

-   at the time of the family law split, the ex-partner held a CSHC, and
-   continues to remain the holder of a CSHC from the date of the split

The Department of Social Services (DSS) manages all means test
assessments of 'split' income. The Service Officer must forward a copy
of the supporting documents to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk (FINS
Helpdesk).

Principal home sale proceeds invested in income stream

The customer can invest proceeds from the sale of the principal home in
an account-based income stream. For more information, see Selling a
home.

Account-based income stream review

Account-based income streams are account-based and reviewed in August
and February each year. See Income stream reviews.

Category rectification activities

A system fix was released in September 2020 for account-based income
stream products, where the product category was incorrectly changed on
the customer's record. Some grandfathered (category 2) account-based
products were being assessed as deemed income stream products (category
9) and vice-versa.

To make sure the customer is not incorrectly assessed, investigation of
the income stream coding on the record is required to determine if the
product category is correct. Remediation action is required to resolve
any incorrect assessments.

Note: due to Process Direct limitations, all remediation action must be
completed in Customer First.

Requests for information

Requests for information to update income streams owned by a non-current
partner are sent to the customer.

Where the customer or partner is unable or unwilling to provide
information due to FDV (Family and Domestic Violence), escalate to
Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR) support. AISR support will
request the information directly from the provider.

The Resources page has examples of calculating gross annual income from
grandfathered account-based income streams, DOC template for
rectification activities, the Details of income stream product (SA330),
contact details, and the Level 2 Policy Helpdesks Online Query Form.

Related links

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Income stream reviews

August review of income streams

February review of income streams

Commutation of asset-tested income streams

Income and assets options online

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
