
Determining the Date of Event for employment income 108-07010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in determining the date of
event (DOV) to code on the customer's record when a customer and/or
their partner have employment income.

Different procedure for SWS and LIC customers

A separate procedure applies:

-   for customers working under the Supported Wage System (SWS)
-   for Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) customers not receiving an
    income support payment

DOV and DOE

It is important to understand the difference between the date of event
(DOV) and the date of effect (DOE):

-   DOV is the date the event actually occurred, that is, the date
    employment income is paid by the employer
-   DOE is the date a particular change first affects the customer's
    entitlement

Notification or statement reporter

-   A notification reporter is a customer who has to report any income
    or other changes within 14 days. When they start work, they must
    advise Services Australia within 14 days of when their employer
    first pays them
-   A statement reporter is a customer who reports via a Reporting
    Statement. They must advise any paid employment income, hours worked
    (if required) and any other changes on their reporting day, which is
    usually their Entitlement Period End Day (EPED). They may advise in
    advance that they will be starting work but will still have to
    report their paid gross employment income and hours on their
    reporting day
-   Customers who are on variable reporting are statement reporters.
    They are required to report any changes, which might affect their
    payment on the EPED of the period that change occurred

Note: notification rules for students in receipt of ABSTUDY payments are
slightly different to other payments.

Determining the entitlement period

All income support payments are calculated on a fortnightly arrears
basis, using a 14 day entitlement calculation. If the customer's EPED
has been changed, payment will be calculated for the actual period of
entitlement based on the gross income paid during that shorter period
only.

If a customer is paid employment income for an employer pay period
greater than the length of their entitlement period, the income must be
assessed for a period equal to the entire employer pay period. The start
and end date of the employer pay period must be recorded to correctly
assess income that is paid for a period greater than the customer's
entitlement period.

Determining the Date Paid

Employment income is assessed once it is paid by an employer to their
employee. This is the 'Pay Date' or 'Date Paid' on the customer's
payslip. If the customer does not receive a payslip, they would need to
confirm this information with their employer. Even if there is a delay
between when an employer pays their employee and when the employee
receives the pay i.e. due to the time it takes to transfer funds between
banks, employment income is still considered paid on the date the income
is disbursed by the employer.

Employer Electronic Reporting (EER)

Customers who have their employment income reported through the Employer
Electronic Reporting (EER) process will have a date of event (DOV) which
may not be the date paid. Employment income is coded from electronic
advice on the day it is provided and this will be the DOV used.

Holiday processing

Service Officers must ensure the DOV is the date paid when running the
Earnings and Reporting workflow for customers who have early reporting
dates, due to holiday processing. The procedure Earnings and reporting
tool, has further information.

Overseas absences

Service Officers must ensure the correct DOV is used when running the
Earnings and Reporting workflow for customers who are reporting early,
due to leaving Australia temporarily or permanently.

For more information about coding employment income for an overseas
absence, see Recording and correcting employment income details.

For customers reporting foreign employment income, see Foreign income
and assets.

Notification handler (NOHL)

The Centrelink system uses a notification handler (often referred to as
NOHL) to calculate a customer's payments. NOHL uses the date the
information was provided (such as DOV and date of notification) to
calculate the DOE of the payment rate change. The Review of Assessment
(ROA) screen assists with the process of determining the correct date of
effect from which to apply a change in entitlement.

From 6 September 2010, changes to NOHL allow the Service Officer to
check reassessments coded for date of effect processing:

-   where either the DOV is before the primary DOV
-   no primary DOV exists, or
-   a customer's circumstances have been corrected or deleted as the
    result of a review of a decision

Once the DOV has been correctly determined, follow the relevant
assessment and coding procedure.

Employment Income pre 7 December 2020

Employment income paid in an entitlement period before 7 December 2020
must be assessed using the pre 'Changing the Social Security Income
Assessment Model' rules. Officers must ensure the correct DOV is used
when coding employment income for an entitlement period before 7
December 2020.

Further information regarding retrospective coding, see Resources.

Related links

General 14 day notification provisions

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessment of employment income for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
customers over Age Pension age

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Reporting screens

Commencing or returning to work JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (job seeker)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Using the Review of Assessment (ROA) screen

Reporting overview

Reporting requirements for students and Australian Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
