
Purchasing another residence 108-04070020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to take when a customer advises they
have purchased another residence or previously advised of selling a home
with the intention to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or renovate a new
principal home with the proceeds. If they have since purchased another
residence or built a new residence, previously exempt assets must be
updated. It is important to determine whether they still own the
previous residence or if they sold it.

Exempt asset for 12 months

Once a customer sells their principal home, the portion of the proceeds
which the customer intends to use to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or
renovate a new principal home are an exempt asset for up to 12 months.

If a customer purchases or starts to build a new home before selling
their existing home, there are no sale proceeds to exempt until they
sell their old home. Undertake an assessment to determine which property
is their primary residence.

If the proceeds from the sale are:

-   held as a financial investment including a non-grandfathered
    account-based income stream, they are subject to deeming. If
    proceeds are invested elsewhere, they will be assessed according to
    usual Income Test rules
-   invested in a Cat 9 deemed account-based income stream, record the
    product on the SVDI screen with the Investment Type as 'OTH'. This
    will enable deeming to apply to the adjusted account balance. Code
    the amount used to purchase a new principal home in the Assets Test
    Deduction Amt field. Once the customer has purchased the new home,
    or as they make progress payments on building a new home, update the
    Asset Test Deduction field.
-   See Selling a home Table 3 Step 5 for coding assistance

Extended exemption up to 24 months

An extended exemption of the sale proceeds may, in some circumstances,
happen for up to a maximum 24 months from the time of sale. Extended
exemption applies if the property sold on or after 1 July 2007 and
applies to all income support payments.

To gain an extended exemption of up to 24 months for the principal home
sale proceeds, the customer must have a continuing intention to apply
the proceeds of the sale to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or renovate
a new principal home and provide documentary evidence to support they
have:

-   made reasonable attempts to obtain a new principal home, and
-   been making those attempts within a reasonable period after selling
    the principal home (that is, 6 months), and
-   experienced delays beyond their control in obtaining a new principal
    home

If the customer cannot meet any of the above criteria, they cannot gain
an extended exemption on the principal home sale proceeds.

A customer meeting the extended exemption conditions is considered to be
a homeowner during the extended exemption period.

Land for new principal home build

Land purchased by the customer from the principal home sale proceeds, on
which they intend to build a new principal home, may be exempt from the
Assets Test. This applies whether the land is owned outright or
mortgaged. The maximum total asset value to be exempt must not exceed
the sale price of the former principal home. For example if the
principal home sells for $250,000, only assets up to the value of
$250,000 can be exempt, this includes the value of the land. The
Resources page has an example.

New property will not be used as principal residence

If a customer uses the proceeds to purchase another piece of real
estate, they will not be living in, record the new property as an
assessable asset. The customer must identify the location of any real
estate or business site they own or in which they have an interest.

Temporarily moves into a house they already own

A customer may sell their principal home and seek to have the sale
proceeds Assets Test exempted for up to 12 months. This is when they
temporarily move into another property they already own while building
or seeking to purchase a new home.

The property the customer temporarily occupies in this situation
continues to be an assessable real estate asset (it is not assessed as
their principal residence). The exemption of the proceeds of the sale of
their principal home continues. The customer cannot have an exemption
for the proceeds of the sale as well as the property they already own.

Still owns former home

If, after purchasing a new principal home, a customer still owns their
previous principal home, the previous home must be assessed under the
Assets Test.

Assess the current market value of the property less any encumbrances on
that house as outlined in Section 4.6.6.30 of Guide to Social Security
Act. See the References page. This may be either a secured loan or an
unsecured loan if the customer can demonstrate the loan is an
encumbrance on that particular asset. Except for primary industry
aggregation, it is not possible to offset an encumbrance on one asset
(exempt or otherwise) against the value of another asset.

Previously owned retirement village unit for sale

In some circumstances, a customer can only sell a retirement village
unit by signing a contract to sell on the open market and/or back to the
retirement village. They have to vacate the unit as part of that
process.

Any amounts due to the customer are not subject to deeming until
received. They are considered proceeds of sale if they are to be used to
purchase a new home or unit in a retirement village. The customer is
still assessed as a homeowner and may be entitled to Rent Assistance
(RA).

Delay in moving into newly purchased home

The sale of home provisions cease once the customer has purchased their
new principal home. If the customer has purchased their new principal
home but does not move in immediately, the property becomes an
assessable asset. The customer's homeowner status will be dependent on
where they are currently living. If the customer is living in a home
they own, this will become their principal home and they are a
homeowner. If the customer is living in a home they do not own, they are
a non-homeowner.

The temporary home vacation provisions cannot apply, as the customer has
not previously resided in the new home. If a customer is unable to move
in to their new home due to unusual circumstances beyond their control
refer the case to Level 2 Helpdesk for advice. For example, customer is
unable to move to their new home due to COVID-19 border closures.

Rent Assistance (RA)

Some customers may be eligible for RA:

-   Income support recipients who have sold their former principal home
    within the last 12 months and are likely to use some or all of the
    proceeds of the sale (within 12 months of the sale) to acquire,
    build, repair or renovate another home that will become their new
    principal home, or
-   Income support recipients who have sold their principal home within
    the last 12 to 24 months and have made reasonable attempts, within a
    reasonable period after selling the home to acquire another
    residence, but have experienced delays beyond their control, and
-   Living in a home they do not own, and paying rent

The Resources page contains links to the forms required for the
re-assessment after the purchase of another residence and a table of
examples relating to assessment and exemptions for sale of principal
home proceeds.

Related links

Selling a home

Assessing house and curtilage

Assessing and coding the Real Estate MOD R

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Address recording for real estate

Permanent vacation of principal home

Updating address details

Qualification for Rent Assistance (RA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
