
Calculating frozen rate pensions for Department of Veterans' Affairs War Widow(er) pensioners 108-03050030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure used to calculate the entitlements
for Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) War Widow(er) pensioners when
the customer was also receiving a relevant income support payment before
20 March 1995.

Pension rates

Customers who are paid a War Widow(er)'s Pension (WWP) by DVA cannot be
granted a social security income support payment from 20 March 1995,
unless they are ineligible for DVA Income Support Supplement (ISS). This
is due to multiple entitlement exclusion provisions. With the
introduction of ISS on 20 March 1995, customers who had been granted
both a social security pension and WWP prior to this date could elect to
either transfer to ISS or remain on their current income support
payments at a frozen rate, which is generally $124.90 per fortnight.

Frozen rate of pension

War widow(er)s receiving a frozen rate of pension do not have their
social security pension indexed. However, they can apply for an indexed
DVA ISS which may be paid at a higher rate depending on their income and
assets. They will no longer be eligible to receive an income support
payment from Services Australia if granted ISS. For most war widow(er)s,
the frozen rate of social security pension is $124.90 per fortnight. The
exception is WWP recipients (including blind war widows) who were
receiving a social security pension at a higher rate immediately prior
to 1 November 1986. These customers continue to be saved (or frozen) at
the higher rate.

Assessment of frozen rate pension entitlements

The frozen rate of social security income support paid to a war
widow(er) is assessed under the income and assets tests in the same way
as for other pensioners that is, based on the person's income and assets
including the income from the WWP payments. A person's income and assets
can result in a reduction to the amount of frozen pension being paid.
The system will automatically calculate and compare entitlements under
the income and assets test against the frozen rate, with the lower of
the three amounts being the amount paid to the customer.

If the war widow(er) is partnered, their social security pension and the
partner's pension are calculated based on the combined income and assets
of both partners, with the WWP taken into account as income.

If the customer:

-   is paid a blind pension by Services Australia, their saved rate will
    not be reduced by their income and assets
-   is affected by the income test and they or their partner are
    receiving an Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA, they may also be
    entitled to receive Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)
    for periods before 1 January 2022
-   is receiving WWP and elects to receive DVA ISS, the ISS is not
    treated as income for the partner

Related links

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Rejecting a Centrelink claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
