
Managed investments 108-04090040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the details when a customer makes an enquiry
about managed investments. The Managed Investment Main Menu (MIMM)
screen in Customer First or Customer Record is used as a gateway to
access enquiry screens relating to managed investments.

Managed investment overview

A managed investment is an indirect investment product that allows
people to invest in a range of investment asset classes. Some of the
features of a managed investment are:

-   the investor's money is pooled with other investors' money in a fund
-   money (or property) is paid or transferred to a body corporate or
    into a trust fund managed on the investor's behalf by a Fund Manager
-   assets bought with invested money are in the body corporate/trust
    fund's name, not the investor's
-   the investor has no control over how the money is invested
-   the investor has a legally enforceable right to the income or
    profits derived from their money

Managed investments will be either unit based or account based:

Unit based (or unitised) products are investments where customers own a
certain number of units within the investment. Each unit is assigned a
unit price. The unit price may vary depending on the market

-   For example, if you have 2,000 units in option A and each unit is
    valued at $1.04, then your total investment would be $2,080

Account based investments are where customers have invested money
directly, often as a lump sum, rather than purchasing individual units

Managed investments will show each investment on the Managed Investment
Summary (MIS) screen. Staff can find out if a product is unit based or
account based by the Amt/Unit: field:

-   Unit based products will have a ‘U’ followed by the number of units
-   Account based products will have a dollar sign followed by the value
    of the investment

Managed investments are financial investments. They are subject to the
deeming provisions. However, the deeming rules are not used to calculate
income from managed investments owned by a private trust or private
company.

If a loan is the source of the funds used to purchase the investment,
this loan or liability reduces the asset value of the managed
investment(s) used as security. Sometimes this is called a Margin Loan.
See Loan or liability against assets for more information.

Customers should be advised that if they give details of any new managed
investment(s) then their record will be reassessed along with all other
existing managed investments that they may have on record. Unitised
managed investments are automatically revalued each 6 months in March
and September. Deeming will still apply to the gross value of the
investment.

If there is a small change to asset values, determine whether the
customer needs to notify.

The revaluation of private trust or company owned managed investments or
shares occurs with any review of, or investment update, within the trust
or company. The latest prices/values are automatically applied at the
time of the review, to update and include within the attributable
assets.

From December 2015, all Timeshare investments are a considered to be
managed investment.

Investments owned by an entity

Managed investments owned by an entity do not have the deeming rules
applied. The actual income received will be used to calculate the
entity’s income. If a margin loan was used to purchase the investment,
this is considered as a Loan or liability against assets used as
security.

Private trust or company owned managed investments can only be assessed
and coded by a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO). The entity has its own
unique record where managed investments are coded.

Investments in trust (including for children)

For information about the treatment of investment funds held in trust,
see Trusts.

The attribution principles apply and the issue should be referred to a
CAO for a decision.

Automatic updates for coded managed investments

Most unitised managed investments coded on the system are automatically
updated each 6 months, in March and September.

Data on unitised managed investments is provided by a contracted company
or collected by Services Australia’s FINS section:

-   on a monthly basis, and
-   using prices from the last working day of each month

Data provided is usually available for assessment purposes by the middle
of the following month.

Closed investment funds

A closed investment fund is generally closed to new investors either
temporarily or permanently.

Terminated funds

A terminated or wound up investment fund is no longer available for
investment.

The Resources page has links to forms, bulletins and examples of managed
investments.

Related links

Managed investments - adding a new investment

Managed investments - updating existing investments

Revaluing managed investments, shares, and securities

Deeming provisions

MIN/SIN Database Maintenance and Updates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
