
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

On this Page:

Requirement to notify

Customers must advise Services Australia of any changes to their address
and/or accommodation details. This is to ensure:

the agency has current and correct contact information

customers receive:

-   the correct entitlements
-   communications

Customers who change their address or accommodation details either
temporarily or permanently:

-   must advise the agency within 14 days of moving, and
-   notify any change in their circumstances resulting from their move.
    For example, if the customer owned their previous home, details of
    what has happened to the property

Check the customer's residential and postal address. If required, update
the address details. Note: do not check the customers address details,
if the customer has been authenticated.

If a customer requests that their mail go to a different address, record
the postal address.

Change of postal address only

Postal address changes do not affect the customer's entitlement for Rent
Assistance (RA).

All mail will go to the postal address.

Sharing accommodation

When a single customer advises a change to living arrangements, the
Living Arrangements question set must be asked, particularly when the
single person advises:

-   they are moving in with another person, and
-   there is no change in their relationship status

Note: do not update future address changes for sharers. Ask the customer
to contact the agency when they have physically moved address or changed
accommodation circumstances.

No home address or temporary/unstable accommodation

Record a Homelessness Indicator if a customer:

-   no longer has a home address, or
-   their new accommodation is temporary or unstable

The customer must provide an address where they can receive mail before
the customer's residential address is updated to no fixed address.

Contents

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen including assessing
Rent Assistance (RA)

Homeownership field on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Sharer Status field on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Type of rent field on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Net rent rules for Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) processing in Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

Related links

Where customers are unable to provide a residential address

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
