
Income, assets and rates of payment 108-01000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the income and assets tests
used to determine a customer's rate of payment.

Government intent - Income, assets and rates of payment

Most payments administered by Services Australia are subject to income
and asset testing.

The Income and Assets Tests aim to provide financial support to
customers who most need it, and to reduce that support in line with
increased capacity of customers to provide for themselves.

The income test and assets test used will depend on the kind of payment
claimed. There are separate assets tests for homeowners and
non-homeowners, and a variety of income tests relating to pensions,
allowances, and family payments.

Assets Test

Assets have no impact on the payment, until they reach the assets limit.

-   For Allowances, no payment can be made once the assets limit is
    reached. Parenting Payment is subject to the Allowance Assets Test
-   For Pensions, once the assets limit is reached, payments are
    tapered, reducing until it reaches zero

The assets test varies according to the customer's situation, for
example, single, partnered, homeowner, non-homeowner.

Exempt assets

Some assets are exempt, for example the person's principal home. The
principal home is generally the home in which a customer or couple lives
for the greatest amount of time each year. The principal home includes
an area of land surrounding the home (usually up to 2 hectares).

Assets hardship

If a person has assessable assets but little or no income (for example,
a farmer with a large farm that is not productive) and the person is
unable to rearrange their financial circumstances to provide an income,
they may qualify for a payment under assets hardship provisions or apply
under the Home Equity Access Scheme.

Income Test

Income has no effect on payments until the income free area is reached.
Exception: income received by Special Benefit customers, or income that
is subject to direct deduction, for example, some compensation income,
customers granted a pension under an international Agreement if they are
receiving income from that agreement country.

The income test varies according to the customer's situation, for
example, allowance or pension, single, partnered, homeowner,
non-homeowner, transitional or non transitional.

Exempt income

Some income types are exempt and care must be taken when assessing a
customer's entitlement that exempt income is disregarded as income, but
may be an assessable asset.

Employment income

If the customer has employment income additional deductions may apply.

-   For customers of work force age, apply the Working Credit rules
    before applying the Income Test
-   For pension customers of Age Pension age, if eligible, apply the
    Work Bonus before applying the Income Test

If the customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and some
of that income is employment income, the customer's payment may remain
current at nil rate for up to 6 fortnights during the employment income
nil rate period. Customers also in receipt of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
Part A will be subject to the FTB Part A income test during this period
and will be required to provide an income estimate within 21 days of
commencing the employment income nil rate period or their FTB will
cancel.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. The transitional rule will apply if the customer receives a
higher rate of payment under the old income test rules (taking into
consideration any Consumer Price Index (CPI) changes) compared to the
new income test rules in place from 20 September 2009. If the customer's
pension is paid under the transitional rules, the Work Bonus is not used
to determine their rate entitlement under the pre 20 September 2009
Income Test but may still be used to calculate their partner's income
support payment entitlement.

Rates and thresholds

The Rates and thresholds page contains information about current rates
and thresholds.

The rates for the previous year can be found on the Rate charts page.

Rate estimator

[] The Centrelink / Family Assistance / Child Support / Child Care
Estimator can be used by staff and customers to estimate potential
entitlement. There are a number of online estimator options.

The 'Compare Centrelink rates only' option can be used to check the
effect of a proposed change in circumstances such as starting work. For
principal carers with mutual obligation requirements, this option can
also be used to run the Financial Suitability Test for suitable work.

-   Customers can access the rate estimator from the Services Australia
    or Child Care Finder websites. Customers do not need to be
    registered for online services
-   Staff can access the Payment and Service Finder in Customer First by
    selecting Customer Online Account > Payment and Service Finder
    (including Centrelink rate estimators) from the menu

Historical information on income and assets tests and limits can be
found on the References page.

The Resources page contains links to the Consumer Price Index home page
for printable rates and income and asset summaries and a link to the
Centrelink rates charts for the current rates.

Contents

Allowance income and assets tests

Income Test for single allowance customers

Income Test for partnered allowance customers

Assets Test for allowances, Austudy and independent ABSTUDY customers

Assessment of income and assets for Parenting Payment (PP)

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income and assets tests

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests

Rates of Parenting Payment (PP)

Weekly payments

Assessing, coding and reviewing weekly payments

Calculating weekly payments

Related links

Pensions income and assets tests

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Personal/Partner Income Tests for students, trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Special Benefit (SpB) income and assets tests

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Veterans' Affairs payments income and assets tests

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Exempt income

Assets hardship

The Parental Means Test

Parental Income Test (PIT)

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Online estimator options

Payment rates and thresholds

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
