
Maintenance Income Test (MIT) reconciliation for ABSTUDY, Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme (AIC) and Youth Allowance (YA) 108-17031700

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Maintenance Income Test (MIT) reconciliation
process for dependent youth customers.

Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

The MIT applies to some dependent customers who receive:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance

From 1 July 2017 until 1 January 2019 the MIT also applied to:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance customers aged under 16 years
-   ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance Group 2, and
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Additional Boarding Allowance

For more information, see Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and
Youth Allowance (YA).

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) reconciliation

The Maintenance Income Test reconciliation, (known as MIT
reconciliation) is a process used to determine:

-   whether the customer’s payment has been correctly calculated for a
    previous financial year
-   when the customer or their parent/guardian is entitled to
    maintenance income and subject to the MIT

During a financial year, annual maintenance income is estimated based on
a child support assessment or voluntary maintenance income received for
the customer.

MIT reconciliation only occurs for customers receiving a MIT affected
payment, using actual maintenance income received for a previous
financial year.

Note: MIT reconciliation will occur on the third Saturday in July where
a customer's payment is in a cancelled state, or they are independent on
that day.

Customers who are exempt from the Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for the
entire financial year are exempt from MIT reconciliation.

Viewing maintenance income reconciliation results

MIT reconciliation results display via customer summary under the MIT
Reconciliation Summary (MITR) table in Process Direct, for all payment
types.

Maintenance income re-reconciliation

Once MIT reconciliation is complete, a re-reconciliation may
automatically occur due to the following changes:

-   a retrospective change in a private collect child support assessment
    for a previous financial year
-   a retrospective change in a sibling circumstance that affects the
    customer's annualised Maintenance Income Free Area (MIFA)

Note: a reconciliation or re-reconciliation may automatically initiate
when a Service Officer undertakes an activity that results in a
backdated re-assessment.

Maintenance income reconciliation results

MIT reconciliation and re-reconciliation can result in no adjustment, a
negative adjustment or a positive adjustment.

Following reconciliation or re-reconciliation, if a negative adjustment
has occurred, the system creates an undetermined debt activity on the
Activity List (AL) screen for investigation. The Process page has more
information.

If an arrears adjustment has occurred, the system issues an immediate
arrears payment and an arrears letter to the customer (YA or ABY), third
party (ABY) or applicant (AIC).

Privacy

There are restrictions about disclosure and confidentiality of customer
and parents or guardians information for YA and ABSTUDY customers.
Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) and implied authority provisions
apply.

The Resources page has links to reconciliation scenarios, Level 2 Policy
Helpdesk and Services Australia website.

Related links

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA)

The Parental Means Test

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
