
Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 108-02010030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the application of the Parental Income Test (PIT)
for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Parental Income Test

The Parental Income Test is used to calculate entitlement to Additional
Boarding Allowance (ABA). ABA is the only AIC Scheme allowance that is
means tested.

Note: from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2018 a Maintenance Income Test
also applied. For historical information on how the Maintenance Income
Test applied, see Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth
Allowance (YA).

Families eligible for Basic Boarding Allowance for a student can also be
paid ABA if the student's annual boarding charges exceed the maximum
rate of Basic Boarding Allowance less $250 for incidentals, and either:

-   at least one of the student's parents qualifies for a PIT exemption,
    or
-   combined parental income for the appropriate tax year does not
    exceed the PIT Upper Income Limit for AIC

For the PIT Upper Income Limit for AIC, see Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) - Parental Income Test (PIT).

Income applied

The PIT applies to the AIC applicant and their partner if they have a
partner.

If the student's parents are separated or divorced, determine who the
approved applicant is and apply the PIT to that parent (and their new
partner, if applicable).

PIT exemption

An exemption from the PIT applies for ABA if:

-   the applicant or their partner receives a qualifying income support
    or equivalent payment (except during an employment income nil rate
    period or if they receive the income support payment entirely as a
    Home Equity Access Scheme loan), or
-   the applicant or their partner hold a Health Care Card (HCC) other
    than a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) or card held by a person
    who gets Mobility Allowance or Carer Allowance for a child with
    disability. Examples of approved HCCs includes an automatic HCC
    issued for a reason such as the applicant or their partner receive
    maximum rate Family Tax Benefit Part A or are in long term receipt
    of JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   the student is in a State authorised care arrangement and their
    carer does not receive a foster care allowance or similar assistance
    for them

PIT application

Any parental income above the Parental Income Free Area (PIFA) (see
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) - Parental Income Test (PIT) is
divided among the children within the family pool. The share of the
parental income for each child will depend on the maximum amount of the
payments for which that particular child is eligible.

A sibling is included in the family pool if they are in receipt of:

-   Youth Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Group 2 School Fees Allowance (means tested component), or
-   AIC Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA), or
-   A sibling who meets the definition of an FTB child or regular care
    child and aged 0 - 15 or 16-19 and in full-time secondary study is
    also to be included in the family pool

All of the following payments will be included in the family pool where
there is only one dependent young person in the family and they also
receive more than one of the following payments:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   Group 2 School Fees Allowance – means tested component
-   Assistance for Isolated Children Additional Boarding Allowance, or
-   Meet the definition Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child or regular care
    child

For example, where a child receives AIC ABA and meets the definition of
a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child or regular care child simultaneously,
both amounts will be included in the family pool calculation.

The family taper of 20% is then applied to the child's share of the
parental income above the threshold. This means that the rate of payment
is reduced by the child’s share of 20 cents for each dollar of their
parents' affecting income.

The References page contains links to policy for definitions of FTB
Child, and Regular Care Child.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
relevant information and the Education Payment Rates factsheet.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Boarding
Allowance (BA/ABA)

A-B payment rates and thresholds

Determining the appropriate tax year for the Parental Income Test (PIT)
for Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme

Assessing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Current Income
Assessment (SY042)

Family taper for the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Circumstances when the Parental Income Test (PIT) does not apply

Assessing verified parental income for current income assessments for
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
