
Paid leave and redundancy payments (advised before 19 April 2010) 108-07010090

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment and coding of paid leave and
redundancy payments advised before 19 April 2010. It is for historical
purposes and should not be used to assess current paid leave. Leave or
redundancy payments received upon termination of employment, or leave
payments received while on paid leave from ongoing employment, may
affect payability of a customer's Centrelink payment.

On this Page:

Assessment method for payments advised before 19 April 2010

The change to the assessment method for leave or redundancy payments
came into effect on 19 April 2010, but was backdated to 20 September
2009. Therefore, any payments advised by customers prior to 19 April
2010 are assessed under the pre 20 September 2009 rules.

Leave and termination payments paid by an employer for a period
beginning after 20 September 2009 and advised after 19 April 2010 are
assessed differently.

Leave and redundancy payments

Leave and redundancy payments can include:

-   Annual leave
-   Sick leave
-   Personal leave
-   Carers leave
-   Long service leave
-   Leave loading
-   Maternity leave
-   Rostered days off
-   Redundancy payment
-   Payment in lieu of notice
-   Gratuity or 'Golden handshake'
-   Other payments received on termination of employment

Note: only redundancy payments received on or after 20 September 2006
are included in the Income Maintenance Period (IMP).

Treatment of leave payments

The treatment of leave payments depends on the Centrelink payment the
customer is claiming or receiving and whether the employment to which
the payment relates is ongoing or has been terminated.

In all cases, assessment is based on the Income Test and Assets Test
which applies to the payment the customer is receiving.

Customers eligible for Working Credits

For customers who are eligible for Working Credits, income from paid
leave is not employment income. Leave payments are included in ordinary
income used when calculating the accrual of Working Credits. The
customer is unable to deplete their Working Credits or use the Work
Bonus to offset income from paid leave.

Students and Australian Apprentices

For students and Australian Apprentices, income bank can be offset
against income from paid leave.

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

For customers claiming or receiving:

-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Partner Allowance
-   Widow Allowance
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) and Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Youth Allowance
-   Austudy, or
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) (except customers who are
    permanently blind)

Leave and redundancy payments received by either the customer or partner
may result in an Income Maintenance Period (IMP) during which the
customer is either not entitled to payment or is entitled to a reduced
rate. Other Centrelink payments are not affected by the IMP rules,
however, leave payments can still be considered financial assets and
subject to the deeming provisions regardless of whether the leave is
assessed as income or not.

IMP part rate and Working Credits

In cases where the IMP does not fully preclude payment (that is,
customer has a part rate) and the customer also has employment income,
Working Credits can be used to offset the employment income.

Employed customer takes leave and receives paid leave payments

If the customer goes on leave and is still employed (employment has not
been terminated) and receives paid leave, it is assessed as income under
the normal Income Test and an IMP may apply for the period the payment
covers. This is regardless of when the payment is received.

A person on leave is not generally regarded as unemployed as their
contract of employment still exists. For example, teachers and other
school workers would not be regarded as unemployed during term holidays.

If the customer's employment has been terminated, any leave payments
received upon or after termination may result in an IMP from the date
the payment is received. This will be for the duration of the period the
leave payment covers, for example, 2 weeks paid sick leave. If more than
one type of leave payment is received, the IMP is worked out by adding
the separate periods to which the payments relate.

Leave entitlements paid out

Cashed in leave entitlements are treated differently. In cases where the
employee does not go on leave but the employer pays out their leave
entitlement in a lump sum, the amount is assessed as a non-remunerative
lump sum. It should be held on the record as income for 52 weeks from
the date the customer was entitled to receive it. The amount is normally
entitled to be received on the date the employer pays it.

Paid leave for customers on payments not affected by an IMP

This is recorded as income if the employment is continuing. Leave
payments paid in a lump sum on termination of employment are not
recorded as income for customers not subject to an IMP. Exceptions: PPS
and DSP customers who are of Age Pension age (except customers who are
permanently blind) are subject to the IMP, for other pensions, if
employment is terminated, leave payments paid either in instalments or
as a lump sum are disregarded as income. However, assess the asset value
and any deemed income generated by investment of the payment.

Purchased leave

An employee may earn money but choose to defer receipt of the money. As
the person has an entitlement to claim the income before it is received,
the income is assessed at the time it is earned rather than the time it
is received.

Deferred salary schemes operate in two ways. The employee may:

-   take a reduction in salary on the basis that they will be entitled
    to leave several years later
-   'purchase' additional leave each year by having 'leave without pay'
    deductions made from each fortnight's salary

Purchased leave is assessed as nil income during the time it is taken as
it has already been assessed through gross income declared during
previous employment periods.

Couples where only one is receiving an IMP effected payment

Effect of the IMP on couples where one is receiving an IMP affected
payment and the other is receiving a payment not affected by the IMP.

Age Pension, Carer Payment (CP) and service pensions are not affected by
IMP provisions.

Allowee/non-IMP affected pension couple

If the allowee customer receives the leave payment, the amount is to be
recorded on their record. This will affect the allowee but not the
pension customer. No income is to be assessed against the pension
customer.

If the pension customer receives the leave payment, the only time it
will affect their payments is if they are still employed. No IMP is
applied to the pension customer but the income can still affect.

If the pension customer has ceased employment and receives a leave
payment, the amount is disregarded for the pension customer, but should
still be coded on the pension customer's record to correctly affect the
allowee partner.

Where a pension customer's employment is ongoing and they receive a
leave payment, the amount is coded on the pension customer's record to
correctly affect both the customer and the allowee partner.

Mobility Allowance

A Mobility Allowance (MOB) customer receiving paid leave is still
considered to be employed for the purposes of the MOB during the period
of leave.

Casual employees

If a customer is working casually they are not entitled to leave
payment/loading. The customer may receive a loading as part of their
ordinary pay in lieu of holidays or sick leave. This loading is included
in their hourly rate of pay and assessed as employment income. This
loading is coded with all other employment income.

Pension Bonus Scheme

If the customer or their partner is registered for the Pension Bonus
Scheme, the leave may affect their entitlement to the Pension Bonus. The
case should be referred to the Senior Practitioner to consider if the
entitlement to the Pension Bonus is likely to be affected. If so, a
Financial Information Service (FIS) is required.

Non-teaching support staff in New South Wales

In New South Wales (NSW), non-teaching support staff (teacher's aides,
library assistants or other non-teaching staff), are employees of the
NSW Department of Education. As they are unable to work during term
breaks, they receive a stand down payment which is based on them meeting
certain criteria. This is treated as ordinary employment income.

The Resources page contains examples of coding leave payments for
allowee/non-IMP affected couples and non-IMP affected customers with
variable and non-variable employment income. It also contains
information on how to assess stand down payments for non-teaching
support staff who work for the NSW Department of Education.

Related links

Leave and termination payments paid by an employer

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Cessation of employment income

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Deeming provisions

Verifying and recording assets changes

Treatment of lump sums

Assessment of other ordinary income for Centrelink payments

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Recording and correcting employment income details

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Assessment of employment income for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
customers over Age Pension age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
