[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines income and assets tests for the income support
payments made by Services Australia which are means tested. This
document does not include family payments as they are not income support
payments made under the Social Security Act.

Government intent

The income and assets tests aim to provide maximum financial support to
customers who need it most, and to reduce that support in line with
increased capacity of customers to provide for themselves.

Customers are assessed separately under the income test, and the asset
test that applies to them. The lowest rate calculated is the rate
payable to the customer.

The income test and assets test that applies to them depends on the kind
of payment claimed, the partner status, and the homeowner status.

General

Customers are assessed under each of the income test and the assets test
that applies to them. The lowest rate calculated is the rate payable to
the customer.

For couples, the combined value of their assets is used in the asset
test. When at least one is a pensioner, each member of the couple is
assessed as earning half the combined income. When there are no
pensioners, each member of the couple is assessed with their income
only. However, their partner’s income will also affect their rate if it
is enough to preclude their own payment.

Income Test

Income below a threshold level is considered to be in an income free
area, and does not affect the rate of payment. Above the threshold,
payments reduce at tapered rates.

Customers who are granted a pension under an International Agreement and
are in receipt of a pension or superannuation payment from that
agreement country, may be subject to a direct dollar for dollar rate
deduction. The same applies to New Zealand pension payments. Certain
compensation income can also result in a dollar for dollar deduction.

The specifics of the income test depend on the personal circumstances of
the recipient, for example their payment type, whether they have a
partner, and the number of dependent children for Parenting Payment
Single (PPS) and the transitional rules for pension customers.

Assets Test

Assets have no impact on the payment, until the value exceeds the assets
threshold.

For Allowances and Parenting Payment Single, payments are not payable
once the assets threshold is reached. Parenting Payment is subject to
the Allowance Assets Test.

For Pensions other than Parenting Payment Single, once the assets
threshold is reached, payments are tapered as assets increase, reducing
until it reaches zero.

The assets test varies according to the customer's partner and homeowner
situation.

Department of Veteran’s Affairs (DVA)

Many people receive different types of payments from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA). The effect on eligibility for payments
administered by Services Australia depends on the type of payment(s)
received from DVA. Some payments made by DVA are exempt under the Income
Test for Social Security pensions and allowances. Other payments are
treated under the Income Test for Social Security pensions and
allowances.

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

The Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA) was an allowance paid
by the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) to customers whose income
support payment under Social Security Law was reduced because of the
inclusion of DVA Adjusted Disability Pension as assessable income.
Payments made under other Commonwealth Acts and regulations may attract
DFISA like payments.

From 1 January 2022, Adjusted Disability Pensions are exempt from the
income test. As a result, DFISA ceased for all periods of entitlement
from 1 January 2022.

Compensation payments

Most Services Australia administered income support payments are
compensation affected payments (CAP). This means that most compensation
payments are not treated as employment income or other ordinary income
when calculating a rate of payment, but are instead subject to the
compensation provisions set out in Part 3.14 of the Social Security Act
1991.

Contents

Allowance income and assets tests

Pensions income and assets test

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessment of income and assets for Parenting Payment

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Care Receiver Income and Assets

Personal/Partner Income Tests for students, trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Special Benefit (SpB) income and assets tests

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Veterans’ Affairs payments income and assets tests

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
