
Income Test for pension customers with partners on allowance 108-03010050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Income Test for pensioner/allowee couples
is applied differently for each member of the couple. Their income is
combined and the total is then divided by two to obtain a personal
income allocation. The personal Income Test is then applied to this
personal income allocation.

Applicable rates and tests

The allowance income test and the student or Australian Apprentice
income threshold is assessed differently to the pension income
threshold. The procedure, Personal Income Test and Income Bank for
ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian
Apprentices, has further information. For the allowance income test, see
the Allowances - Personal Income Test thresholds link on the Rates and
Thresholds page.

The Income Test has different applications for the following pension
customers:

-   single pensioners
-   pensioners with children
-   partnered pensioners
-   partnered pensioners where the partner is on an allowance payment
-   pensioners separated due to ill health
-   pensioners with children - if the pensioner is paid under the
    transitional rules for pension customers and the customer has
    children, an extra income amount per child may be deducted before
    the rate of pension payable is calculated

A separate rate is calculated under both the Income Test and Assets Test
with the one resulting in the lowest rate of pension being applicable to
that person.

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension
(Blind) may be exempt from the means test, but income and assets details
are required to determine the partner's entitlement to payments or if
the customer is claiming rent assistance.

The procedure, Exempt income, provides information about assessing
income that is exempt from the Income Test.

International agreements and compensation

Customers who are granted a pension under an International Agreement and
are in receipt of a pension or superannuation payment from that
agreement country, may be subject to a direct dollar for dollar rate
deduction.

Certain compensation payments or New Zealand Pension payments may also
result in a direct deduction.

Income from employment and self-employment

Additional deductions may apply if the customer is of:

workforce age, apply the Working Credit rules before applying the Income
Test

Age Pension age and receiving an income support payment other than PPS.
Apply the Work Bonus to their eligible income. The Work Bonus needs to
be applied before the Working Credit calculations. Eligible income for
Work Bonus is:

-   employment income, and
-   self-employment income earned through personal exertion

If the customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and some
of that income is employment income, the customer's payment may remain
current at nil rate for up to six fortnights' employment income nil rate
period.

Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

For children born or entrusted to care on or after 1 October 2016,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) is counted as
ordinary income for pensions. PPL and DAP for children who were born or
entrusted to care prior to 1 October 2016 is treated as exempt income.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. The transitional rules will continue to apply for as long as the
customer receives a higher rate of payment under the old Income Test
(pre 20 September 2009) with no Work Bonus applied compared to the
Income Test in place from 20 September 2009 which does include the Work
Bonus. It is possible for their partner's income support payment rate to
be calculated under a different income test, that is, the customer could
receive a higher rate under the old income test and their partner may
have been granted after 20 September 2009 and therefore only eligible to
be paid under the new income test.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains a link to rates factsheets.

Related links

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Transitional rules for pension customers on payment at 19 September 2009

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assets Test for pension partnered customers

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

International Social Security Agreements

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Review of decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
