
Payment of arrears after reassessment 108-08170000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the rules for the payment of arrears, including
after reassessment. Arrears may be paid when a customer was paid at the
wrong rate or their payment was cancelled incorrectly. Arrears may also
be paid after a review of a decision.

Payment of arrears following reassessment

A customer may be entitled to an arrears payment after a reassessment or
review. However, arrears may be limited depending on:

-   the legislation/policy under which the payment is made
-   if the reassessment was initiated by the customer or Centrelink
-   if the reassessment related to a new claim
-   the date the reassessment was initiated
-   if a written notice of the original decision was sent to the
    customer
-   the date the customer was notified of the original decision

When restoring a payment or doing a retrospective reassessment, Service
Officers must have an expectation of what the result should be. They
must check the assessment result, including any resulting
payment/arrears is correct before finalising the activity.

There may be system arrears limits to some payments. See Reissuing a
rejected payment.

The general rule for date of effect under social security law

If the customer has advised of a change to their circumstances, the date
of effect for a favourable determination is the later of:

-   the date of notification
-   the date of event

This general rule does not apply in a range of circumstances set out in
subsections 110(2) - 110(11) of the Social Security Administration Act
1999.

Date of effect following a review of decision

See Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes for the date of
effect of a decision following an application for formal review or
Secretary initiated review of a decision.

Family assistance law

Generally, the date of effect of a favourable determination is the date
from which full effect is given to the decision - full arrears are
payable.

For decisions about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments, the date of
effect can be no earlier than 1 July of the financial year before the
financial year in which the favourable determination is made.

Note: in cases where an activity causes a Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU)
debt as NBU eligibility is lost, for example FTB A cancelling, and a
subsequent activity is paying arrears for NBU, the system will
automatically offset these arrears with the debt. To allow the automated
withholdings process to offset arrears, do not suppress the arrears and
do not code FMAD.

Withholdings will automatically apply from the NBU payment to the
outstanding amount of an existing NBU debt, which will occur after
running the payment strip. It displays as a withholding for Family
Assistance.

This offsetting also occurs if multiple activities are processed in the
one day, the first paying arrears of NBU and a subsequent activity
causing a loss of eligibility resulting in a debt. If these activities
are on the same day, the offset will occur so a payment does not issue
and subsequently raise a debt on the same day.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

For Secretary initiated reviews of CCS decisions, the date of effect for
favourable changes cannot be earlier than the beginning of the previous
financial year/. Arrears for CCS must not be paid before the previous
financial year.

The exception is CCS reassessments due to:

-   changes to an individual’s Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI), including
    reviews conducted by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), or
-   changes to the customer’s activity test result for CCS as a result
    of the customer meeting CCS reconciliation conditions. This is. when
    customers with an estimated ATI above the lower income threshold now
    meet eligibility for the 24 hours per fortnight of CCS without
    having to meet the Activity Test. as actual ATI is now below the
    lower income threshold

The time limit for applying for a formal review of a decision is
generally 13 weeks after the person is notified of the decision, unless
there are special circumstances that prevented the person for applying
for the formal review. For reviews relating to a customer’s CCS Activity
Test, jurisdiction and time limit to review depends on whether it is a
Customer initiated review of decision or a Secretary initiated review of
decision.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

PPL reassessments that may result in the payment of arrears can occur
if:

-   there is a change to a customer’s PPL period start date
-   the customer claims a Flexible PPL day for a date in the past that
    is outside of their current entitlement period

This may be due to a review of decision, correction or change in
circumstances.

Generally, the PPL period and Flexible PPL backdating limits will reduce
the amount of arrears that are payable.

If an activity results in the payment of PPL arrears in conjunction with
an overpayment of PPL or an income support payment, the system will
automatically offset these arrears up to the overpayment amount. The
offset occurs to avoid a payment issuing and subsequently creating a
debt on the same day.

Note: offsetting for Income Support Payment (ISP) overpayments only
applies where the ISP overpayment is due to the customer receiving PPL
for the same past period. This is because PPL is treated as ordinary
income for calculating the rate of ISP.

For more information, see Parental Leave Pay (PPL) debt raising, debt
offsetting and recovery.

Arrears payment used to repay debts

Pension bonus payments and arrears of social security payments can be
used to recover a debt. This is possible when the debt to be repaid:

-   was raised at least 28 days in the past, and
-   is due and payable

If the customer is entitled to an FTB top-up, lump sum or instalment
arrears, it may be used to repay the following debts:

-   Family Assistance
-   Social Security
-   Student Assistance
-   Paid Parental Leave Scheme

This may occur even if the customer has entered into a repayment
arrangement with Services Australia. The system then pays any residual
amount to the customer.

Employment income revised

If a customer overstates their employment income for a fortnight then,
within 13 weeks, advises of a lower amount, arrears may be paid. For
further information, see Recording and correcting employment income
details.

Rent Assistance arrears

A customer may be entitled to arrears of Rent Assistance (RA). The
amount will depend on the payment the customer is receiving. These rules
differ between social security law and family assistance law.

If customers receiving an income support payment claim Family Tax
Benefit, they could receive duplicate payments of RA.

Updating Working Credit

Working Credit accrual and depletion is automatic. Service Officers may
have to adjust the working credit balance manually for past periods.
This will be for cases if:

-   a limiting date has been applied, preventing system recalculation
-   the customer’s record has a manual rate override

Weekly payments

Customers receiving their payments weekly receive the same amount of
income support payment as customers receiving their entitlements
fortnightly. The payment of a customer on a weekly basis does not change
any arrears calculations.

Tax liability

A customer can incur a tax liability if an arrears payment is issued
that places them over the Medicare/Tax free threshold. This happens when
a customer is receiving a taxable payment and receives an arrears
payment that spans multiple financial years. As tax liability is applied
for the year it is received and not entitled, this arrears payment may
subsequently take these customers over the tax-free threshold resulting
in tax liability when they otherwise would not be impacted.

See Taxable and non-taxable payments for Centrelink Payment Summary and
Managing Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions.

The Resources page has examples of a Stop Payment Request DOC, links to
the ICT Service Desk for the webform 'Stop Customer Payment', contact
information for the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Processing
Team and a list of codes for Manual Adjustment Reasons.

The Training and Support page has a link to a training package, Manual
adjustment of assessment results.

Contents

How to manually calculate arrears

Related links

Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes

Customer initiated review of decision

Secretary initiated review of decision

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing) review and
appeals

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Using the Review of Assessment (ROA) screen

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Customer enquires about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump
sum claim

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Notification Handler (NOHL)

Notification provisions

Frequency of payments

Weekly payments

Calculating weekly payments

Changing Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)

Reporting overview

Rent Assistance (RA) verification

Calculating the start day general rule

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Taxable and non-taxable payments for Centrelink Payment Summary

Managing Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) debt raising, debt offsetting and recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
