
Assets hardship for income support payments 108-04120000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before inviting a claim under assets hardship provisions, the case must
be discussed with a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) in the Asset
Hardship Team.

This document outlines the details of the assets test for income support
payments. The assets test presumes that customers with substantial
assets, apart from their own home, apply those assets to produce income
for their own support. Special provisions are in place for those
customers in severe financial hardship due to the application of the
assets test.

Hardship rules

The hardship rules allow for the value of particular assets to be
disregarded and for the rate of pension, allowance or benefit payable to
be determined in a special manner.

Assessing assets

If substantial assets are held, but they produce little or no income,
the owners are expected to rearrange their financial affairs before
calling on the community for income support through the social security
system.

Where a customer is in long term hardship, the customer should seek to
borrow against any assets they want disregarded (for example, a loan or
reverse mortgage on a holiday home or investment property). Customers in
long term hardship do not have to obtain a loan secured against their
principal home but borrowing should be expected against the asset being
considered for exemption, but only when the customer can afford to repay
the debt. In these cases all options should be investigated.

Sometimes a customer is unable to rearrange financial affairs, or, in
the case of pensions, could not reasonably be expected to rearrange them
because of particular circumstances.

Qualifications for severe financial hardship

For the hardship rules to apply, a customer will be considered to be in
severe financial hardship if:

-   their available money is less than the readily available funds
    limit. Note: from 3 August 2007 the limits vary depending on the
    customer's income support payment, and
-   they have no other course of action which they could reasonably be
    expected to take to alleviate that hardship

Hardship test by payment type

An asset is said to be unrealisable if the customer cannot sell it or:

-   For pension recipients, it would seem unreasonable to expect them to
    sell or realise the asset. The asset is also said to be unrealisable
    if the customer cannot or could not reasonably be expected to use
    the asset as a security for borrowing
-   For a customer claiming an allowance, they must have applied for and
    been deemed not eligible for payment under the assets test, plus
    meet other basic qualifications
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) is a pension under section 23(1) of
    the Social Security Act 1991, however for assets hardship purposes
    PPS is treated the same as allowances

The hardship provisions do not apply to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A,
FTB Part B, Maternity Allowance (MAT) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
because there is no assets test for these payments.

Members of a couple hardship provisions

Where both members of a couple are applying for payment under the
hardship provisions, each person must lodge a claim, this can be done by
completing separate forms or one claim form with both partner's details.

Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme)

The Scheme does not preclude customers from consideration under the
hardship provisions. It may be appropriate to investigate whether a
customer has entitlement under the hardship provisions before proceeding
with a request for loan payments under the Scheme. The two provisions
are mutually exclusive and that payment can only be made under one or
the other provision.

Granting and backdating of claims

An assets hardship claim may be lodged following the rejection,
cancellation or rate reduction of an income support payment.

The Social Security Act allows a delegate to backdate a claim for assets
hardship for up to 6 months before the signed claim form was lodged. As
most customers have limited knowledge of the assets hardship provisions
the CAO should view favourably a request to grant for an earlier period
in most circumstances.

Example - a customer makes claim for Age Pension in July and is rejected
under the assets test in August. They become aware of the assets
hardship provisions via their rejection letter and obtain a claim form
and apply for assets hardship as soon as practicable in September. In
this case the delegate has the discretion to pay assets hardship from
July if all the criteria are met from that time.

Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) delegation

Before inviting a claim under the assets hardship provisions, Service
Officers are advised to discuss the case with a Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO) in the Asset Hardship Team who can advise the Service
Officer of the issues to be considered and other concessions that may be
available to the customer.

The customer’s eligibility for assets hardship, under provisions for
pensions, or allowances, is to be checked before contacting a CAO.

The delegation to make decisions under the assets hardship provisions
lies with the CAO.

Contents

Assets hardship provisions - Pensions

Assets hardship provisions for allowances

Completing the Consideration under Assets Test hardship provisions

Assessment of assets hardship

Unrealisable assets under the Assets Test hardship provisions

Severe financial hardship under the assets test hardship provisions

Notional income on unrealisable assets

Review of assets hardship cases

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
