-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Defence Force Income
Support Allowance (DFISA) and how it supplemented income support
payments affected by Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA.

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

DFISA was an income support payment paid by the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) to customers whose social security pension or benefit was
reduced (including to nil) because of the inclusion of Adjusted
Disability Pension from DVA as assessable income.

DFISA was introduced on 20 September 2004 and ceased on 1 January 2022,
when Adjusted Disability Pension became exempt income under the Social
Security Act 1991. Retrospective DFISA assessments and payments may
still occur for periods prior to 1 January 2022.

Payments made under other Commonwealth Acts and regulations were not
covered by the DFISA legislation however the Veterans' Entitlements
(DFISA-like Payment) Regulations 2005 provides for DFISA-like payments.
Customers paid under these acts and regulations received DFISA-like
payments identical to DFISA payments, rather than DFISA, and unless
specified in this document, the term ‘DFISA’ covers ‘DFISA-like’ also.
These payments commenced on 20 September 2004 and ceased no later than 1
January 2022.

Where a customer's Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA affected their
partner's rate of social security pension or benefit, the partner may
have also been entitled to receive DFISA payments.

DFISA was also paid where there was a reduction in rate because of the
inclusion of Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA in the assessment of
Lump Sum Bereavement Payment, Pension Bonus Scheme and Home Equity
Access Scheme.

There was no claim form or claim process for DFISA. Eligibility is
automatically assessed by the Services Australia system for all
customers who are paid Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA.

Calculation of DFISA for periods before 1 January 2022

A person's rate of DFISA is equal to the difference between the actual
rate of social security pension or benefit the person receives, and
their notional rate, which is the rate they would receive if Adjusted
Disability Pension from DVA:

-   was excluded from income in the assessment of the person's actual
    rate, but
-   included in the calculation of rent assistance (for example, the DVA
    disability income rent test is applied)

DFISA = notional rate minus actual rate

The amount of DFISA will be automatically recalculated at each rate
reassessment for periods before 1 January 2022, and transmission of new
DFISA information will be sent to DVA at the end of every business day.
DVA will generally pay DFISA fortnightly on the DVA payday.

A manual DFISA calculation will be needed for customers who are on a
manual rate of payment for their pension or benefit, or where the system
cannot perform an automatic rate calculation. Manual DFISA calculations
are done by the DVA Clearance Team.

If the customer was being paid their social security pension or benefit
under the Assets Test, they will not attract DFISA payments as the
Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA did not reduce their payment rate.
If their assessment method subsequently changes from the Assets Test to
the Income Test, the system will automatically calculate whether the
customer is entitled to DFISA for past periods.

See Process for information on how to calculate DFISA.

DVA Adjusted Disability Pensions

Adjusted Disability Pensions from DVA include the following:

-   Disability Compensation Payments paid under Parts II and IV of the
    Veterans' Entitlements Act (VEA) 1986
-   Permanent Impairment payment and Special Rate Disability Pension
    paid under the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act (MRCA)
    2004
-   Temporary Incapacity Allowance (only payable for periods of
    incapacity prior to 20 September 2011)
-   Dependant's Allowance (only payable for periods prior to 20
    September 2009)

Payments affected by DFISA legislation

Payments affected by the DFISA legislation included:

-   ABSTUDY (affected by DFISA-like payments regulations)
-   Age Pension
-   Austudy
-   Bereavement Allowance
-   Carer Payment
-   Child Care Subsidy
-   Disability Support Pension
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Newstart Allowance (prior to 20 March 2020)
-   Parenting Payment Single
-   Parenting Payment Partnered
-   Partner Allowance (prior to 1 January 2022)
-   Special Benefit
-   Widow Allowance (prior to 1 January 2022)
-   Widow B Pension (prior to 20 March 2020)
-   Wife Pension (prior to 20 March 2020)
-   Youth Allowance

Prior to 1 July 2014 the following income support payments were also
known as primary payments for the purposes of DFISA-like payments:

-   Farm Help Income Support (FHIS)
-   Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment (ECRP)
-   Interim Income Support (IIS)
-   Sugar Industry Reform Program 2004 - Income Support Payment

These payments were administered by the Department of Agriculture, Water
and the Environment, and were superseded by the introduction of Farm
Household Allowance (FHA) on 1 July 2014.

The following payments did not attract DFISA:

-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA) payments are not affected by the
    DFISA legislation, as Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA was not
    included as income for Farm Household Allowance purposes
-   Customers paid under the Financial Hardship Guidelines (section 1130
    of the Social Security Act 1991) did not attract DFISA
-   Customers paid a pension under the criteria for blindness that is
    income and assets test free were not eligible for DFISA, however
    their Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA could still affect their
    partner's entitlement. If the blind customer elected to receive Rent
    Assistance, their income support payment was income tested and DFISA
    may have been payable

Taxability of DFISA

Where a customer received a taxable income support payment, for example,
Age Pension, the DFISA payment was taxable. If a customer received a
non-taxable income support payment, for example, Disability Support
Pension (under the Age Pension age), the DFISA payment was non-taxable.

DFISA and the income test

Although DFISA ceased for periods from 1 January 2022, retrospective
reassessments may create payments of DFISA after that date. All DFISA
payments are exempt from the Income Test for all income support
payments. However, DFISA is:

-   always included in the ordinary Income Test for Low Income Health
    Care Card (LIC)
-   included in the assessment for Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card
    (CSHC) only where it is taxable income
-   assessed for Family Tax Benefit and CCS purposes only where it is
    taxable income

Current zero rate (CZR - DFISA)

When a customer's income precludes entitlement to their income support
payment, their pension or benefit is usually rejected or cancelled.
Before 1 January 2022, customers who were paid an Adjusted Disability
Pension from DVA would have a DFISA calculation done before this
occurred. If DFISA was greater than zero, their pension or benefit
status was held as Current Zero Rate (CZR-DFISA). These customers were
regarded as receiving the pension or benefit for which they qualify and
entitled to the associated benefits and concessions relevant to their
payment.

CZR-DFISA customers must have continued to qualify for their pension or
benefit, and meet the obligations associated with their particular
payment.

Under family assistance law, CZR-DFISA customers were taken to be
receiving the social security pension or benefit which was supplemented
by their DFISA payment. They would therefore be exempt from the FTB Part
A income test.

Customers ceased to be CZR-DFISA from 1 January 2022 as Adjusted
Disability Pension from DVA was no longer assessed under the income test
for income support payments.

Stimulus reporting customers who received DFISA

DFISA payments for stimulus reporters were calculated and transmitted to
DVA when the customer reported their income at the end of every
entitlement period up until 1 January 2022. This was to ensure all
income was taken into account when DFISA was calculated, and reduced the
risk of overpayment. DVA paid DFISA retrospectively for the entitlement
period.

A zero DFISA rate was then transmitted to DVA at the start of every
entitlement (reporting) period.

DFISA and the Home Equity Access Scheme

The Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) (known as the Pension Loans Scheme
prior to 1 January 2022) allows older Australians and their partners to
supplement their income with a government funded loan.

Services Australia pay the loan:

-   fortnightly, or
-   as an advance payment lump sum

Prior to 1 January 2022, the amount of DFISA decreased the loan amount a
person could receive each fortnight. DFISA does not affect the advance
payment option, as it only became available from 1 July 2022.

DFISA and Lump Sum Bereavement Payment, Pension Bonus and Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment

There were instances when a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment, Pension Bonus
or Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment was reduced due to the inclusion of
an Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA. In these instances a DFISA Lump
Sum Bereavement payment, a DFISA Pension Bonus payment or a DFISA
Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment was also calculated and transmitted to
DVA for payment.

For information on the calculation of these amounts, see the Process
page.

DFISA and partnered pension customers

Pension customer partnered with an allowance customer, or both
pensioners

When a couple includes at least 1 pensioner, their income is combined
and then halved to establish their assessable income. Their respective
rates are calculated using this income information. These rules remain
unchanged with DFISA, meaning half the total combined DVA Adjusted
Disability Pension was assessed as income against each customer for
periods before 1 January 2022.

For pension/allowance couples with Rent Assistance (RA), the RA is paid
to the pension customer. To establish the amount of DFISA payable, the
notional rate of pension and notional RA were added together to obtain
the pension customer’s total notional rate. The notional RA amount was
calculated using the DVA disability income rent test, in which the
couple’s combined Adjusted Disability Pension income was halved in order
to obtain the RA reduction amount used in the calculation.

DFISA and non-pension partnered customers

Allowance customer partnered with a Parenting Payment customer, another
allowance customer, an ABSTUDY customer, or partner not on benefits

When a partner’s ordinary income exceeds the Partner Income Free Area
(which is the cut-out point where the partner’s benefit is no longer
payable), it reduces the rate of allowance payable to the customer. To
calculate the amount of partner excess income to deduct from the
customer’s fortnightly payment, the Partner Income Free Area is deducted
from the partner's income and multiplied by 0.6. See the Process page
for further information.

A partner’s compensation direct deduction excess income is treated as
ordinary income for the customer.

For the calculation of DFISA, all steps in the calculation of a
customer’s rate must be mirrored in the notional rate calculation, for
example, if there is compensation direct deduction excess in the actual
calculation, this must be included in the notional calculation.

The exceptions to this are the notional partner excess income and
notional rent assistance calculations, which require special treatment
as described below.

Notional partner excess income

If a customer’s fortnightly allowance was reduced by their partner’s
excess income, and the partner also received an Adjusted Disability
Pension from DVA before 1 January 2022, the  notional partner excess
income  must be included in the customer’s DFISA calculation.

For information on how to calculate notional partner excess income, see
the Resources page.

Notional Rent Assistance calculation for partner with excess income

The partner’s Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA excess income must be
included in the calculation of notional Rent Assistance (RA) for the
customer.

Partner Adjusted Disability Pension from DVA excess income is obtained
by subtracting notional partner excess income from the actual partner
excess income.

The resulting amount is subtracted from the customer’s notional RA as a
final step in the DVA disability income rent test.

For information on how calculate the notional rent assistance rate for a
partner with excess income, see the Resources page.

Historical Note:

The DFISA-attracting payment Community Development Employment Project
Scheme Participation Supplement ceased on 30 June 2015. In respect of
Newstart system (NSS), a customer partnered with Parenting system (PGA)
customer, or both NSS customers, or partnered to an ABSTUDY customer,
excess wages were treated as ordinary income or employment income for
the partner, not as direct deductions.

Effect of DFISA when determining whether transitional rules apply

From 20 September 2009 changes to the pension income test were made as a
result of the Pension Reform. As part of this reform, transitional rules
were put in place to ensure no pension customer was worse off following
the introduction of the new income test.

To qualify for their payment to be calculated under the transitional
rules, a customer must have been on a relevant pension payment and been
payable as at 19 September 2009, and have had no break in entitlement.
They will continue to be paid under transitional rules until they are
entitled to an equal or higher rate under the new rules implemented on
20 September 2009. Once this occurs they move to the new income test
rules permanently.

The DFISA rate must be included when the comparison is conducted between
the rate payable under transitional rules and the rate payable under the
new rules (that is, the current income test), as DFISA is part of the
total income support payment received by the customer.

These rate comparisons will be made by the system. Where an automatic
calculation cannot occur a manual rate calculation will be completed by
a Service Officer within the DVA Clearance Team.

Payments that attract DFISA and were eligible for transitional rules are:

-   Age Pension
-   Bereavement Allowance
-   Carer Payment
-   Disability Support Pension (except for customers under 21 years who
    have no affecting income and/or no dependent children)
-   Widow B Pension (prior to 20 March 2020)
-   Wife Pension (prior to 20 March 2020)

The Resources page contains an example of how DFISA rates will display
for reporting customers, calculation of notional rent assistance using
the DVA disability income rent test, and calculation of DFISA
Bereavement Lump Sum.

Related links

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) benefits and services overview

Payments from the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) and referrals to
the DVA Clearance Team

Completing Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances and income
coding

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
