
Updating telephone details and/or paying Telephone Allowance (TAL) 108-08100010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to update a customer's Centrelink record when
there has been a change of telephone details. It also covers how to
update the customer's record to pay Telephone Allowance (TAL) including
the higher rate of TAL for eligible home internet subscribers.

On this Page:

Telephone and internet details

TAL is payable to each telephone/internet subscriber who is eligible.
Depending on the rate of TAL they receive, TAL recipients are required
to advise Services Australia if they have a phone connected in their
name, or if their phone number or internet subscriber details change.
Service Officers must also check when updating contact details if a
customer is a subscriber and indicate this on the customer's record.

Generally telephone details and internet details where applicable,
including a customer's status as subscriber, are recorded when
processing a new claim. If a customer is a subscriber and their
telephone and internet details are recorded correctly, TAL is
automatically payable to eligible customers from the next TAL payment
date after the date of notification of subscriber status.

If the customer advises, TAL may be coded as a future date. If a
customer is no longer a subscriber, TAL is not payable from the date of
change in status.

Telephone details for Norfolk Island customers

Norfolk Island has its own Island/Country Code which is +6723. All
Norfolk Island telephone numbers are a five digit number:

-   all landlines start with 2#### for example 21234
-   all mobile telephones start with 5#### for example 51234

Where international calling is enabled the full number to be dialled
will be 0011–6723-(plus the 5 digit landline or mobile) for example
0011–6723-21234.

Higher rate of TAL payable

A higher rate of TAL is payable to Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and
Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers, (under 21 with no dependent
children), who are current home internet subscribers. To qualify for the
higher rate, customers must be eligible for basic TAL and have a home
internet connection.

Note: members of a couple may be eligible for different rates of TAL.

Electronic messaging service

Messages are able to be sent automatically to the customer's mobile
phone via Electronic Messaging. Customers will be subscribed to this
service automatically when a new mobile phone number is recorded or an
existing mobile phone number is updated however they may withdraw from
the service at any time.

TAL is not payable to customers with SMS functionality alone as they
will not be regarded as eligible telephone subscribers.

Customers may view their contact details (including telephone numbers)
as recorded with Centrelink online. If they identify that information
recorded there is incorrect or needs amending, they can contact
Centrelink to have their details updated.

Customers should be advised that information used for their Centrelink,
Child Support and Medicare payments and services is not routinely
transferred within Services Australia. The customer may need to contact
Centrelink, Child Support or Medicare separately to update relevant
information.

Requirement to update details via self service

[] Customers should be strongly encouraged to complete the transaction
using self service (online, Express Plus Student App or phone self
service) if they can.

If a customer who is not excluded from using self service contacts about
a change in their contact details they should be strongly encouraged to
use self service to complete the update unless:

-   self service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by NNU,
    Newsflash and Bulletins), or
-   the Service Officer determines the customer is not capable of
    self-management in that instance

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Updating address, accommodation or contact details online

Using Centrelink self service

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Telephone Allowance (TAL)

How to pay Telephone Allowance (TAL) arrears

Payment of Telephone Allowance (TAL) to customers suspended or cancelled
due to employment income

Rates and thresholds

Payment destination

Pension Supplement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
