
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances 108-03050020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the clearance process between Services Australia
and the DVA for customers in receipt of benefits, pensions, allowances
or cards.

Clearance process

The clearance process refers to information and data exchanged between
Services Australia (Centrelink) and DVA. This ensures the customer and
other linked persons, such as their partner, dependant, or carer,
receive the correct benefit type and payment rate.

Clearance processes can occur via a data exchange or manually via email.
Manual intervention of automatic clearances may be required where data
cannot be loaded on a record and needs further verification and
assessment. Manual clearances are actioned by the DVA Clearance Team.

The Clearance process will ensure that:

-   DVA customer records are identified, linked or unlinked to
    corresponding Centrelink records
-   Mutually exclusive benefits are not paid by both Services Australia
    and DVA concurrently
-   Benefits are coded with correct start and end dates, and paid at the
    correct rate
-   Both Services Australia and DVA can recover overpayments for the
    other as part of the clearance process

A DVA Clearance refers to a DVA initiated data exchange, where DVA sends
information to Services Australia about a change to a DVA benefit.

A DVA Reverse Clearance refers to a Centrelink initiated data exchange,
where Services Australia send information to DVA about a change to a
Centrelink payment or benefit.

The clearance process is required when:

-   DVA customer receiving an income support payment is transferring to
    a Centrelink income support payment. Do not reject these claims
    without consulting with the DVA Clearance Team
-   Services Australia customer or their partner is granted a DVA income
    support payment, War Widow(er) Pension, DVA grant Compensation for
    Permanent Impairment, or to a Wholly Dependent Partner (WDP) or
    Eligible Young Person (EYP) under the Military Rehabilitation and
    Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA)
-   Services Australia customer or their partner is granted or has a
    change in rate of DVA Disability Compensation Payment
-   Services Australia customer is caring for a person who is receiving
    a DVA income support payment
-   Supplements become payable by either Services Australia or DVA
-   DVA grant a Prescribed Education Scheme payment to a child or young
    dependant of a Veteran
-   Customer submits a new claim to Services Australia and advises about
    a payment received from DVA
-   Dependent child of DVA recipients submits a new claim to Services
    Australia
-   Service Officer requests confirmation of DVA payments
-   Mutual Services Australia/DVA customer or their partner dies

DVA data exchange and clearances

Services Australia and DVA exchange information daily about changes that
affect customer's payments. Data may be placed on a customer's record
automatically.

Automatic exchange of data can flow only if identity matching has
occurred and a Centrelink Customer Reference Number (CRN) is linked to a
DVA Unique Identification Number (UIN). When matching fails, the DVA
Clearance Team conducts manual matching of Centrelink and DVA customer
records.

If the data on a customer record is incomplete and unable to assess the
benefit status of the customer, or the payment information from DVA is
not transmitted via the automated exchange, a manual clearance will be
completed.

Services Australia (Centrelink) and DVA have a bilateral agreement,
which outlines the relationship between the two agencies and the
expected standards of performance. Set guidelines and agreements between
Services Australia and DVA determine rules about clearances. Guidelines
determine:

-   delegation and authority to disclose information
-   obligations about what information can be requested and exchanged
    between the two agencies
-   specified forms to be used to disclose information and response
    times in the clearance process

Customer is granted a DVA Income Support Payment (ISP), War Widow(er)'s Pension or Social Security Age Pension (paid by DVA)

DVA will advise Centrelink of grants or changes to a:

-   DVA income support payment
-   War Widow(er)'s Pension, or
-   Social Security Age Pension paid by DVA

The Centrelink payment will be reassessed upon receipt of this advice. A
DVA benefit under the multiple entitlement exclusion rules, will cancel
a current Centrelink payment or benefit.

In the event that cancellation results in a debt, Centrelink transmits
debt amounts to DVA as part of an automated recovery process for
payments under the Veterans’ Entitlement Act (VEA) 1986. Once DVA has
recovered a Centrelink debt from a customer's DVA arrears, a
notification is sent to Centrelink with details of the amount recovered.
These repayment details are placed on the customer's debt record, and
finalised automatically. If DVA do not hold enough arrears to recover
the Centrelink debt, a residual debt amount will remain on the
customer's Centrelink record.

The Centrelink system may be unable to automatically calculate a debt
amount. This may be due to:

-   a limiting date
-   a cancelled payment record
-   manual rate case, or
-   where conflicting data exists

In these cases, a manual clearance will be required.

Residual debts from the grant of War Widow(er)'s Pension may be
recovered by negotiation with DVA by manual clearance, if the customer
is later granted Income Support Supplement (ISS).

Customer is granted Wholly Dependent Partner (WDP) payment under the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act (MRCA)

When DVA grant WDP payments under MRCA, a manual clearance process
occurs. DVA sends this information via email to the DVA Clearance Team
on an endorsed MRCA Clearance form.

These payments are assessed under multiple entitlement exclusion rules
and result in the cancellation of all Services Australia income support
payments for the lifetime of the recipient.

WDP payments are granted as an ongoing weekly entitlement (paid
fortnightly) but may be commuted by the customer to a lump sum
entitlement (either partially or fully) at any time within 2 years of
the payment being granted.

Family assistance recipients must include WDP ongoing payments and/or
any lump sum as income for calculating adjusted taxable income (ATI) for
family assistance payments when the ongoing entitlement is granted, and
again if this is commuted to a lump sum entitlement. See Tax Free
Pensions or further information.

Customer is granted DVA Disability Compensation Payment

From 1 January 2022, all DVA Disability Compensation Payment types are
exempt income for social security income support payments. A Disability
Compensation Payment may be reduced by a 'limiting amount', for lump sum
compensation previously received. In this case only, the actual (net)
amount of the Disability Compensation Payment received is treated as
income.

A Services Australia veteran of age pension age who is paid a DVA
Disability Compensation Payment under the VEA, but is not eligible for a
DVA Service Pension, can elect to receive the Social Security Age
Pension under the SSA paid by DVA.

DVA will automatically transmit details of grants and variations of
Disability Compensation Payments, plus indexed rates twice a year in
March and September. MRCA Permanent Impairment and SRDP payments are
advised via manual clearances as explained below.

Customer is granted Compensation for Permanent Impairment under the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act (MRCA)

When DVA grant Permanent Impairment compensation payments under MRCA or
the Safety Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence Related Claims) Act
(DRCA), a manual clearance process occurs. DVA sends this information on
a prescribed MRCA Clearance form that includes the following
information:

-   payment type
-   Act reference
-   amount paid
-   date paid, and
-   indexed rate amounts

Permanent Impairment periodic payments and Special Rate Disability
Pension paid under MRCA are treated as exempt income for social security
income support payments from 1 January 2022.

Lump sum payments will be treated as exempt income when received, but
will be deemed assessable assets when invested. If any money received is
invested, income derived from financial investments will have deeming
provisions applied.

Family Assistance recipients must include these payments (tax-free
pensions) as income for assessing adjusted taxable income (ATI) for
Family Assistance Payments.

Compensation paid for incapacity (loss of earnings and loss of income)
under the MRCA and DRCA Acts, is treated as normal compensation under
the SSA See Role of staff outside Compensation Teams.

DVA payments affecting Family Tax Benefits (FTB) Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A is not income tested for customers
and/or partners receiving the following income support payments from
DVA:

-   DVA Service Pension
-   Social Security Age Pension paid by DVA
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)
-   Veteran Payment

The maximum rate of FTB Part A will be paid. These payments must be
included in the family income estimate for FTB Part B and Child Care
Subsidy (CCS).

Incorrect coding of DVA payments may result in Family Tax Benefit Part A
(FTB A) recipients being incorrectly exempted from the income test.

Service Officers processing FTB claims or reconciling family assistance
payments should not attempt coding of DVA payments on DVAS screen.
Consultation with the DVA Clearance Team must occur.

A DVA clearance is required when a DVA payment is indicated on a new FTB
claim.

Customers receiving FTB and CCS must also include the following DVA
payments when advising estimated Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for
family assistance payments:

-   MRCA Compensation payments (tax-free pensions or lump sums),
    including Wholly Dependent Partner
-   Defence Force Income Support (DFISA), for periods before 1 January
    2022
-   Invalidity and Service Pensions paid to those who have not reached
    Age Pension age (not taxable)
-   Adjusted Disability Pensions

For further information on family assistance payments, see Taxable
income and Tax Free Pensions.

Double Orphans

Where a customer receives Double Orphan Pension (DOP) and has claimed or
is receiving a Double Orphan War Pension from DVA, entitlement to DOP
ceases. An overpayment of DOP can occur for any overlapping periods.

A customer may be granted a pension by DVA which is back dated. In these
cases, the social security payment paid during the period of DVA
payability is recoverable under the Veterans Entitlement Act.

Customer is granted a prescribed Education Scheme payment

Manual clearance processes are in place for DVA grants of Veterans'
Children Education Scheme (VCES) and Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme (MRCAETS) payments. These
are considered prescribed education scheme payments.

When a student receives VCES or MRCAETS, payment of any other Australian
Government income support or educational assistance is precluded under
DVA legislation. Legislation administered by DSS differs, as it only
precludes VCES and MRCAETS recipients from receiving Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and ABSTUDY. This allows VCES and MRCAETS to be treated as
income for the following social security income support payments:

-   Disability Support Pension
-   Carer Payment
-   Parenting Payment

Customers cannot receive education payments from both Centrelink and DVA
due to DVA's multiple entitlement exclusion rules.

VCES payment will also prevent a customer from receiving Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) for a child 16 years and over. The parent will need to
consider the benefit of transferring an FTB child to DVA VCES. Rent
Assistance paid with FTB will be lost, if the child is transferred to
DVA VCES and parent is not in receipt of FTB for another child.

A clearance form is used to negotiate transfer of payment from
Centrelink to DVA.

Parental Income Test (PIT) exemption for ABSTUDY, Youth Allowance (YA) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Dependent customers who are subject to the Parental Means Test and the
personal income test will have their rate of payment determined by the
test that results in the greatest reduction of their payment.

The following DVA payments listed in Module L of Section 1067G of the
Social Security Act 1991 will attract a PIT exemption:

-   Service Pension
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)
-   Veteran Payment
-   Social Security Age Pension paid by DVA
-   War Widow(er)s Pension
-   Wholly Dependent Partner payment

Supplements granted by DVA or Centrelink

A number of supplements are available from DVA, which are mutually
exclusive with those available from Centrelink. An automated clearance
process between the agencies controls the payment of supplements. Data
is exchanged in real time when customers move between different payment
types and cards. A comparative list of DVA Supplements is available from
Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs.

A payment hierarchy is in place, which determines customers' eligibility
to a supplement. Where any supplement is lower in the hierarchy, it will
be either suppressed or cancelled.

Supplement Hierarchy (from highest to lowest)

Pension Supplement (DVA)

Pension Supplement (Centrelink)

Energy Supplement (DVA)

Energy Supplement (Centrelink)

Gold Card Energy Supplement (DVA)

Veteran Supplement (DVA), and

Telephone allowance/ Pharmaceutical allowance (Centrelink)

DVA income support customer claiming a pension or benefit administered by Centrelink – Reverse Clearance

When a DVA income support customer claims a Centrelink pension or
benefit, automatic identity matching and data exchange processes occur
between Centrelink and DVA. This will confirm whether the customer is
receiving income support from DVA. If there is a match, the system will
prevent the claim from being finalised. A manual DVA Reverse Clearance
must be obtained.

DVA will be contacted to arrange a cut-off date for the DVA payment to
reduce unnecessary debts, calculate any DVA overpayment amount if
necessary, and cease any DVA mutually exclusive payments coded on the
record. If DVA have overpaid the customer, a debt will be raised on
behalf of DVA. The debt will be linked to the claim and recovered from
the customer's Centrelink arrears if applicable.

The Service Officer processing the claim must follow this procedure and
any other instructions given by the DVA Clearance Team, to avoid
incorrect claim rejection and ensure the correct outcome of the claim.

DVA Veteran Payment (VP) recipient claiming a benefit administered by Centrelink

VP provides interim financial support to a veteran who lodges a claim
with DVA for a mental health condition. This may be under the Military
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA), or the Safety,
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act (Defence-related Claims) Act 1988
(DRCA). Partners are also eligible to claim Veteran Payment at the same
time as the veteran.

VP prevents payment of a Centrelink benefit under the multiple
entitlement exclusion rules.

A customer currently receiving VP that was unsuccessful in their claim
for compensation for a mental health condition from DVA, may claim
payments with Centrelink. VP recipients can continue to receive payments
for 6 weeks from the receipt of their rejection letter. They are invited
to claim payment from Centrelink during this time.

Centrelink customers currently receiving Disability Support Pension
(DSP) may claim VP from DVA. These customers should be advised to
consider the risk of being reassessed as 'not qualified' for DSP when
reclaiming from Centrelink in the event the compensation claim with DVA
is unsuccessful.

A Centrelink claim for income support should not be rejected for the
reason DVA without consulting with the DVA Clearance Team. The customer
may be considered a vulnerable customer.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

New claims for Commonwealth Senior Health Card (CSHC) will be rejected
if any of the following payments are received from DVA:

-   Social Security Age Pension paid by DVA
-   Service Pension
-   Veteran Payment
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)
-   CSHC from DVA

A DVA Reverse Clearance is required for new CSHC claims when DVA
payments and supplements are identified.

The Process page contains information on requesting a DVA Reverse
Clearance for CSHC.

Confirmation of a customer's DVA payments and requesting a DVA Reverse Clearance

A DVA Clearance is required for a new claim assessment. Confirmation may
also be necessary at other times when a DVA payment is indicated, such
as a customer notifying a payment received from DVA.

The DVA Clearance Team can be contacted for confirmation and coding of
DVA payments. See Process for information on how to request assistance.

For a detailed explanation of DVA payments, see the Resources page of
Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Grandfathered account based income stream advised by DVA

A DVA customer transferring from DVA to Centrelink - or their partner -
who holds an account-based income stream that commenced prior to 1
January 2015, may be eligible for grandfathering status.

See Adding or updating an account-based income stream for grandfathering
provisions and coding instructions.

The DVA Clearance Team can verify continuation of income support
payments by checking the customer's DVA record.

Grandfathered energy supplement advised by DVA

A DVA customer who was in receipt of a qualifying income support payment
(ISP) on 19 September 2016, and applies for the Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC) from Centrelink within 42 days of the ISP
cancellation, may be eligible for grandfathering status.

See Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders for
grandfathering provisions and coding instructions.

The DVA Clearance Team can verify continuation of income support
payments by checking the customer's DVA record.

Manual calculations of DVA Clearance debts, Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP), DFISA LBP and Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Centrelink overpayment amounts are calculated manually where the system
is unable to calculate the clearance debt amount due to system
limitations. This work is completed by staff in the DVA Clearance Team.

This includes:

-   limiting dates
-   cancelled payment records
-   manual rate cases, or
-   where conflicting data exists
-   DVA will recover the Centrelink debt from DVA held arrears and
    return the details of the recovery back to Centrelink

When DVA notify the death of a customer and the surviving partner is a
Centrelink customer, Centrelink is responsible for assessing and paying
LBP.

DVA may be responsible for calculating and paying the LBP if the
surviving partner is a DVA only customer.

Lump Sum Bereavement Payments (LBP) are manually calculated, where the
system is unable to calculate the amount.

Before 1 January 2022, for partnered Centrelink customers who also
received DFISA payments, DFISA LBP may be payable. In these cases, a
manual follow up will be created automatically, when the death action is
undertaken on the primary payment.

The amount of DFISA LBP will be calculated and a manual payment advice
sent to DVA. DVA administer the payment of DFISA and DFISA LBP.

For examples of DFISA calculations, see the Resources page of
Calculation of Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA).

The Resources page contains contact details for the DVA Clearance Team
(SCS), a link to the Protected Information Disclosure authorisations
page on the intranet, DVA Clearance forms, and a table that shows the
agreed response times in the clearance process.

Related links

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Locating debts in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment overview

Calculation of Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
