-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assets owned by a customer that
are treated as assessable assets and included when calculating the rate
of payment unless specifically exempted under a provision of the Act.

Applying appropriate assets test

When calculating a customer's entitlement to a payment under the Social
Security Act 1991, qualification, eligibility and payability is tested
under various rules. This is done to ensure that financial assistance is
directed to those members of the community most in need.

The Assets Test is based on the principle that customers with
substantial assets, apart from their principal home, should use these
assets to produce income for their own support.

On 1 July each year, assets thresholds are indexed to the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) along with deeming thresholds and Income Test free areas.

The type of payment a customer is applying for or receiving determines
which Assets Test to apply. A customer can also apply under hardship
provisions if necessary.

For Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers aged under 21, the
allowable assets thresholds for full pension are the same, but the cut
off limits for part pension will be lower due to the lower maximum rate
of payment.

Assessable and exempt assets

Section 11 of the Social Security Act 1991 defines an asset as
'property'. Property is not defined in the Act, but has an established
common law meaning - any possession, belongings or property owned solely
or partly, including beneficial interests, and/or debts owed to a
person. Some assets are exempt under the Social Security Act 1991,
section 1118.

Market value

Assets are assessed at their net market value. Net market value is not
the replacement value or the amount it is insured for - it is the amount
likely to be received by selling the asset. The market value of an asset
can be reduced if there is an encumbrance or unsecured loan against it.

If the asset is owned with another person, the asset value for a
customer is determined using their proportion of their interest in the
asset.

Property settlements

Property settlement pending: The percentage of ownership the person has
before they are separated remains after the separation until any
property settlement is finalised. If the customer asserts a beneficial
or trust ownership different to the legal ownership of an asset, the
trust and companies provisions are applied to determine existence of a
trust and attribution of income and assets.

If proceeds from the sale of the customer’s principal home (exempt
asset) are in a solicitor’s trust account pending the resolution of a
property settlement, see Selling a home.

Example: A couple sell their principal home on 1 February 2023 and
separate. The division of property through the court occurs on 1
November 2024:

if applicable the home sale proceeds exemption provisions apply from the
date of sale for 24 months (or up to 36 months) as the date of sale was
after 1 January 2023. See Note below

as the funds were inaccessible due to legal proceedings, the exemption
starts from when the funds become available for the balance of the 24
month exemption period

each member of the couple have 3 months (of the 24) left of their home
sales proceeds exemption. However if they meet the requirements:

-   they can apply for an extension of up to 36 months from the date of
    sale for the home sales proceeds exemption, and
-   they could have up to 15 months in total

Deeming only applies once the division of property is known, so in the
above example, the sales proceeds would be deemed from 1 November 2024.
For sales finalised on/after 1 January 2023, only the lower deeming rate
applies to the portion of the sale proceeds the customer intends to
spend on their new home.

For sales finalised before 1 January 2023, the sale of home provisions
apply for 12 months from the date of sale, with a possible extension of
up to an additional 12 months (for a total maximum of up to 24 months)
in certain circumstances.

Note: In all cases, consider if the property sold is the customer’s
principal home. If the customer(s) have vacated the property and
established a new principal home, the sale of home provisions do not
apply.

If the customer has advised they have separated and their former partner
still resides in the principal home, the percentage of the property the
customers owns becomes an assessable asset. (For example, if they were
joint owners they would be considered to be 50% owners of the net asset
value calculated by assessing the market value reduced by any loans or
liabilities secured against the property). If the customer is affected
by the assets test, the property may be disregarded under the assets
test hardship provisions if the asset cannot be sold (unrealisable
asset).

When a jointly owned assessable asset (e.g. rental property) is sold and
the funds are held in a solicitor’s trust account pending a property
settlement between a separated couple:

-   the percentage of ownership the person has before they are separated
    remains until any property settlement is finalised
-   the proceeds held in the solicitor’s trust account are deemed

Property settlement finalised:

-   The outstanding balance of a property settlement is an asset
-   If the court order allows for income to be paid on the outstanding
    balance, it is assessed as income
-   Financial assets are deemed
-   The trust and company rules apply to any trust created or declared
    by a court, tribunal or arbitrator as a result of a property
    settlement, or created as a result of a property settlement

Deprivation: When a person gives away assets as a result of a court
order or property settlement following a relationship breakdown, it is
not regarded as deprivation for Social Security purposes. Satisfying the
demands of a court order or property settlement is considered adequate
consideration for the asset.

Loans

An amount lent by a customer is an assessable asset and is assessed as a
financial investment subject to the deeming provisions. A customer may
apply through the Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer to the
Minister for Social Services to exempt investments and loans from the
deeming provisions.

Assessment of stolen assets

If a customer’s assets are stolen, including in cases of elder abuse,
refer the case to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for advice. Document the
customer’s record with the details of the situation and the date
referred.

Note: before referring, ensure the customer has provided any available
evidence to verify that theft has occurred. Suitable evidence could be a
police report or similar document verifying the circumstances.

Real estate, businesses, trusts and companies

To work out the total net value of a customer's assets, the primary
production aggregation rules are applied.

Real estate, businesses, trusts and companies are assessed as primary
production assets or a non-primary production asset so that negative net
primary production assets can be offset against other primary production
assets.

The Resources page contains a link to CPI information. It also contains
a link to assets information on the Services Australia website.

Contents

Assessing and coding real estate details

Assessing the Income and Assets (SA369)

Assessing a failed loan

Loans and liabilities against assets

Interest in an estate

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

Related links

Rates and thresholds

Exempt Assets

Pensions income and assets tests

Allowance income and assets tests

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assets and liabilities of a business

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
