
Treatment of compensation payments 108-03190000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the treatment of compensation payments. Most
Services Australia administered income support payments are compensation
affected payments (CAPs). This means that most compensation payments are
not treated as employment income or other ordinary income when
calculating a rate of payment, but are instead subject to the
compensation provisions set out in Part 3.14 of the Social Security Act
1991.

Compensation provisions

In general terms, the compensation provisions have the following effect:

-   A person who is able to claim compensation, but who does not do so,
    cannot be paid
-   Lump sum compensation amounts may preclude payment for a period
    determined by the size of the lump sum. This is referred to as the
    compensation lump sum preclusion period. Lump sum compensation
    payments are considered an asset
-   Periodic compensation payments are deducted from the CAP as either a
    direct deduction (i.e. dollar for dollar) or as other ordinary
    income
-   Compensation payments that are subject to preclusion or direct
    deduction assessments are not counted as employment income or other
    ordinary income. Compensation payments that are not subject to these
    arrangements are treated as other ordinary income

Different rules apply to ABSTUDY for the treatment of compensation
payments.

Income from compensation is never treated as employment income. When
income from compensation is treated as other ordinary income, it is used
in calculating the accrual of Working Credits. The customer is unable to
deplete their Working Credit balance to offset compensation income.

Different rules apply to Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS)
payments for the treatment of compensation payments.

All SRSS cases should be referred to the SRSS Helpdesk, who will then
liaise with the Department of Home Affairs policy area to determine how
a customer's SRSS payment will be affected. As the SRSS payment is an
administrative payment and not paid under Social Security Law, normal
processes around compensation do not apply to SRSS customers.

DRCA and MRCA payments

People receiving Safety, rehabilitation and Compensation
(Defence-Related Claims) Act 1988 (DRCA) or Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA) payments may be eligible to receive income
support payments under the Social Security Act. Payments under DRCA or
MRCA that contain an economic loss component (including incapacity
payments but not Special Rate Disability Pension (SRDP)) are
compensation as defined under the Social Security Act, section 17.

MRCA compensation for Wholly Dependent Partners (WDP), eligible young
persons and dependants, which is paid as a lump sum, are not assessed as
income for social security income tests purposes.

The Resources page contains contact details for the SRSS helpdesk and
links to the Social Work Services Branch and the Multicultural and
Tailored Services Branch intranet page.

Contents

The effect of compensation on Social Security payments

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

Treating periodic compensation payments as a direct deduction or income

Related links

What is Compensation

Compensation procedures

Compensation Preclusion Period

Compensation affected payments (CAP)

Reviews and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
