
Transition to Independent Living Allowance (TILA) 108-08070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and process Transitions to
Independent Living Allowance (TILA) claims. TILA is a payment to assist
eligible young people leaving formal care. From 1 January 2014 Services
Australia is responsible for delivering TILA payments of up to a maximum
of $1,500 per claimant on behalf of the Australian Government Department
of Social Services (DSS).

On this Page:

Role of Services Australia

The agency is required to:

-   accept claims
-   make TILA payments to the relevant State, Territory or
    non-government agency to a maximum of $1,500 per eligible young
    person

If a young person contacts regarding a TILA claim advise them to contact
their case worker in the State or Territory department or non-government
agency that manages their leaving care plan.

If a case worker contacts Services Australia about TILA eligibility,
Unified Government Gateway (UGG) registration or policy needs, advise
them to contact DSS using contact details in the TILA Operational
Guidelines which are provided by DSS to all organisations that
administer TILA.

Note: TILA applications no longer need prior approval from DSS before
making an application to the UGG.

Eligibility

Eligible young people will be identified by staff in the State or
Territory agencies responsible for state-based care, or in
non-government organisations who administer TILA on behalf of those
agencies. Case workers in these agencies will be responsible for
assessing eligibility and approving payment of TILA. Services Australia
has no role in determining who is eligible to receive the allowance and
the claimant does not have to be a customer of the agency in order to
qualify for TILA.

The young person must be in the TILA eligible age range on the day the
claim is submitted by the case worker via the UGG.

Claims

TILA claims can only be submitted to Services Australia by case workers
from the State or Territory departments or non-government agencies that
administer TILA on behalf of those agencies. Young people cannot apply
directly to the agency for TILA.

TILA claims must be submitted through the UGG and both the case worker
and their organisation must be registered to use the UGG.

When the claim is submitted the UGG will attempt to identify an existing
record for the young person in Services Australia's Centrelink database.
If a clear match is found the claim is processed automatically. Note: if
a claimant is matched to a sensitive record the details will not be
displayed to the caseworker, however the TILA claim will be
automatically processed.

If there is no clear match the submitted claim will require manual
processing by the agency.

The maximum TILA entitlement of $1,500 may be issued in one or more
separate payments (no more than 6) during the period when the young
person is in the TILA eligible age range. A separate claim will be
required each time.

No identity confirmation documents are required for TILA.

Claims received by Services Australia for manual processing are
considered to have been approved by the referring case worker/agency.

Claimants do not have to be an existing customer, nor do they require a
current Services Australia record in order to submit a claim.

Manual processing of TILA claims

Manual processing of TILA claims can only be completed by delegated
staff in a specialised TILA processing team. These staff must ensure
that the claimant:

-   is in the TILA eligible age range for TILA and
-   has not already received the maximum TILA entitlement

Claims will be rejected and are not able to be appealed if these
criteria are not met.

Where the amount approved to be paid by the referring case worker/agency
would cause the total TILA payments made to the claimant to exceed the
maximum entitlement of $1500 (within the ten year period), only the
difference between the maximum and the total payments previously issued
in respect of the claimant will be paid.

Note: the payment destination for TILA will always be the bank account
of the organisation that submitted the TILA claim; however the payment
will appear on the Payment Summary (PS) screen of the young person's
Centrelink record. Only staff with designated TILA access in SAMS will
be able to view or update the payment destination. The bank account
details of the organisation will not be displayed to the young person in
their online account.

Rate of payment

The minimum TILA payment for a claim is $250 and the maximum $1,500,
except where the available balance is less than $250.

TILA payments are:

-   non-taxable
-   not compensation affected
-   not subject to Income Management, and
-   not to be used for Centrepay or other deductions

The Resources page contains a list of the questions about the young
person that appear in the Transition to Independent Living Allowance
(TILA) claim via the Unified Government Gateway (UGG) and a link to the
Services Australia website.

Contents

Manual processing of Transition to Independent Living Allowance (TILA)
claims

Related links

Unified Government Gateway (UGG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
