-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details to determine the appropriate tax year for
the non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test and apply
the components of the CRIA test.

Income and asset limits for a non-customer care receiver

A non-customer care receiver is subject to income and asset limits in
order for their carer to qualify for Carer Payment (CP).

A non-customer care receivers income threshold and asset limits are
determined under the Social Security Act (SSA) 1991.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

The Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test does not apply to CP
(XWP). For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to
Carer Payment (CP).

Appropriate tax year for the care receiver income test

For the calendar year in which CP is to be paid, the base tax year is
used for the care receiver income test. The base tax year is the tax
year that ended on 30 June in the previous calendar year.

Base tax year income too high

A care receiver with taxable income over the care receiver's income
threshold in the base tax year can pass the care receiver income test
if:

-   their written estimate of their taxable income for the current
    financial year is reasonable, and
-   is below the care receiver income threshold

In these cases, the:

-   appropriate tax year is the current financial year, rather than the
    base tax year
-   estimate for the current financial year should be recorded

For the care receiver income thresholds see the Carer Payment (CP) -
Care Receiver Income and Asset Limits link on the Rates and Thresholds
page.

Assets over the care receiver's assets value limit

The appropriate tax year for the care receiver income test is generally
the current financial year if the assets are above the care receiver
assets test limit. This is because a care receiver may be exempted from
the assets test depending on their:

-   assets value
-   liquid assets, and
-   estimated current financial year taxable income

For these cases the appropriate tax year is usually the current
financial year, rather than the base tax year. For care receiver income
thresholds and assets limits see the Carer Payment (CP) - Care Receiver
Income and Assets Limits link on the Rates and Thresholds page.

Income limits for a non-customer care receiver

The income assessed for a non-customer care receiver is based on their
personal circumstances (for example, single or partnered, living with a
parent/guardian, etc.), and their income in the appropriate tax year as
set out in the SSA. It does not include any non-taxable income.

Note: Paid Parental Leave (PPL) is not exempt income for the CRIA test,
as it is taxable income.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds, whether received
periodically or as a lump sum (including interest accrued), which are
deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of managing the
customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from the income and assets tests and
deeming. They do not need to be reported but if they are should not be
considered in the income and asset assessment.

Once income qualification is established, the non-customer care receiver
assets test is applied.

There are different types of Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
payments and different processes to follow when customers advise they
receive DVA income.

For care receivers income thresholds and asset limits see the Carer
Payment (CP) - Care Receiver Income and Asset Limits link on the Rates
and Thresholds page.

Adult care receivers

If the adult care receiver is receiving a social security pension or
benefit, or income tested payment from DVA, they are exempt from the
CRIA test. However, DVA Disability Pension and War Widow(er)'s Pension
(WWP) are non-income tested. Care receivers receiving either of these
payments should be tested under the non-customer CRIA test. If a care
receiver is receiving WWP or WID in addition to a DVA Income Support
Supplement (ISS), they are not subject to the non-customer CRIA test.

An adult care receiver can qualify their carer for CP, if the only
reason they are not being paid a social security pension, or income
tested payment from DVA is because they have not been an Australian
resident for a long enough period. This means they have met all other
requirements such as incapacity for Disability Support Pension (DSP) and
passed the income and assets tests applicable to each type of payment.

Note:

-   ABSTUDY is not defined as a social security pension or benefit,
    therefore a care receiver receiving ABSTUDY does not exempt the
    carer from the non-customer CRIA test
-   Only social security pension and income tested payments from DVA can
    qualify under the residence criteria. This means a qualification for
    JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) or Special Benefit
    (SpB) will not meet the requirements of the Social Security Act,
    section 198(7) of the legislation

Child care receivers

For a carer to be paid CP for a child under 16, the income and assets of
the child being cared for (and if the child lives with their
parent/legal guardian, the income and assets of the parents and their
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children) must not exceed the CRIA test limits.
There is no exemption from the CRIA test for a child care receiver.

Assets test

The non-customer care receiver assets test includes assets within and
outside Australia and the value of the asset is the net market value.
Assets exempt under the Social Security Act are not included in the CRIA
assets test.

Assets test exemption

If a non-customer care receiver's assets are over the minimum care
receiver assets test limit, they may be exempt from the test depending
on the value of their assets, liquid assets and the income amount that
will be used in calculating the income limit.

Liquid assets limits are $6,000 for single people and $10,000 combined
for partnered people. For care receiver assets test limits see the Carer
Payment (CP) - Care Receiver Income and Asset Limits link on the Rates
and Thresholds page.

A decision may be made to exempt a non-customer care receiver from the
non-customer care receiver assets test where all the following
conditions are met:

-   a request has been made by the carer (for an adult care receiver) or
    the carer/parent (for a child care receiver or 2 or more child care
    receivers)
-   the request is that the assets test not be applied
-   the request provides a written estimate of the appropriate taxable
    incomes for the current tax year
-   the estimate is accepted as being reasonable

The effect of these exemption provisions is that some people with assets
above the care receiver assets test threshold will be considered to meet
the assets test if their liquid assets and current income are below the
exemption thresholds.

They still need to meet the care receivers' income threshold. The
Process page identifies the persons whose assets and income are to be
included in the relevant tests. For care receiver income thresholds and
asset limits see the Carer Payment (CP) - Care Receiver Income and Asset
Limits link on the Rates and Thresholds page.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds, which are deposited
into an account used to manage the customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from
the income and assets tests and deeming. This includes funds received
periodically or as a lump sum, including interest accrued. These funds
are not required to be reported or if reported should not be taken into
account in the income and assets assessment.

Assets that are obtained to assist the care receiver in respect of their
disability (for example, motorised scooters) are exempt from the assets
test. Where there have been modifications made to a car, the value of
the modifications are exempt however, the value of the car that does not
relate to the modifications is assessable. Service Officers need to
verify the value of the modifications and subtract this amount from the
final value of the motor vehicle. However, if the car is exclusively
designed for use by a disabled person, for example special wheelchair
access, special driving controls, other design features, then the whole
value of the car would be exempted.

Where a customer, their partner or dependent child is disabled and there
is an increase in the value of assets as a result of purchase or
modifications (that is, to a car or home) to accommodate disabilities,
these assets are disregarded when assessing the total value of the
asset.

The procedures, Exempt income and Exempt Assets, provide information
about assessing income and assets that is exempt from the Income and
Assets Tests.

Assets above assets value limit for care receivers

A family with assets above the assets value limit for non-customer care
receivers can only be considered to meet the assets test if:

their assets are in the Medium Range and:

-   their income is under the care receiver income test, or

their assets are in the High Range and:

-   their liquid assets are below the liquid asset limit and
-   their current taxable income is below the special income test
    required for assets test exemption

Overpayments

An overpayment of CP can occur when the actual taxable income of the
care receiver (and any other person included in the care receiver income
test) is more than the income limit. See the Resources page in Care
Receiver Income and Assets.

The Resources page contains:

tables with information about the rules for non-customer care receiver
assets and income tests

a link to relevant forms:

-   'A guide to Australian Government payments', and
-   the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Reference Guide 'An
    Overview of DVA Payments and Services'

Related links

Rates and thresholds

Payments from the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) and referrals to
the DVA Clearance Team

Coding the Care Receiver Income and Assets Details (CRIA) screen

Coding a paper claim for Carer Payment (CP) where the care receiver is
16 years of age or over

Pensions income and assets tests

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
