
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment overview 108-03050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the different types of payments that customers
receive from the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA), and the effect
on eligibility for payments administered by Services Australia.

On this page:

Payability

Payability of a benefit, pension, supplement or card can be affected by
multiple entitlement exclusion provisions. Customers may not be able to
receive a payment from both Services Australia and DVA.

Some payments made by DVA are treated as income for social security
purposes, while some DVA payments are exempt from the income test. These
payments may include add on payments similar to Services Australia
payments and those made to veterans for their disabilities.

A number of supplements are available from DVA that are equivalent to
those available from Services Australia. They should not be paid
concurrently. See Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances for
information on the payment hierarchy for supplements.

Education payments

DVA administers the Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES) and
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training
Scheme (MRCAETS). They are listed as prescribed educational scheme
payments.

When a student receives VCES or MRCAETS, payment of any other
Commonwealth income support or educational assistance is precluded under
DVA legislation.

Legislation administered by Services Australia differs, as it only
precludes VCES and MRCAETS customers from receiving Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and ABSTUDY. This allows VCES and MRCAETS to be treated as
income for some social security income support payments, including
Disability Support Pension, Carer Payment and Parenting Payment. These
customers are ineligible to receive payments from both DVA and the
agency due to multiple entitlement exclusion rules in the DVA
legislation.

When receiving a VCES or MRCAETS payment, Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is
payable when a child is aged under 16.

For children aged 16 or over, FTB is not payable if the child receives
VCES or MRCAETS, however in some circumstances it may be more beneficial
for the person caring for the child to claim FTB payments.

Payments treated as compensation

Incapacity payments made under the Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA) and the Safety, Rehabilitation and
Compensation (Defence Related Claim) Act 1988 (DRCA) are treated as
compensation for social security purposes.

Wholly Dependent Partner payment

Wholly Dependent Partner (WDP) payment, paid under the Military
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA), may be paid to
widow/ers (married/de facto/in a recognised relationship) of veterans,
where the widow/er was wholly dependent on the veteran immediately
before the veteran's death, and liability has been accepted for the
death as service related.

WDP is a tax free payment that can be paid as either:

-   lifetime fortnightly payments equal to the War Widow(er)s pension
    provided under the Veterans Entitlement Act 1986 (VEA)
-   an actuarial lifetime equivalent paid as a lump sum, or
-   a combination of fortnightly and partial lump sum payments

WDP is granted with a date of effect from the date of the veteran’s
death. Due to the complex nature of the claim circumstances, (e.g. it
may take considerable time to establish that cause of death was service
related), claims may be subject to lengthy backdating, generating large
arrears.

WDP recipients are not eligible for a social security income support
payment due to multiple entitlement exclusion rules. In the case of WDP
the exclusion begins from when the customer starts receiving WDP and is
for the lifetime of the claimant. They may be entitled to an Income
Support Supplement from DVA instead.

Customers should ensure their family assistance payment/s income
estimate is updated with the total amount of ongoing WDP payments,
including any WDP arrears, expected to be received during the current
financial year. If a customer opts to receive WDP via a lump sum (either
in full or partially) this amount will need to be included in their
family assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave scheme income estimate for
the financial year they receive the lump sum. WDP is also assessable
income for family assistance, Paid Parental Leave scheme payment and
Parental Income Test purposes.

A customer who is claiming, or already in receipt of, WDP may contact
Services Australia to discuss impacts to their Services Australia
entitlements. The customer may also contact Services Australia to speak
to a Financial Information Service Officer (FIS) about financial
information relevant to their entitlements.

WDP customers are also entitled to receive the following from DVA:

-   Gold card
-   Veteran Supplement, subject to VEA rules
-   Income Support Supplement, subject to VEA rules
-   benefits for dependent children

Social security Age Pension (paid by DVA)

Veterans in receipt of a Disability Pension from DVA, who are also
eligible to receive a social security Age Pension, (and their partners
who are eligible for Age Pension) have the choice of receiving their Age
Pension from either DVA or Services Australia. DVA acts as an agent for
the Department of Social Services and any social security Age Pension
paid by DVA is assessed under the provisions of social security law.

Notification of income from DVA

Notification of income from DVA is usually received either from DVA or
the customer.

-   DVA notifies Services Australia of grants or changes in DVA payments
    through the DVA clearance process
-   If a customer advises in a new claim, they are in receipt of DVA
    income, they need to provide a statement from DVA listing the
    payment types and amounts they receive
-   During new claim processing verification of DVA income must also be
    obtained by contacting the DVA Clearance Team (SCS)
-   If the customer contacts for any reason other than for a new claim,
    see Process for information on how to refer notification of DVA
    income received to the Clearance Team

Resources contains contact details for Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA) - Centrelink DVA Clearance Team (SCS).

Contents

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances

Calculating frozen rate pensions for Department of Veterans' Affairs War
Widow(er) pensioners

Related links

Exempt lump sums

Exempt income

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
