
Selling a home 108-04070050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process if a customer sells their principal
home. The proceeds can be exempt from the assets test if conditions are
met.

Principal home sale proceeds

When a customer sells their principal home, the portion of the proceeds
which the customer intends to use to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or
renovate a new principal home are an exempt asset for up to 12 months
from the date of sale. Most of the time, this date will be the property
settlement date.

If the proceeds are held as financial investments, they are an exempt
asset, but still subject to the deemed income provisions from the date
they are legally entitled to receive the funds (this is not always the
settlement date).

The customer may use the proceeds to purchase investments, such as
income streams or loaned to other parties. The customer must state they
will partially or fully commute the income stream, recover the loan,
etc., within the exemption period and use the full proceeds to purchase
another principal home.

A customer is considered a homeowner during the exemption period.

Sale proceeds invested in an income stream

The customer can invest proceeds of the sale of the principal home in an
account-based income stream. The income stream will be subject to the
deemed income provisions, if the purchase date is on or after 1 January
2015. The asset exemption is still applicable. The customer must commute
part or all of the income stream and use the money to purchase another
principal home prior to the expiration of the exemption period.

Note: specific coding is required to correctly apply the asset test
exemption to the account-based income stream, see the Process page for
full details.

Extension of exemption

The asset test exemption may be extended for up to an additional 12
months if the customer has a continuing intention to apply the proceeds
of the sale to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or renovate a new
principal home and have:

-   made reasonable attempts to obtain a new principal home, and
-   been making those attempts within a reasonable period (i.e., 6
    months) after selling the principal home, and
-   experienced delays beyond their control in obtaining a new principal
    home

All of the above criteria must be met for the customer to gain an
extended principal home sale proceeds exemption for up to 24 months. The
customer will need to provide evidence to satisfy some of these
criteria.

Where the asset value is exempt for the 12-24 month period, it is still
subject to deeming provisions during the asset exemption period.

A customer meeting the extended exemption conditions is considered a
homeowner during the extended exemption period.

Home not sold but deposit received

The home is considered sold once a legally binding and unconditional
agreement for the sale of the property has been entered into, or all
conditions are met if the agreement is subject to preconditions. This
can be before the actual settlement date.

If the customer receives a deposit amount before the home is considered
sold, the deposit amount received is not exempt. If it is deposited in a
financial institution as a new investment, code this. If it is deposited
in an existing investment, update the balance of the existing
investment. Once the sale is completed, this deposit amount may be
exempted if it meets the 12 month exemption conditions.

Land to build a new principal home is owned/purchased by customer

From 1 July 2007, land already owned (outright or mortgaged) by the
customer on which they intend to build a new principal home, may be
exempt from the assets test once the principal home sale proceeds have
been received.

If the customer uses the proceeds of sale to purchase a block of land on
which they intend to build a new principal home, the land may be exempt
from the assets test for up to 12 months.

The total exempt asset value must not exceed the sale price of the old
principal home. The Resources page has examples.

Customer still owns previous principal home

If a customer still owns their former principal home after purchasing a
new principal home, assess the previous principal home under the normal
Assets Test using the current market value of the house less any
encumbrance. This can be either a secured loan or an unsecured loan, if
the customer can show they took out the loan specifically to purchase
that particular asset.

See the Guide to Social Security 4.6.6.30, on the References page.

Conditional and unconditional sales

A property is not considered sold until the legal owners enter a legally
binding and unconditional agreement for the sale of the real estate or
property or until all preconditions are met if the agreement is subject
to preconditions.

If a customer's sale agreement is conditional and not all preconditions
have been met, the customer has not entered into a valid and legally
binding contract and the home is not considered sold. It will remain an
exempt asset while it is the customer's principal home. If a customer
vacates the principal home before it is considered sold, it may be
considered a temporary vacation if there is a possibility the customer
may return, for example, if the sale does not proceed.

Sale by instalments or deferred payment

If a customer sells their principal home by instalments or the payment
is deferred (by a sale or loan agreement), these payments may be
considered as proceeds from the sale of the principal home. Take care to
ensure only the payments to be received within the initial 12 months and
used to acquire the principal home are disregarded. These payments are
not income for Social Security purposes.

ACT and NSW Government Buybacks

Payments to customers for homes purchased under the ACT Government
Loose-fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme or the NSW Voluntary
Purchase and Demolition Program (for example, homes insulated by Mr
Fluffy using loose fill asbestos) are compensatory. Advise the customer
the lesser of the sum received and the amount they are intending to
spend on a replacement will not be assessed as an asset or deemed to be
earning income. This applies until they have replaced the property,
subject to a 12 month limit (unless there is a valid reason for taking
longer).

Aged care customers

When a single customer moves into residential aged care, the value of
their home is assessed as an asset in their Aged Care Means Assessment.
It remains an exempt asset for income support purposes as stated in
Vacation of principal home due to illness. If the home sells during this
exemption period, the proceeds are immediately assessable for income
support purposes. Any new property obtained from the sale does not
satisfy the exemption provisions.

A principal home will be assessed as an exempt asset for Aged Care if
there is a protected person living in it. See Aged Care Means
Assessment - Protected person for more information. If the protected
person is the partner, and they sell the home, and intend to purchase a
new home, an exemption for the funds received from the sale of the home
may still apply.

Rent Assistance (RA)

A customer may be entitled to RA if in rental accommodation while
intending to purchase a new home.

Some customers are not classified as ineligible homeowners, and may be
eligible for RA:

-   Income support recipients who have sold their former principal home
    within the last 12 months and are likely to use some or all of the
    proceeds of the sale (within 12 months of the sale) to acquire,
    build, repair or renovate another home which will become their new
    principal home
-   Income support recipients who have sold their principal home within
    the last 12 to 24 months and have made reasonable attempts, within a
    reasonable period after selling the home to acquire another
    residence, but have experienced delays beyond their control

The Resources page contains examples of real estate assessments and
exemptions, and a link to Office Locator.

Related links

Sale of real estate by instalment or deferred payment

Purchasing another residence

Permanent vacation of principal home

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Determining homeowners and non-homeowners

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) verification

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Address recording for real estate

Temporary vacation of principal home

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
