
Date of event (DOV) for family assistance income estimates 108-05030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the correct DOV to use when customers advise a
new family assistance estimate. Most families receiving Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) must provide income estimates. All families receiving
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) must provide an estimate.

DOV and date of effect (DOE) difference

It is important to understand the difference between DOV and DOE.

-   DOV is the date the event actually occurred
-   DOE is the date a particular change first affects a customer's
    entitlement This is determined by the system

The DOV used for an estimate is the:

-   Event Date field in Customer First
-   Start Date on the FAO Taxable Income (FTI) table in Process Direct

DOV for income estimates

The general DOV rule for FTB and/or CCS current customers is that the
estimate applies from the date the customer notifies of the change,
except if the customer is:

-   FTB CAN-OIS in the current financial year
-   FTB CAN-ENA or CAN-ENR in the current financial year
-   becoming partnered
-   lodging an FTB claim, or
-   lodging a CCS New Claim

Note: if using a DOV other than the notification date in the above
situations, it may result in arrears or overpayments generating for CCS
and/or FTB.

FTB - DOE for income estimates

During the financial year, the DOE of a revised estimate depends on:

-   when it is provided
-   if it results in an increase or decrease to the customer's ongoing
    FTB rate, and
-   the customer and partner's current circumstances

The system determines the correct DOE of the estimate where the change
in circumstance coding and income estimate update is actioned in the
same activity.

If completed separately:

-   the DOE of the income estimate may not be correct
-   an alert will appear asking for the DOE to be checked, and
-   if the DOE is not correct, it must be manually determined

CCS - DOE for income estimates

When a customer updates their income estimate for the current year,
review their Activity Test details to ensure they receive their correct
hours of entitlement.

The DOE for a change in income estimate for CCS is the start date of the
next CCS fortnight after the DOV. This means if the DOV is:

-   the date of notification, any change in CCS percentage will take
    effect from the start of the next CCS fortnight
-   backdated for FTB, it may result in an arrears payment to the
    customer, or a potential overpayment for CCS

For more information, see Changes in circumstances and date of effect
for CCS and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

The Resources page contains examples of how to determine the DOV.

Related links

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Assessment of income cancellation periods in Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Restoration of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
