
Sharer Status field on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen 108-18092640

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about sharing accommodation and
determining the Accommodation Details (AC) option for the Sharer Status
field.

Definition of a sharer

Not all customers who share accommodation are considered sharers for the
purposes of RA.

A customer is a sharer if all of the following apply:

the customer is single

has no dependent children

the customer and 1 or more other people have the legal right to share at
least 1 major area of accommodation. This can include a:

-   kitchen
-   bedroom
-   bathroom

is not an exempt sharer

does not live in exempt accommodation

The system automatically determines situations where the customer does
not meet the definition of a sharer. In these cases, if a customer meets
the criteria for a Sharer Status field sharing option, the relevant
sharing option must be used. The system will still pay the full rate of
RA.

Exempt sharer

A customer is an exempt sharer if any of the following apply:

-   in receipt of Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Carer Payment (CP)
-   paying board and lodging and not able to give a breakup of the
    lodgings and the board components separately.
    Note: if a person pays for lodging only or has been able to separate
    the lodging component from their board, this exemption does not
    apply

The system automatically determines the above 2 situations are exempt
sharers. RA will pay at the full rate no matter what Sharer Status field
option is used. The correct sharer code relating to the customer's
sharing arrangements must be used.

A customer is also an exempt sharer when they are a single customer:

-   with dependent child/ren and the customer gets RA with their primary
    benefit and not with Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   living only with recipient child/ren. This is when the child/ren get
    a Social Security payment, ABSTUDY, a Service Pension or Veteran
    Payment, or Youth Allowance (YA) student, but the child/ren does not
    get RA.
    Note: if there is a third party sharing the accommodation, this
    exemption does not apply
-   living in a caravan, boat or mobile home on their own, even if they
    are sharing a major communal area of accommodation within the
    caravan park or marina
-   living in exempt accommodation

These customers must have the specific option relevant to their
situation used for the Sharer Status field for RA to pay at the correct
full rate.

Exempt accommodation

People living in exempt accommodation are exempt from the application of
the sharers rate of RA and from having to verify the amount of rent
paid.

Staff must make a determination about if a customer is living in exempt
accommodation. Not coding the correct sharer exemption code and choosing
a sharing option in the Sharer Status field for these customers living
in exempt accommodation will incorrectly pay the sharers' rate of RA.

For more details, review the definition for exempt accommodation or
search exempt accommodation in the A-Z of Rent Assistance terms and
codes.

Sharers' rate of Rent Assistance (RA)

The sharers' rate of RA addresses the inequity in payment rates between:

-   singles customers who share, and
-   members of a couple

The sharers' rate reflects the cost of living economies of scale for
customers sharing accommodation.

The sharers' rate of RA is capped at two-thirds the maximum rate payable
to single customers living alone. A sharers rate of RA will vary based
on how much rent they pay over the threshold amount, up to the maximum
RA rate payable.

Legal right to share a major area of accommodation

A legal right to share a major area of accommodation can be shown in one
of 2 ways:

The customer's (and/or their current partner's) name is included on a
formal lease or tenancy agreement, or

The customer has:

-   a verbal agreement to share, and
-   there is a Rent Certificate (SU523HD) or Rent Declaration (SU336M)
    proving the customer pays regular amounts of money on a regular
    basis

If there is no evidence the customer has a legal right over the
accommodation, the customer is not a sharer. The customer would be
considered a guest.

Sharers and Rent Assistance (RA)

If a customer is considered a sharer in their accommodation, the net
rent rules apply.

Change in sharer details for single customers

When a single customer advises a change to living arrangements, the
Living Arrangements question set must be asked. This is particularly
important when the single person advises:

-   they are moving in with another person, and
-   there is no change in their relationship status

Quality On Line (QOL) tool step question for the AC screen

For details about QOLCheck tool step question options for the AC screen,
search QOL tool in the A-Z of Rent Assistance terms and codes.

The Resources page has examples to help with determining sharer status.

Related links

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen including assessing
Rent Assistance (RA)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Type of Rent field on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Net rent rules for Rent Assistance (RA)

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

The Living Arrangements question set

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Income from boarders and lodgers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
