[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines profit sharing and the assessment of income and
assets from this source. Profit sharing arrangements often occur in high
income seasonal industries such as cray fishing, pearling and prawn
fishing.

Profit sharing arrangement

Some workers undertake employment on a profit sharing arrangement.
Rather than receiving a wage or contract to provide their services for
an agreed price, the remuneration received is based on a proportion of
the overall profit earned from the activity undertaken. Generally,
payment is made as a lump sum after the completion of work.

The nature of the employment relationship applicable to customers
involved in these arrangements more closely resembles that of an
employee than a person who is a self employed contractor or involved in
a business or partnership.

The amounts earned by a customer involved in a profit sharing
arrangement are regarded as remunerative lump sums. Accordingly, the
gross income received by a customer from a profit sharing arrangement is
assessable under the general meaning of ordinary income and the
provisions of permissible reductions of business income do not apply.

Lump sum received after claiming pension or benefit

If a customer receives a lump sum amount from a profit sharing
arrangement after claiming a pension or benefit payment, or while
current on a pension or benefit payment, the lump sum amount is assessed
as income for 52 weeks from the date the customer is entitled to receive
the amount.

Lump sum received prior to claiming pension or benefit

If a customer receives a lump sum amount from a profit sharing
arrangement before claiming a pension or benefit payment, the lump sum
amount is not treated as income. However, it may be used to calculate a
seasonal work preclusion period for customers claiming a benefit
payment.

Customers must also advise what they have done with any lump sum amounts
so that, where appropriate, bank accounts and/or other asset items and
amounts can be updated.

Related links

Employment income

Treatment of lump sums

Seasonal work preclusion period (SWPP)

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
