
How to manually calculate arrears 108-08170010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manually calculate arrears. A customer may
make a query after being notified of a decision, and be entitled to a
higher payment for a period than has been automatically paid through the
system. This may be identified when a reassessment is done and the
correct arrears amount has not been issued.

On this Page:

System unable to calculate correct arrears

The correct arrears will be automatically calculated by the system for
almost all assessments, based on the correct coding of the date of
effect (that is, date of event or date of notification). There will be
some activities where the system is unable to automatically calculate
and pay correct arrears. This procedure is designed to assist assessors
to calculate and pay manual arrears when the system is unable to pay the
correct amount.

Working Credits

Working Credit accrual and depletion is usually automatic, however, at
times it may be necessary to adjust the working credit balance manually
for past periods. This will be for cases where:

-   a limiting date has been applied, preventing system recalculation
-   the customer's record has a manual rate override

Arrears and weekly payments

Some customers who are entitled to arrears may be receiving their income
support and supplementary payments weekly rather than fortnightly. This
does not alter the amount to which they are entitled, but may mean that
arrears are also due for Week 1 of the current entitlement period.

Legal entitlement to arrears

Extra caution must be taken when a decision is made to pay manual
arrears. The reason the system is not paying arrears may be that the
customer has no legal entitlement to the payment. If the assessor is in
any doubt about the customer's legal entitlement to arrears they should
first contact their Technical Support, Access Support Centre or Service
Support Officer who will then contact the relevant Level 2 Policy Help
Desk via the Online Enquiry Form for the Life Event.

However, if the assessor is unsure why the system will not pay the
correct arrears, assistance will be provided by Technical Support, the
Access Support Centre or Service Support Officer.

PYAJ screen access

Access to the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen is limited to the APS 5/6
level.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk -
Online Enquiry Form. It also contains a link to an attachment with more
information about components on the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen.

Related links

Using the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Frequency of payments

Weekly payments

Calculating weekly payments

Changing Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)

Immediate payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
