
Customer compensation and act of grace payments 109-07040000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Case studies

Case 1

Mr Z lodged a claim for Sickness Allowance (SA) after suffering a
workplace injury. Mr Z lodged a Module C. A Service Officer noted on Mr
Z’s record that he was to receive Personal Accident and Sickness
Insurance through his superannuation, which is not viewed as
compensation, but should be coded as ordinary income. Mr Z’s SA claim
was rejected because additional information associated with Module C was
needed. Mr Z was provided incorrect advice in a subsequent service
centre visit that, if his income protection claim was granted, he would
not qualify for payments. Therefore, he did not ask for a review or
lodge a new SA claim. Mr Z subsequently qualified for JobSeeker Payment
(sickness) after his employment was terminated by his employer and his
insurance claim had been paid.

In Mr Z’s case, the Service Officer should not have rejected his claim
for SA. They should have provided Mr Z adequate time to provide the
additional information requested in line with procedures in Operational
Blueprint. It is likely that, had this occurred, Mr Z’s claim would have
been granted when the requested information was provided. In addition,
had a different Service Officer not provided incorrect advice that Mr Z
would not qualify for SA if the insurance claim was paid, it is likely
he would have lodged a new claim for SA and been granted. The agency
determined that Mr Z had suffered a loss of SA due to defective
administration and compensation was offered for the loss of SA from the
date he first became eligible, until he was qualified for and was
granted JobSeeker Payment.

As Mr Z’s SA claim was incorrectly rejected in 2018, and he did not ask
for a review due to the agency’s incorrect advice at the time, he did
not become aware until 2021 that he would have qualified for SA in 2018.
Therefore, the timeframe for Mr Z to request a review was well outside
the 13 weeks and compensation was paid under the CDDA Scheme.

Case 2

Mrs M interacted with the agency on a number of occasions from late 2015
to mid-2016 when she attempted to apply for payments (Carer
Payment/Allowance and Disability Support Pension) for herself and her
terminally ill husband. The compensation investigation found that, from
the available information on Mrs M’s customer record for Service
Officers managing her enquires, the agency should have been aware of Mrs
M’s family and economic circumstances including the fact she had
children. This is especially the case, given Mrs M provided such
information (that she had dependent children for whom she was not
receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for in her Carer Payment claim form).

The agency considered there has been an unreasonable failure by agency
officers to give Mrs M proper advice that was within their power and
knowledge to give (such as inviting a claim for Family Tax Benefit)
during the multiple interactions during the relevant period. The agency
accepted Mrs M has suffered a loss of FTB as a result of defective
administration and compensation was paid under the CDDA Scheme.

As Mrs M had not lodged a claim for FTB during the relevant period,
there was no ability to pay her entitlement under the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999.

Services Australia website

Claiming compensation from us

Upload your Centrelink documents online

Department of Finance website

The Scheme for Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective
Administration (the CDDA Scheme)

Forms

Compensation Application (SS509)

Online claim form (for staff)

Intranet link (for staff)

Legal Services Division

Contact details

Commonwealth Ombudsman

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
