
Reviews of JET Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA) decisions 109-05040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for reviewing JETCCFA decisions.
Reviews of these decisions are subject to rules different from those
governing the review of other Centrelink decisions.

Steps in the internal review process

JETCCFA eligibility decisions

These decisions can be reviewed under the usual internal review process.
Types of eligibility decisions that can be reviewed are: rejection of a
claim, cancellation of JETCCFA, a start date, and the number of hours a
person is eligible to receive JETCCFA.

When a customer contacts to discuss a JETCCFA eligibility decision:

-   At the first point of contact, a Service Officer will discuss the
    decision, and give the customer information about their options to
    request an explanation or apply for a formal review of the decision.
    Service Officers can use the support resources available to them if
    the matter is complex, or if they need support to give a
    satisfactory response to the customer
-   The customer can choose to request an explanation of the decision,
    which will be provided by a Subject Matter Expert (SME). The
    customer may choose this option if they do not understand or would
    like more information about the decision
-   The customer can choose to apply for a formal review of the
    eligibility decision by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO). The
    customer may choose this option if they do not agree with the
    decision

Note: the JETCCFA scheme is not based on legislation. This means
decisions about JETCCFA eligibility cannot be reviewed by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

JETCCFA debt raising and/or recovery decisions

JETCCFA debts are raised under the Public Governance, Performance and
Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA).

This means the usual internal review process does not apply for
decisions about the raising and/or recovery of JETCCFA debts. These
decisions cannot be formally reviewed by an ARO, but a SME can provide
an explanation. An ARO can compete a formal review of the decision that
led to a JETCCFA debt being raised,

If the customer does not agree with the decision to raise and/or recover
a JETCCFA debt, they can contact the Commonwealth Ombudsman.

The Minister for Finance and Parliamentary Secretary, or delegates in
the Department of Finance determine waiver decisions for JETCCFA debts.
Services Australia does not have the delegation to action these waivers.

Time limit

An application for a formal review of a decision must be made within 28
days of the decision.

If the customer requests an explanation of a JETCCFA decision or wants to apply for a formal review of a JETCCFA eligibility decision

See Request for an explanation or application for a formal review.

If the application for a formal review is about an assessment that is
still current, the person will remain eligible for JETCCFA under the
terms of their existing assessment until the ARO review has been
finalised.

A Subject Matter Expert (SME) provides the explanation of a JETCCFA
decision.

An Authorised Review Officer (ARO) completes the formal review of a
JETCCFA eligibility decision.

If a customer does not agree with any decision made in relation to
JETCCFA, they may contact the Commonwealth Ombudsman.

The Resources page contains a link to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
website.

Related links

Reviews and appeals

Raising Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
