
Request for an explanation or application for a formal review 109-02000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to do when a customer requests an
explanation or applies for a formal review of a decision. It explains
how to record a request or an application. It also covers enquiries
about the progress or withdrawal of a request or application. There are
separate processes for requests made before 15 May 2021.

Discussing internal review options with a customer

When discussing a decision that has been made, internal review options
must be given to a customer before a request for an explanation or an
application for a formal review can be recorded. Service Officers should
see Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process
for important information to assist when having a conversation with a
customer about their available internal review options.

Customer requests an explanation of a decision

If a customer does not understand the reason/s for a decision, they may
request an explanation.

A Subject Matter Expert (SME) will investigate the decision and try to
contact the customer. For more details, see SME explanations, ARO
referrals and implementing ARO decisions.

Customers cannot request an explanation by a SME if they:

-   have applied for a formal review of the same decision, or
-   previously requested an explanation of the same decision and a SME
    has provided an explanation. Tell the customer they have the right
    to apply for a formal review if they do not agree with the decision
    Exception: there is no formal review option for Consumer Travel
    Support Program Round 2, COVID-19 Disaster Payment and Pandemic
    Leave Disaster Payment decisions. See Reviews of grants and
    ex-gratia payments

Customer applies for a formal review of a decision

If a customer does not agree with a decision, they may apply for a
formal review. This may be without requesting an explanation, or after a
SME explanation has been provided.

An Authorised Review Officer (ARO) will review the decision and try to
contact the customer. For more details, see Reviews by an ARO.

Note: customers cannot apply for a formal review of Consumer Travel
Support Program Round 2, COVID-19 Disaster Payment and Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment decisions. See Reviews of grants and ex-gratia
payments.

Customers cannot apply for another formal review once an ARO has
reviewed the decision. Tell the customer they may have the right to seek
a further review, for example by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT).

How customers request an explanation or apply for a formal review

Customers can do this verbally or in writing to any staff member.

Or, customers may complete the relevant form:

-   Explanation or formal review of a decision (SS351), or
-   ABSTUDY and Assistance for isolated Children (AIC) Explanation or
    formal review of decision (SY054)

Note: an application for a formal review of some decisions must be made
in writing. See Payment specific reviews of decision.

If a customer indicates they do not agree with a decision, check if they
want an explanation, a formal review, or something else. If there is any
doubt, try to contact the customer. If unable to contact them, record a
DOC and send a letter inviting them to contact. Do not make assumptions
about what they want.

The customer does not have to provide new information. If they would
like to provide new information, tell them to do so as soon as they can,
preferably within 7 days.

If there has been no decision, do not record a request for an
explanation or application for a formal review. For example, if the
customer's claim has not been determined. Tell the customer a decision
must be made before they can request an explanation or apply for a
formal review.

Decision has not been made or has no effect

Customers cannot request a SME explanation or apply for a formal review
of a decision that has:

-   not been made. For example, a claim has been lodged but not
    determined, or a debt shell created but a debt not raised. (The
    customer can request an explanation or apply for a formal review of
    the decision that caused the debt shell)
-   no operative effect on the customer. For example, a decision that a
    customer is subject to a compensation preclusion period, but the
    customer has not made a claim. The compensation decision has not
    been put into operation and so has no effect on the customer. There
    can be no SME explanation or formal review

See the Resources page for examples.

Time limit to apply for a formal review

There is no time limit for applying for a formal review of most
decisions.

However, there are time limits for applying for a formal review of these
decisions:

some decisions under family assistance law, see Customer initiated
review of decision

some decisions under the Paid Parental Leave scheme, see:

-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employee initiated reviews and appeals
-   Paid Parental Leave (PPL) employer initiated reviews and appeals
-   Reviews and appeals for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

decisions about Jet Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA)

within 3 months of the decision date of a Student Financial Supplement
Scheme (SFSS) decision under the Student Assistance Act 1973

within 13 weeks of being notified of the original decision for

-   LPG Vehicle Scheme
-   Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)
-   Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Still record the application if the customer applies for a formal review
after the time limit. The ARO will check if they can undertake a formal
review and will tell the customer.

The date of effect of the review outcome may be affected if there is a
delay in applying for a formal review.

Withdrawing a request or application

A request for an explanation or application for a formal review can only
be withdrawn at the customer’s request. For example, the customer phones
a Smart Centre to advise they do not want to proceed with their
application for a formal review.

If withdrawn, the request or application is taken to have never been
made.

Tell the customer that if they withdraw their request or application and
later request an explanation or apply for a formal review of the same
decision, back payment may be limited if the outcome is in their favour.

Timeliness standards

Services Australia aims to complete:

-   an explanation of a decision within 14 days from the date of the
    customer’s request
-   a formal review of a decision within 49 days from the date of the
    customer’s application

AAT sets aside and remits decision

If the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) sets aside and remits a
decision (sends it back to the agency for reconsideration), the new
decision made by the agency can be reviewed.

Any findings made by the AAT on aspects for the decision must be applied
to the new decision made by the agency.

For example, the AAT sets aside and remits a debt decision, requesting
the debt be recalculated based on an assessment of income for a period.
The AAT also finds that the new debt amount cannot be waived. Once the
debt is recalculated and amended, the new debt amount/period is a new
decision. The AAT’s finding in relation to waiver must be applied to the
new decision.

The customer can request an explanation or apply for a formal review of
the new decision. However, the SME/ARO must apply the AAT's findings
about the income assessment and waiver.

The customer may request an AAT second review of the findings of the AAT
first review.

Payment specific review and appeal processes

Family assistance care decisions

For more information on explanations and formal reviews, see Internal
review process for care decisions.

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) exit decisions

For more information on explanations and formal reviews, see Exit
applications from the CDC.

Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or Departure Authorisation Certificate
(DAC) decisions

These decisions are not subject to the normal internal review process.
See Review or appeal a DPO or DAC decision.

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) employer initiated reviews

All applications for a formal review of an employer decision are managed
by the PPL Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT). See PPL employer initiated
reviews and appeals.

Grants and ex-gratia payments

For more information on explanations and formal reviews, see Reviews of
grants and ex-gratia payments for the following:

-   Disaster Recovery Payment
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance
-   Tertiary Access Payment
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   Consumer Travel Support Payment
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment
-   MH17 Family Support Package

Other payments

See Payment specific reviews of decisions.

Complaints and FOI requests

A customer who requests an explanation or applies for a formal review of
a decision may also:

-   make a complaint about the service they received, or
-   request release of documents under the Freedom of Information Act
    1982

Customer compensation and act of grace payment

A customer who requests an explanation or applies for a formal review of
a decision may also make a claim for compensation under the Compensation
for Detriment caused by Defective Administration (CDDA) Scheme.

While compensation may not be payable if there is a legislative
mechanism that can remedy the mistake (a legislative right of review),
all available review and appeal options do not need to be exhausted
prior to lodging a claim for compensation.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, forms and the
Services Australia website. It also has examples of referrals, when
there can be no explanation or formal review; where a decision has not
been made or has no operative and running the script.

Contents

Priority explanation or formal review of a decision

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Related links

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Appeals (APL) system

Customer queries Child Care Management System (CCMS) information

Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes

Exit applications from the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Internal review process for care decisions

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements- reviews and appeals

Payment specific review decision

Requests lodged under Freedom of Information Act 1982

Review or appeal a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or Departure
Authorisation Certificate (DAC) decision

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

Reviews of grants and ex-gratia payments

Secretary initiated review of decision

Using the Internal Review/Explanation script

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
