
Customer compensation and act of grace payments 109-07040000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers may be able to claim compensation
if they believe Services Australia has made a mistake that has caused
them financial loss or other detriment. This information helps staff
support customers who wish to make a compensation claim for losses
suffered as a result of agency error.

Reasons for compensation claims

Typically, compensation claims are made by customers who have suffered a
loss:

-   because they relied on incorrect or incomplete advice provided by an
    agency officer
-   (such as a personal injury) as a consequence of the agency’s error/s
    or failure to act
-   because the agency failed to follow existing procedures or have
    appropriate procedures in place
-   because the agency failed to provide proper advice that was within
    its power to give
-   because of a breach of privacy by the agency or one of its officers

Customers may apply for compensation for losses they have suffered as a
result of errors, which may have occurred across any master program.

Service delivery issues such as poor customer service or inappropriate
behaviour by agency officers, or a customer disagreeing with the
eligibility criteria for a payment or service, is not defective
administration.

Compensation cannot be claimed for a debt owed to the Commonwealth, even
if the debt arose as a result of defective administration. If a customer
has a debt they do not think they should have to pay, they may wish to
apply for a debt waiver from the Department of Finance.

Before making a claim

Not all mistakes made by the agency can be remedied by a compensation
payment. For example, compensation may not be payable if there is a
legislative mechanism that can remedy the mistake (a legislative right
of review).

If a customer wants to claim compensation or an act of grace payment,
encourage and help them to:

-   consider whether there is a quicker and simpler way to address their
    concern, such as making a complaint, providing feedback or
    requesting a review
-   read the information on the Services Australia website about
    claiming compensation
-   call the Customer Compensation Team for advice and information on
    1800 995 496. Agency officers can also contact that team for
    guidance and advice

A customer does not need to exhaust their review and appeal rights
before lodging a claim for compensation or an act of grace payment.

Note: never discuss the possible outcome of a compensation claim.

The legal or administrative mechanism used to deal with a compensation
claim will vary depending on the nature of the claim and whether the
agency considers it may be legally liable if the matter went to court.
See below for more information.

Identification of potential legal liability is the first step in the
compensation process. If legal liability is ruled out, the compensation
claim will be considered under the Scheme for Compensation for Detriment
caused by Defective Administration.

Legal and administrative mechanisms

Legal liability

If it is reasonable to conclude that the agency would be found liable if
the matter were litigated in court, a claim must be settled in
accordance with Appendix C: Handling Monetary Claims set out in the
Legal Services Directions 2017 issued by the Attorney-General under
section 55ZF of the Judiciary Act 1903.

Scheme for Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective Administration
(CDDA)

This is a discretionary mechanism that allows the agency to pay
compensation when a person or organisation has suffered detriment as a
result of the agency’s defective administration and when there is no
legal requirement to make a payment.

Compensation claims are assessed by the Customer Compensation Team per
guidelines issued by the Department of Finance (Resource Management
Guide 409). The Guide 409 is published on the Department of Finance
website. See References for a link.

Act of grace payments

The act of grace power is intended to ensure consistency and equity in
the impact of government activities where other legislative and
administrative provisions do not take sufficient account of the unique
circumstances of individual cases.

Act of grace decisions are made by the Department of Finance. Section 65
of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 allows
the Finance Minister or their delegate to make payments that would not
otherwise be authorised by law. Information about the act of grace is
provided in Resource Management Guide 401, available on the Department
of Finance website. See References for a link.

Waivers of debts

The CDDA Scheme must not be used to offset debts that are owed to the
Commonwealth, even if those debts have arisen due to defective
administration.

If a person has incurred a debt due to defective administration, and
does not consider they should have to repay it, they can apply to the
Department of Finance for consideration under the waiver of debt
mechanism. Information about waiver of debt is provided in Resource
Management Guide 401 available on the Department of Finance website. See
References for a link.

The Process page contains more detail for specialist officers.

The References page contains links to the relevant policy and
legislation.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and
Department of Finance websites for information for customers, links to
relevant forms, and a link to the Legal Services Division intranet page.
It also contains Case studies.

Related links

Commonwealth Ombudsman

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
