
Reviews and appeals 109-03000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the internal and external review and appeal
process for Centrelink decisions.

Government intent

The right to have a decision reviewed exists for almost every decision
made by Centrelink. It is also possible for a customer to seek an
administrative law remedy where the actions of Services Australia have
had an adverse impact on them.

It is important that customers are aware of their review and appeal
options if they do not understand or do not agree with a decision.

Internal review framework

The internal review framework aims to make sure that customers:

-   understand decisions that affect their entitlements
-   are given the chance to provide new information to have a decision
    reassessed
-   can exercise their right to apply for a formal review of a decision
    they disagree with

Documenting the decision discussion

Document a discussion about a decision on the customer’s record. This
will make sure that:

-   there is a record showing what was discussed with the customer
-   the contact can be acknowledged if the customer contacts again

Steps in the internal review process

When a customer contacts the agency to discuss a decision that has been
made:

-   At the first point of contact, a Service Officer will discuss the
    decision, and give the customer information about their options to
    request an explanation or apply for a formal review of the decision.
    Staff can use the support resources available to them if the matter
    is complex, or if they need support to give a satisfactory response
    to the customer. See the Process page
-   The customer can choose to request an explanation of the decision,
    which will be provided by a Subject Matter Expert (SME). The
    customer may choose this option if they do not understand or would
    like more information about the decision
-   The customer can choose to apply for a formal review of the
    decision, which will be undertaken by an Authorised Review Officer
    (ARO). The customer may choose this option if they do not agree with
    the decision

Note: the referral for an explanation or a formal review should be based
on what the customer wants. If there is any doubt, ask the customer. A
formal review was known as an appeal

The internal review process should be straightforward for customers.
Errors should be fixed and any new information assessed as quickly as
possible. Customers do not have to provide new information. If a
customer wants to provide new information, tell them do this as soon as
they can, preferably within 7 days.

The Process page has scripting to help Service Officers have a
conversation with a customer about the internal review options.

For more information, see:

-   Request for an explanation or application for a formal review
-   Priority explanation or a formal review of a decision

Role of the decision maker

-   Try to contact the customer before finalising an unfavourable
    decision
-   Discuss the decision with the customer
-   Allow new information to be provided
-   Correct errors and undertake reassessments
-   Explain review and appeal rights
-   If the customer does not understand or does not agree with the
    decision, record a request for an explanation or application for a
    formal review

Role of the Service Officer

Discuss the decision with the customer

Document the discussion with the customer

Allow new information to be provided

Correct errors and undertake reassessments

Arrange other appropriate referrals or assistance including:

-   continuing payments pending review of the decision (for a formal
    review only)
-   debt recovery arrangements
-   referral to a social worker

Explain review and appeal rights

If the customer does not understand or does not agree with the decision,
record a request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Role of the Subject Matter Expert (SME)

The SME is:

-   a skilled officer, independent of the original decision
-   responsible for explaining the decision when a customer has
    requested an explanation

See SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions.

Role of the Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

The ARO is a senior officer, independent of the original decision.

The ARO is responsible for undertaking a formal review of the decision.

See Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO).

External review process

After a formal review by an ARO, the customer may apply to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) for an AAT first review of the
decision. Certain decisions are excepted.

If a customer does not agree with an AAT first review decision, they may
apply for an AAT second review.

All parties to an AAT second review have a further right of appeal to
the Federal Court. Decisions of the Federal Court may be appealed, by
leave, to the High Court.

These decisions cannot be appealed to the AAT:

-   ABSTUDY entitlement and eligibility decisions. See Review of ABSTUDY
    and AIC decisions
-   JET Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA) decisions. See Reviews of
    JETCCFA decisions
-   Grants, formerly known as ex-gratia payments. Appeal rights
    following an ARO review depend on the guidelines for each grant. See
    Reviews of grants and ex-gratia payments.

Complaints and FOI requests

A customer who requests an explanation or applies for a formal review of
a decision may also:

-   make a complaint about the service they received, or
-   request release of documents under the Freedom of Information Act
    1982

Contents

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Court Appeals after an unfavourable decision by Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) (AAT second review)

Related links

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Priority explanation or formal review of a decision

Secretary initiated review of decision

Appeals (APL) system

Continuing payments pending review (PPR)

Managing reviews and appeals paper files

Requests lodged under Freedom of Information Act 1982

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Customer compensation and act of grace payments

Australian Human Rights Commission

Commonwealth Ombudsman

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
