[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines some of the issues affecting the courts' ability
to review an AAT second review decision after a person or government
agency has appealed to the courts for a judicial review of the
Tribunal's decision.

Right of appeal

All parties to an AAT second review appeal have a further right of
appeal to the Federal Court. Decisions of the Federal Court may be
appealed, by leave, to the High Court. Both the customer and the
government organisation can appeal a decision of the AAT second review
to the Federal Court.

Grounds for appeal

An appeal to the Federal Court in respect of a decision following the
AAT second review can only be made on a point of law. The AAT has the
final say on any issues of fact. The courts will consider whether the
AAT has correctly interpreted and applied the law.

Federal Court

The Federal Court is the first level of appeal, and is a formal judicial
process. The matter is heard and decided by a single judge.

Some matters may be referred from the Federal Court to the Federal
Circuit Court, which is intended to provide a simple and accessible
alternative to the Federal Court. The decision of the Federal Circuit
Court may then be appealed back to the Federal Court.

Decisions of a single judge of the Federal Court can be appealed to the
Full Bench of the Federal Court, with three judges deciding the matter.
Some AAT second review decisions go directly to the Full Court although,
with the agreement of all parties, they can be remitted to be considered
by a single judge first.

High Court

A decision of the Full Federal Court can in turn be challenged in the
High Court. The High Court is the highest level of appeal, consisting of
formal appeal consideration by three to seven judges. Although it is
often concerned with constitutional matters, the High Court is also the
final level of appeal for most jurisdictions, including the State
Supreme Courts. Access to the High Court is not automatic. The appellant
must seek and obtain special leave to appeal, which can be a significant
process in itself.

Time limits on appeal

There are time limits on lodging appeals. If a person takes longer than
the limit to lodge an appeal the court holds a hearing to determine
whether it should accept the appeal.

Costs

Unlike most appeals to the AAT, there are costs associated with court
appeals. For example, there is a fee to lodge an appeal and there are a
range of costs associated with filing documents required by the court.
These fees may be waived by the court for Centrelink customers.

In addition, the courts generally award costs to the successful party.
This means that the legal costs of the successful party must be paid by
the unsuccessful party. As Centrelink must engage lawyers to represent
itself or its policy departments, these costs can be substantial and may
have to be met by a customer who unsuccessfully appeals a decision.

The Resources page contains links to the court websites.

Related links

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
