
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the office of Commonwealth Ombudsman (the
Ombudsman) exists to investigate the administrative actions of
Commonwealth agencies, either on their own motion, or arising from
specific complaints. This topic outlines the role and powers of the
Ombudsman.

On this Page:

Focus and powers of the Ombudsman

The Ombudsman’s office seeks to ensure transparency and fairness in the
way people are treated by government departments and agencies. They do
this by considering and investigating customer complaints and examining
programmes on their own motion. The Ombudsman aims to resolve
investigations impartially, informally and quickly.

The Ombudsman Act 1976 (Cth) provides the Ombudsman with wide powers,
similar to those of a Royal Commission. The Ombudsman can request
information from agencies, question officers, inspect documents and
enter Commonwealth premises.

Customer dissatisfied with actions or decisions of Services Australia

A person dissatisfied with the actions or decisions of Services
Australia may lodge a complaint with the Ombudsman.

Complaints can be made in person, by telephone, letter, or via the
online complaints form on the Ombudsman's website.

Before investigating complaints, the Ombudsman normally expects
complainants to have first approached Services Australia to resolve
their issue, or seek a review of the decision.

Receiving and responding to enquiries and investigations from the Ombudsman

The Ombudsman Relationship and Management Section (ORMS) is the single
point of contact for the Ombudsman’s office when dealing with Services
Australia.

ORMS manages investigations received from the Ombudsman and refers these
to the most appropriate business area/s to prepare a draft response.

If contacted by the Ombudsman’s office, please transfer them to the ORMS
contact line or provide email. See the Resources page for a link to ORMS
contact information.

The Resources page contains links to the Commonwealth Ombudsman's
website, contact details and complaint form and a link to the Services
Australia intranet page for the Ombudsman Relationship and Management
Section.

Related links

Australian Human Rights Commission

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
