
Paid Parental Leave (PPL) employer initiated reviews and appeals 109-05100000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines PPL employer initiated reviews. An employer has
the right to apply for a formal review of certain decisions, which
affect them under the Paid Parental Leave scheme.

Employer initiated reviews

Employers can apply for a formal review of:

-   employer determination decisions
-   PPL funding amount decisions

Note: an employer cannot request an explanation of a decision.

When a review by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) is finalised, the
employer can request an Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) first
review. Employers do not have a right to request an AAT second review.

The Paid Parental Leave Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT) records an
employer's application for a formal review and refer them to an ARO.

Employer determination decisions

The decision made by Services Australia about who will provide the PPL
payment is based on information provided by the employee.

An employer may apply for a formal review of the decision that they must
provide PPL to an employee on certain grounds. The Process page lists
grounds for review.

The application for a formal review must be made in writing, be signed
by a person authorised by the employer and be accompanied by documentary
evidence or a statutory declaration supporting the review request.

A request for review must be made within 14 days after Services
Australia gives the employer written notice of the employer
determination decision.

If an ARO or AAT first review about the employer determination decision
has not been finalised, Services Australia may take on the employer role
in providing PPL payments to the employee when 28 days or more of
arrears has accrued.

When the ARO or AAT affirms the original decision, the employer has 14
days to accept and provide bank account and pay cycle details. Failure
to comply will result in the commencement of the assisted dispute
resolution process.

Note: for the factors to consider when establishing whether a person is,
or is not likely to be an Australian-based employee of the employer for
the required period, see Employer Determinations and Casual Employee
Guidelines. The Resources page contains a link.

PPL funding amount

When the funding amount is insufficient, an employer may apply for a
formal review of the funding amount decision.

An application for a formal review must be made:

-   within 14 days after the day of the second payroll cut-off in
    relation to the PPL funding amount
-   in writing and be signed by a person authorised by the employer

PPL debt decisions

Employers have no legislative right to apply for a formal review of a
debt raising or debt recovery decision.

Withdrawal of an application for a formal review

The employer may withdraw their application for a formal review at any
time before the review being completed. A withdrawn application for a
formal review is taken ‘never to have been made’.

AAT second review

Employers have no legislative right to seek an Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) second review.

The Resources page contains a link to Employer Determinations and Casual
Employee Guidelines

Related links

Reviews and appeals

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employee initiated reviews and appeals

Authenticating an employer

Assisted dispute resolution for employer determination for Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Reviews and appeals for Dad and Partner (DAP)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
