
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when reviewing Austudy
Debts determined before 1 July 1998.

Time limits on reviews

Debts raised for Austudy payments made before 1 July 1998 may be
reviewed by Services Australia. There is a 3 month time limit for
seeking review of these decisions, but the time limit may be extended to
the date the review is requested if a determination is made that special
circumstances exist.

Extension of time limits

If a determination to extend the time limit is made, the normal
reconsideration process is followed.

Prior to 1 July 1998, the AUSTUDY scheme was administered under the
Student Assistance Act 1973. This Act contains provisions for raising
debts accrued under the AUSTUDY scheme. Even though this AUSTUDY scheme
has been abolished, the debt raising and recovery provisions are still
in force. This means that debts under the AUSTUDY scheme can still be
investigated, raised and recovered. The Act also has a 3 month time
limit on seeking a review of a decision under the Student Assistance Act
1973.

AUSTUDY debts appealed more than 3 months after the decision to raise
and recover the debt can only be reviewed if a determination is made
that special circumstances exist that allow the time limit to be
extended.

New Austudy scheme

The AUSTUDY scheme was abolished on 30 June 1998, with a new scheme
being introduced that split study payments into Youth Allowance (YA) and
Austudy. These payments were closely aligned with existing social
security payments and incorporated into the Social Security Law. There
is no time limit on seeking review of debt decisions made under the
Social Security Law.

Most relevant staff members are delegated to make the determination
extending the time limit for seeking a review under the Student
Assistance Act.

Special circumstances

It is impossible to give an exhaustive list of all factors relevant to
special circumstances or prescribe those circumstances in which the
discretion should or should not be exercised. Each case must be
considered on its merits. Guidance is available in the procedure
regarding special circumstance reviews of compensation payments under
Section 1184K.

A determination to refuse the extension of time is a decision which may
be appealed to a higher review level. That is, if an extension of time
is refused by a Service Officer, the customer must be given the option
of having the refusal reviewed by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO).

The Resources page contains a link to the Instrument of Delegation for
the Student Assistance Act 1973.

Related links

Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

Special circumstance reviews of compensation payments under Section
1184K reviews

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
