[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines content relevant to reviewing Child Support
decisions.

Government intent

The objection provisions allow parents and non-parent carers to ask the
Registrar to formally reconsider particular decisions made under both
the Assessment and Registration and Collection Acts. This means that
parents and non-parent carers have the opportunity for formal internal
administrative review of some decisions. The review is conducted by a
Child Support officer not involved in making the original decision.

On this Page:

Open exchange of information

Services Australia is required by legislation to provide customers with
information and copies of documents supplied by an applicant, respondent
or third party as part of the following decision making processes:

-   Change of Assessment (COA)
-   Capacity to Pay (CTP)
-   Objections - including General, Care and Part 6A
-   Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Information used to make these decisions must be exchanged with both
customers to ensure a transparent, fair and reasonable decision making
process.

Note: there is no legislative requirement in the objections process to
provide a copy of the response (and/or accompanying documents) to the
objector.

Child Support open exchange is consistent with that used by the AAT and
the Courts.

Objecting to Child Support decisions

An objection is a formal full merit review for customers who believe
Child Support have made a mistake or applied the law incorrectly. Most
objections must be lodged in writing.

The review is conducted by an Objection Officer who was not involved in
making the original decision. The Objection Officer will reconsider the
facts, law and policy aspects of the original decision and determine the
correct and/or preferable decision. There are 3 possible outcomes of an
objection, disallowed, allowed or allowed in part.

The objection process can take up to 60 days (120 days for customers in
reciprocating jurisdictions) and requires the open exchange of
information between all parties to the objection.

Objecting to care decisions

Since 1 July 2010 (3 March 2011 for WA ex nups) customers may lodge an
objection to any care percentage decision made by Child Support or
Family Assistance. The objection can be lodged over the phone or in
writing. If a customer raises multiple issues in their objection, only
an objection to a care percentage decision is able to be taken over the
phone.

Objections to care decisions where the notification date was before 1
July 2010 (3 March 2011 for WA ex nups) must follow the same process as
for other objections.

Objections relating to an overseas liability

If the objection relates to an overseas liability issued by an overseas
authority, the objection can be transmitted to the relevant overseas
authority.

AAT first review applications against Child Support decisions

A customer may apply to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) for an
AAT first review of:

-   a decision to disallow, allow or part-allow an objection, or
-   a decision to either grant or refuse an application for an extension
    of time to lodge an objection

The AAT refer to this process as an 'application for review'.

Contents

Open exchange of information for Child Support customers

Child Support objections

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support
decisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
