
Requesting information from third parties 110-11030040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Intelligence and Investigations Branch only.

This document outlines how to request information from third parties for
Intelligence and Investigations Branch administrative and criminal
investigations, and how to record details on the investigation record.

Commonwealth Government agencies

A separate procedure covers requesting information from Commonwealth
Government agencies.

Administrative investigation

An administrative investigation is an administrative process and does
not need investigation in line with the Australian Government
Investigations Standards (AGIS). The primary purpose of an
administrative investigation is to determine that the customer:

-   is receiving the correct entitlement, and
-   have been paid the correct entitlement in the past

Information notice

The information notice must state:

-   what information/document is required
-   how the person is to provide the information/ documents
-   consequences for failing to respond to the notice
-   the period within which the person has to provide the information
-   that it is an information notice given under the relevant
    legislation

Generally 21 days is given to comply with an information notice.

Allow reasonable postage time in determining the reply date to include
in the notice, and in setting up an interview time and review activity.

Details of the request must be recorded in the relevant case management
system.

Third parties

Third parties include but are not limited to:

-   airlines
-   Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry
-   child care centres
-   eBay
-   employers
-   hospitals
-   insurance companies
-   prisons
-   public trustees
-   roads and traffic authorities
-   schools
-   superannuation companies
-   deceased estate executor/administrator

All requests are to be in writing via the appropriate template or letter
unless an online request is authorised.

PGP secure email, facsimile and the Financial Institution Exchange (FIE)
tool have been approved as appropriate methods for Intelligence and
Investigations Branch staff to issue written notices under section 196
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999, section 158 A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) Act 1999, and section 120 Paid Parental Leave Act
2010.

A Third Party Contact Directory holds contact details for numerous third
parties to help Intelligence and Investigations Branch staff send the
request to the appropriate person and address.

Before requesting information from a child care centre, school or
sporting organisation, a Critical Decision Record must be completed and
approved.

The Resources page has links to relevant websites.

Related links

Gathering information and evidence for fraud investigations

Requesting information from other Commonwealth Government agencies

Creating or reviewing the investigation plan

Critical decision recording

Prosecutions

Requests for information after someone has died

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
