
Processing class action settlements 110-21091009

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Compliance Officer (CO) processes a class
action settlement.

For staff trained in Class Action Settlements only.

What is the Income Compliance class action

In November 2019, Gordon Legal filed a class action lawsuit on behalf of
6 applicants and other group members against the Commonwealth of
Australia. The class action relates to Centrelink debts raised by income
compliance reviews since July 2015. This included people with debts that
did not use averaged ATO income information.

In November 2020, the Commonwealth and Gordon Legal agreed on a proposed
settlement. The Federal Court approved the settlement on 11 June 2021.
Under the settlement, the Commonwealth will pay $112 million in
settlement payments (less Gordon Legal's fees) to eligible group
members.

Group members will receive a categorisation letter to let them know if
they’re eligible for a settlement payment or not.

Customer record and class action notices

As part of the class action, the Federal Court required the agency to
send opt-out notices to members of the class action.

Services Australia completed 2 mail outs to group members to provide
information about the proposed settlement. This included advice on how
group members can opt out of the settlement.

Group members who lodged a formal objection to the settlement had a
final chance to opt-out of the class action. Services Australia
contacted these group members with information on how to opt-out. The
opt-out period ended on 17 September 2021.

Customers who were sent a class action notice have a Class Action
Settlement DOC recorded.

Customers who were sent opt out notices have an Opt out of class action
DOC recorded.

Registration

Auto registration for the class action settlement occurred when a
customer:

-   was on an income support payment, or
-   had previously received an Income Compliance refund

Some customers needed to register. These include former customers
including deceased estates who were not eligible or had not received
their income compliance refund.

Registration closed on 11 February 2022.

Registered group members can still update their bank details until 14
March 2022.

Queries and disputes

Customers had until 10 December 2021 to lodge a query or dispute on
their categorisation. If a query or dispute was not requested by this
date the categorisation of their debt/s cannot be reviewed and will
remain in the same categorisation.

If the customer is deceased, the Executor, Administrator, Solicitor or
Beneficiary had until 7 January 2022 to lodge a query or dispute on the
categorisation.

Customers who lodged a dispute and received the outcome had until 7
January 2022 to request an independent review by the assurer.

Returned to sender

The aim of the process is to make sure group members receive
correspondence about their debt categorisation for the Income compliance
class action settlement.

If the categorisation letter has been 'Returned to Sender', Compliance
Officers (COs) must check the customer record for recent address
updates.

-   If there is a new address, they will issue the letter
-   If there is no new address, they will try to contact the customer to
    confirm and update their address to reissue the letter. If contact
    is unsuccessful, third party data may be used to identify a
    different address

If the customer is deceased, attempts will be made to contact the person
recorded as the Executor or Administrator. If the Executor or
Administrator is not recorded, staff will attempt to locate and contact
an Executor or Administrator, Solicitor or Beneficiaries. For more
information, see Processing class action settlements for customers with
manual exceptions.

The Resources page contains:

-   explanation of the debt categories
-   suggested dialogue to support staff
-   link to categorisation scenarios
-   implementation plan
-   contact details
-   links to the Services Australia and Gordon Legal websites listing
    requirements for customer interactions about the class action

Related links

Processing class action settlements for customers with manual exceptions

Income Compliance Programme class action

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
