
Processing end of course and intention to study reviews for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) 110-07040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how end of course reviews are processed for
Austudy and YA.

Your course is ending review (Course End Date Review)

The end of course review is undertaken on all YA and Austudy students.

A 'You need to act now' letter is sent to students 4 weeks before their
student end date. This lets them know they must advise if there has been
a change to their course end date or if they intend to continue
studying. This letter was known as an SY073 - End of Course Review.

The review letter lets the customer continue their payments without
completing a new claim, or verify they will no longer be studying and
may need other help.

[A self service option is available for customers] Customers should
provide this information via the Manage study details option online
service or by advising future study intentions using phone self service.

Course details required (Intention to Study Review)

Customers who have been unable to provide their course details as part
of their End of Course Review, but have advised they intend studying in
the next study period will have an intention to study recorded.

These customers will be issued a 'Course details required' letter 21
days before the end date of their current intention to study period.
This letter was known as an SY074 - Intention to Study Review.

The Course details required letter lets the customer advise Services
Australia the course they are intending to study so that their
continuing entitlement can be assessed. They are also advised to contact
if they no longer intend to study.

[A self service option is available for customers] Customers should
provide this information via the Manage study details option online
service or by advising future study intentions using phone self service.

Determining study start dates for YA and Austudy

Most education institutions will have an academic calendar with the
standard date many students will start or end their courses or study
periods. Service Officers can access these dates on the National Course
Approvals sub-site. Education institutions often publish their academic
calendars on their websites. It is important to note that many students
will be enrolled in a course that starts or finishes on a different date
to the standard date on the education institution's academic calendar.

From 13 January 2019, Service Officers can accept a student start date
advised by a YA or Austudy customer, providing that date is not greater
than 14 days before the standard course start date published on the
National Course Approvals sub-site, or an education provider's website.

Continuing and intending students

When making study updates, consider whether the customer can be treated
as a continuing/intending student. This may influence what date they are
eligible to receive a student payment. The rules for
continuing/intending students vary between different student payments.

Responding to the letter/notifying study details

Students can:

[A self service option is available for customers] view and manage their
study details online if they are registered online and authenticated -
this service is also available on the Express Plus Students application

call Services Australia, and:

-   select the Advise my Future Study Intentions to provide their
    intention to study, or new study details, via the Interactive Voice
    Response (IVR) self service, or
-   speak to a Service Officer

visit a service centre to use the self service facilities or to provide
their new course information verbally

Phone self service

If customers use the IVR service and intend to continue studying and
know their course details, they will be referred to a Service Officer in
a Smart Centre to complete the coding required.

Online accounts

If the student provides a change to their participation status or
student end date, this will generate follow up action for a Service
Officer in a Smart Centre.

Notification of stopping studies

If a YA (Student) under 22 years of age stops full-time study and wants
to continue to receive payment as a job seeker, they must notify the
agency and complete a participation interview within 14 days.

Failure to notify cessation of study within 14 days will result in
cancellation of YA from the Student End Date + 1 day.

If a student fails to notify they have stopped study within 14 days,
payment of YA (Job seeker) can only start from the date the claim is
submitted. A debt may be generated for students who fail to notify
cessation of studies.

Students 22 years of age or over at their study end date who are
receiving either Austudy or YA (Student), and notify of cessation of
study within 28 days of their study end date may be eligible to access a
streamlined claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP). See Student to job seeker
transfers.

Unfavourable decision

If not speaking with the customer when making an unfavourable decision,
make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page has links to the Access Support Centre (ASC) page,
Payment and Service Finder and the Student Programme Resource Tool.

Related links

Student to job seeker transfers

Payment of Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy when a student is deferring
or discontinuing study before the end of the course

Manage study details option online

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Reviews and appeals

Using Centrelink self service

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
