
Initiation and customer contact for MIC interventions 110-18020701

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Manual Income Confirmation (MIC)
Interventions including initiation, customer contact and updates, both
verbal and documented.

On this Page:

Unearned Income

MIC Interventions are triggered from external data matching with third
parties such as Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and Department of
Education, Skills and Employment. The MIC gives the customer the
opportunity, to confirm or update income information provided to
Centrelink by third parties.

-   Family Day Care (FDC): income declared to Centrelink by a customer
    differs from the FDC Educator income details provided to Centrelink
    by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.
-   Trusts: income declared to Centrelink by a customer differs from the
    Trust income details provided to Centrelink by the Australian
    Taxation Office (ATO)

Initiation

All MIC Interventions are loaded into Customer First as
non-discretionary interventions and are centrally initiated from the
Compliance Management Centre (CMC) via Selection Intervention Management
System (SIMS).

Initiated interventions will have an Income Confirmation letter sent to
the customer (and their nominee if applicable) via registered mail
and/or myGov/Secure Online Mail (SOM).

Registered Mail

On 10 February 2017, a Registered Mail process was implemented to
support compliance interventions. The Registered Mail process aims to
ensure customers receive their correspondence in relation to the
compliance interventions.

For further information on the registered mail process and how
Compliance Officers (CO) process returned correspondence, see Registered
Mail Processing.

Customer contact

An Income Confirmation letter is sent to the customer requesting them to
contact Services Australia on the provided phone number to discuss their
income details.

If the customer fails to respond to the letter, or fails to supply
verification after agreeing to do so, third party information will be
sought and may be applied to the customer’s record. Where both the
customer and third party fail to respond to our request for information,
the CO will finalise the intervention with the best information
available. This may result in a debt they will need to repay.

Verbal updates

Verbal updates can only be accepted in limited circumstances and will be
assessed against the MIC match data to determine if the information
provided is reasonable and acceptable.

Documented evidence

If information cannot be accepted verbally, the customer must be given
the opportunity to provide suitable evidence to support any update. If
the customer is unable to provide suitable evidence, additional
information may be sought from relevant third parties and may be applied
to the customer’s record.

The Resources page contains links to guides and documentation that will
support Compliance Officers (COs) in the processing of MIC
interventions, including links to Assessing Additional Risk, Assessing
and Coding Income and Assets, Source Document Options, Documenting
requirements for MIC Interventions, Intervention text for customer and
3rd party verification, the ATO information request form, contact
details and a link to the Customer Compliance online Service desk. It
also contains examples of examples to assist COs in determining if the
evidence is sufficient and if Verbal updates are reasonable.

Related links

Assessing and finalising MIC interventions

Trusts

Upload documents service

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Treatment of lump sums

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Assessing child care business income

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
