
Random Sample Surveys (RSS) 110-10000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Random Sample Surveys (RSS)
programme.

On this Page:

Government intent

The Random Sample Surveys (RSS) programme measures the accuracy of
welfare payments. RSS reviews are a point in time analysis of customer
circumstances, designed to establish whether the customer is correctly
paid.

Programme background

Customers are randomly selected from, and representative of, the general
population for each payment type. A standard sampling methodology
applied to the case selection provides a statistically representative
sample for analysis.

Payments reviewed by the RSS programme include:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Age Pension
-   Austudy
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Payment Accuracy

The Department of Social Services (DSS) use RSS data to calculate
payment accuracy results. DSS publishes the results in their annual
report.

Payment Correctness

The department uses RSS data to calculate payment correctness. The
measure of payment correctness is the percentage of surveys that
identify no administrative errors affecting a customer’s payment.

The department has a payment correctness target of 95 per cent.

RSS results inform decision makers about possible improvements to policy
and administration.

The Resources page contains a link to the Appeals and Reviews Branch
intranet page.

Contents

Arranging access to the Integrated Review System (IRS) and the Random
Review Results System (RRRS) for Random Sample Surveys (RSS)

Tasks to be undertaken prior to commencement of a new Trimester for
Random Sample Surveys (RSS) interviews

Random Sample Surveys (RSS) interviews and Intensive Desktop Reviews
(IDRs)

Post interview verification and finalising Random Sample Surveys (RSS)
reviews

The Quality Process for Random Sample Surveys (RSS)

Full Circumstance Review (FCR)

Related links

Getting It Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Error recording for Random Sample Surveys (RSS) reviews

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
