
Member of a couple reviews - Section 24 110-19111307

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for conducting member of a couple
reviews for customers receiving a payment under Section 24 provisions.

Initial assessment of a couple

Assessment under Section 24 enables a delegate to decide there is a
special reason not to treat a customer as a member of a couple. This
only applies in limited situations. Generally, if either member of the
couple does not, or cannot reasonably expect to benefit from the pooling
of resources that usually occurs in a member of a couple relationship.

Exercising the discretion to continue treating a customer as not being a
member of a couple occurs only after the completion of a review. The
customer's current circumstances at this time must be assessed and a
determination made to either continue payment under Section 24
provisions or not.

The intention of Section 24 is for it to be the option of last resort.
Apply Section 24 provisions only when all other reasonable means of
support have been explored and exhausted.

Reviews of Section 24 determinations

It is important to keep all cases with a Section 24 assessment applied
under close review. Especially if there is a risk of incorrect payments
due to a change of circumstances that would warrant ending the Section
24 assessment. Conduct manual reviews on a regular basis. A review must
occur every 13 weeks or earlier if warranted. Customers with
circumstances unlikely to change or a very low risk of incorrect payment
may have an annual review. If using discretion to extend the review
period beyond 13 weeks, document this on the customer's record supported
by facts.

The purpose of the review is to identify the appropriateness of
continuing to apply a Section 24 assessment. It is also to identify
whether the customer's circumstances have changed and if it is no longer
appropriate. Changes that may affect the ongoing assessment of a
customer as single under Section 24 include:

-   income and assets
-   living arrangements
-   changes to the partner's residence/visa status or overseas absences,
    i.e. cancellation of partner’s visa

There may be circumstances where the application of a Section 24
assessment is no longer applicable. Entitlements under Section 24
provisions may no longer be appropriate if:

-   a customer receiving payments under Section 24 advises they have
    separated from their partner
-   a customer receiving payments under Section 24 while in a multiple
    relationship, advises they are no longer in a multiple relationship
-   a customer is no longer in receipt of Centrelink payments or
    services and the payment has been cancelled for 13 weeks or longer
-   the partner is now on a Centrelink payment

The review process must include reviewing the circumstances at the time
of the original decision to apply Section 24 together with their current
circumstances, and the following:

-   Have the circumstances changed?
-   Are the circumstances still beyond the control of the customer?
-   Has the customer taken reasonable steps to change the circumstances
    within their control?

The review should consider if the customer has taken reasonable steps to
access funds from assets and/or income previously not readily
accessible.

The Process page contains details on the assessment process.

Current Section 24 customer and exemption from the NARWP for family member of refugees and former refugees

If the customer is partnered to a person living overseas, the arrival of
the partner (newly arrived resident) in Australia is a change in
circumstances. Therefore, a review of the Section 24 decision must
occur.

The partner may wish to claim their own income support payment upon
arrival. As a newly arrived resident, they may access an exemption to
the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP). However, they must
be the family member of:

-   the refugee or former refugee when the refugee arrived in Australia,
    and
-   that person on the date they lodge a claim for an income support
    payment (unless the refugee or former refugee has died)

As the customer and their partner are treated as single under Section
24, this decision impacts on the definition of a family member for the
purposes of the NARWP exemption. Therefore, the Section 24 review needs
to be finalised prior to considering whether the partner is eligible for
the NARWP exemption.

The Resources page contains links to forms, letter templates, Office
Locator, Section 24 Decision Support Tool, questions for member of a
couple interviews and approved text for Section 24 Questionnaire,
confirmation and rejection letters.

Related links

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Assessment of relationship status - processes, roles and
responsibilities

Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison

Eligibility for Special Benefit (SpB)

The Assurance of Support (AoS) scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
