
Initiation and customer contact for Unearned Income Interventions (UII) 110-13020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting Unearned Income Interventions only

This document outlines for Compliance Officers what to discuss with the
customer, what to do if the customer does not contact, and how to
determine the scope of the intervention.

Process for UII

UIIs use information received from a variety of sources to address the
potential risk of overpayment to customers and/or their partners from
unearned income and assets.

This process aims to increase voluntary compliance to make sure
customers receive their correct entitlements and reduce the risk of
customers being overpaid.

Compliance triggers

UIIs are triggered by several types of match data, including:

-   Annual Investment Income Report (AIIR) provided by the Australian
    Taxation Office (ATO)
-   Income and assets from companies or investment properties provided
    by the ATO
-   State Government land titles provided by state land titles bodies
-   Investment properties from internal Centrelink matching
-   Foreign Pensions from internal Centrelink profiling
-   Public advice via the Fraud tip off line
-   Family Day Care (FDC) income provided by the Department of
    Education, Skills and Employment

Initiating interventions

Interventions are conducted on customers who are or have been getting
income support payments and income from assets has not been addressed.

All UIIs are loaded to the Integrated Review System (IRS) as
non-discretionary interventions. They are initiated by the Compliance
Management Centre (CMC).

Initiated interventions will have:

-   a request to contact letter sent to the customer (and their nominee
    if applicable)
-   an intervention DOC created to record all UII actions
-   an IRS review set to held for 21 days in the future

Customer contact

A contact letter is sent to the customer requesting them to contact
Services Australia within 21 days on the phone number provided to
discuss their income and asset circumstances.

If the customer fails to respond to the contact letter, their payment
may be manually suspended and third parties contacted to obtain
information.

Attribution of Results

Prior to making any payment affecting updates, for example, Private
Company income updates or suspension action on the customer's record the
Compliance Officer must make sure they have selected the IRS review
prior to starting those updates. This is also known as accessing the
'review image'. This will make sure that any results from those updates,
for example debt outcomes, are automatically attributed to the review.

Cancelling a UII

UIIs are non-discretionary interventions. They should only be cancelled
by the CADO Service Desk. These circumstances include when the customer:

-   has recently completed a review and income has been verified
-   is a potential mismatch

The Resources page contains links to the Service Desk, user guides, DOC
templates and information to help with these interventions.

Related links

Unearned Income Intervention (UII)

Requesting verification for Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

Assessing and finalising Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Guidelines for using interpreters

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Call and screen recording - information and access

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Adding a Manual Partner Intervention

Recovery Fee Workload Management for Compliance Interventions

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Family and Domestic Violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
