
Finalising Registrar-General’s Office Interventions (RGO) 110-13050050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting Registrar-General's Office interventions (RGO)

This document outlines the process to finalise RGO death matching
interventions. This includes adult, child and care giver death matching
and the raising of any related debts.

Main objective

Data matching with State and Territory RGOs aims to identify cases when
the death of a Centrelink customer has not been reported to Centrelink.

The main objective of matching RGO death data, as soon as practicable
after reporting of the death from the relevant State or Territory RGO,
is to detect the death, stop payment(s) and recover monies which may
have been incorrectly paid.

Matching is also conducted on customers in receipt of a payment for
people with caring responsibilities, if the care receiver is reported as
a deceased person. These matches are loaded on to the care giver record,
not the deceased person record.

Data matching

Death data is received daily and monthly. The daily death data is
received from State or Territory Registrars of Birth, Deaths and
Marriages (RBDM) via the Victorian RBDM. The monthly death data is
provided by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW),
co-ordinated by the Tasmanian RBDM and is supplied to Services
Australia.

Data is matched using personal identity details that is surname, first
name, middle initial, date of birth and gender. Tight matching processes
ensure that it is highly unlikely that the wrong customer will have been
matched, however the possibility will always be considered.

Matched cases with a date of death after the date of grant of the
Centrelink payment are selected. Note: matched cases with a date of
death before the date of grant of the Centrelink payment are referred to
the Intelligence and Investigations Branch.

Automated processing

Automated processing of a death action occurs when a deceased customer
is clearly identified. If a customer requires manual death action (for
example non-customer partners of Centrelink customers), or if the
customer fails the automated death processing an Integrated Review
System (IRS) intervention is set up on the customer's record (or where
the customer is a child, on the parent/guardian's record) for processing
through a Customer Compliance team.

The Resources page contains links to the CADO Service Desk; Privacy
guides and the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner's
website.

Related links

Initial compliance checks for Registrar-General's Office Interventions
(RGO)

Initiating and assessing Registrar-General's Office Interventions (RGO)

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental Leave scheme and bereavement

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Parenting Payment (PP) and bereavement

Procedures for non -Compliance staff in Compliance Risk branch (CRB)
interventions

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
