
Assessing and finalising Unearned Income Interventions (UII) 110-13020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting Unearned Income Interventions

This document outlines how Compliance Officers assess and finalise UIIs.
It includes how to finalise the UII after the return of verification.

Assess

After obtaining the relevant information for the customer or third
party, assess and update the customer's record.

If the update results in a debt this must be fully explained to the
customer. This includes clearly explaining what information was used to
calculate the outcome. When unable to contact the customer, send a
Pre-Adverse Decision letter to the customer and/or their partner to show
how the outcome was calculated.

The customer must be given the chance to provide more information before
the outcome is finalised.

Finalise

The intervention is finalised after:

-   the conversation with the customer
-   delivering the education message, and
-   calculating any changes to the customer's and/or their partner's
    entitlement

If the customer does not contact in response to the Pre-Adverse Decision
letter or fails to give more information, the outcome will be finalised.

Before finalising, check that all completed activities undertaken as
part of the UII are correctly attributed to the review in IRS.

When making an unfavourable decision, the Decision Maker (DM) must:

-   explain the decision to the customer and give them a chance to give
    more information or evidence relevant to the decision
-   tell the customer their review rights and record a request for a
    review of the decision if needed

Make 3 genuine attempts to contact the customer. If unsuccessful, issue
a manual Q888 Pre-Adverse Decision letter before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains links to the Service Desk, user guides, DOC
templates and information to help with these interventions. It also
explains how to upload, amend and delete Earnings Apportioning Tool
(EAT) calculation sheets.

Related links

Initiation and customer contact for Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

Requesting verification for Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

Adding a Manual Partner Intervention

Authenticating a customer

Call and screen recording – information and access

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Family and domestic violence

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Interpreter Services

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Recovery Fee Workload Management for Compliance Interventions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
