
Manually loading a Partner Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For service centre, zone office and Review staff.

This document outlines information about how a review may be required to
confirm partner details as part of a customer's eligibility and
entitlement to Centrelink payments. Note: where the term 'review' is
used, this also applies to interventions.

On this Page:

Manually loading Partner Reviews

As this procedure relates to manually adding a Partner Review from
within the Integrated Review System (IRS), it is only applicable for
Review Types which are processed in IRS, such as Compliance or Fraud
reviews.

If the partner is in receipt of payment in their own right then a
separate review should be conducted and a separate result claimed on
IRS. A Partner Review should only be loaded if the information received
is likely to impact the partner's or ex-partner's payment(s). The
Partner Review should be created as soon as action is commenced on the
original review in order to attribute the results of any actions. If the
Partner Review has not been created before action is commenced,
attributable results will not be able to be claimed.

Partner not in receipt of Centrelink income support payment

Where the partner is not in receipt of a Centrelink income support
payment, details should still be confirmed to ensure that there are no
changes in circumstances that will affect the primary customer's
payment. Any changes made due to the partner's circumstances where the
partner is not a customer, will need to be recorded as results for the
original review.

A Partner Review must not be initiated if the partner is not a customer,
or did not receive entitlement during the period in question. There is
no legal basis to review a person who is not a Centrelink customer in
their own right. Another person's circumstances may be investigated as
part of a review of the entitlements of a Centrelink customer, even
though that person is not a customer, if that person's circumstances
could affect the entitlement of the Centrelink customer.

Service Updates and Program Reviews

Service Updates and Program Reviews will have a Secondary Partner
Service Update or Review automatically loaded to the IRS when the
customer being reviewed has a current partner. Secondary Service Updates
or reviews are identified in IRS by a Secondary Review Type of 'PPL'
which can be used as part of any search criteria on all IRS search
screens to identify all Secondary Partner Service Updates or Reviews
associated with the search.

To create a Partner Review in the IRS, it must have the same Review Type
as the primary review. This must be created by accessing the New Review
(IRNR) screen. The manual Partner Review must have a Review Reason of
'MPR' (Partner Review - manual).

It is not appropriate to use the manual partner code of 'MPR' to load a
new review to IRS where the review is for another reason other than a
manual partner review. For example, loading an 'MPR' when the customer
has no linked partner.

Note: not all reviews processed in IRS are subject to manually adding a
Partner Review.

The Resources page contains the Austrac Access and Disclosure document
and a table of types of Partner Reviews which can be loaded to IRS.

Related links

Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Navigating in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Linking reviews in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review System (IRS)

Extracting Service Update and Review data in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
