[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process for the annual Parental Income Test
(PIT) review. These reviews are for dependent ABSTUDY customers only.

PIT

A dependent customer's rate of ABSTUDY payment is based on the combined
parental income in the appropriate tax year. Services Australia will ask
the customer to provide updated parental income after the end of each
financial year. This will ensure the correct rate of ABSTUDY is paid.

In some cases, customers may be exempt from PIT.

Base tax year

Services Australia will assess a customer's rate using income from the
base tax year. The base tax year is the financial year ending in the
calendar year before the current calendar year. For example, for the
2023 calendar year, it is the 2021/2022 financial year. This is because
the financial year is complete and the customer's actual combined
parental income is generally available.

Completing a PIT review

Dependent ABSTUDY customers will need to complete a PIT review unless:

they are PIT exempt

a PIT copy occurs by the second Monday of September for the appropriate
tax year. The parent/guardian must receive one of the following for this
to occur:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Child Care Benefit (CCB) or
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

To complete a PIT review, customers will receive a letter with a One
Time Access Code (OTAC). This will request their parent(s)/guardian(s)
use the [] Advise parental income online service to provide the
information.

See Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY).

Information to be provided by parent/guardian(s)

The parent(s)/guardian(s) will need to provide:

-   actual or estimated income figures for the most recently completed
    financial year. This must include all components of combined
    parental income that form part of the Parental Income Test (PIT)
-   the date of issue of their Notice of Assessment (NOA) from the
    Australian Taxation Office. If this is not available, they can
    provide an estimated date of when it will be available

Some parent(s)/guardian(s) may also need to provide current income
assessment information.

Contents

Dealing with ABSTUDY enquiries about annual Parental Income Test (PIT)
reviews

Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews

Related links

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY) reviews

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
