
Employment Services Provider reports customer commenced employment but income not declared 110-08030000

-   Background
-   
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a discussion is required with a customer,
where notification has been received that a customer has been placed in
employment by one of the Employment Services Providers and the customer
has not declared income from employment.

Electronic notification of customer employment

When a provider places a job seeker in employment or becomes aware of a
job seeker finding their own employment, an electronic transaction is
created and transmitted to Services Australia. An alert within the
Earnings and Reporting Workflow or a DOC recorded from self-managed
service reporting will notify the Service Officer that a job placement
has occurred and the job seeker has not recorded any employment income
or hours worked on their Reporting Statement. Service Officers are able
to view the information regarding job referral and placement recorded by
the Employment Service Providers within the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations system.

Regular reporters

For customers who are regular reporters with a report due, an alert will
appear in the Earnings and Reporting Workflow if the job commencement
date is within the previous 14 days. If the commencement of employment
is more than 14 days in the past or a future date, no alert will be
created and no action is required. When the alert is presented the
Service Officer is required to discuss the job placement with the
customer. The report cannot be finalised until a valid outcome reason is
recorded. If the customer reports online, a DOC will be recorded and the
customer advised to contact Services Australia before payment is
processed to discuss employment. If the customer reports via phone self
service a DOC will be recorded and the customer will be put through to
Smart Centre Call.

Notification or variable reporters

For customers who are notification reporters or variable reporters who
do not have a report due, an Urgent Issue will appear to advise the
Service Officer that they must have a discussion with the customer about
the job placement at their next contact.

If such customers are contacting to declare employment income or hours
worked, instead of selecting the Urgent Issue, Service Officer should
record the details via the workflow as this action will finalise the
Issue.

Reports lodged via self-managed service channels, fax or mail

[] Where customers lodge or report their Reporting Statement via
self-managed service channels (online account, Express Plus application
or phone), fax or mail and do not declare employment income or hours,
they are presented with a dynamic question set. This will determine if
contact with the agency is required or if payment can be stimulated. If
payment is not stimulated the customer will be required to have a
discussion with a Service Officer and/or the provider where possible
before payment is stimulated.

The Service Officer must record the outcome of the discussion on the
system. There are five available options:

-   Customer will now declare income from employment: This is likely to
    occur where a customer may not have realised that income from
    employment needs to be declared in the fortnight it was paid
-   Earnings previously declared: This is to be used when a customer
    indicates that they have declared paid income from the employer in a
    previous fortnight and this has been confirmed
-   Job commencement date is in the future: The customer indicates that
    the start date of a job placement is in the future. Alerts will
    appear for the next three reporting periods if no employment income
    or hours are declared
-   Information is incorrect or the job did not eventuate: This needs to
    be confirmed with the provider or the customer’s employer where
    permission has been given by the customer
-   Further discussion required with Employment Services Provider or
    employer: This option is only to be used in the instances where
    neither the provider or the employer can be contacted to confirm the
    information as provided by the customer or the customer has lodged
    their form by fax or mail and cannot be contacted

Affected customer groups

Job seekers with compulsory participation/ mutual obligation
requirements on the following payments who report fortnightly, or are
variable statement or notification reporters are affected. The payments
this applies to are:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) Single
-   Parenting Payment (PP) Partnered
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Related links

Participation with Workforce Australia

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
