
Assessing and finalising MIC interventions 110-18020702

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing and finalising Manual
Income Confirmation (MIC) interventions.

Assess

Apply income information provided by the customer to clarify a
discrepancy if possible.

If the customer cannot provide a suitable update to clarify a
discrepancy:

-   For employment income. apply income information provided by the
    third party to the customer record
-   For Family Day Care Interventions only, if both the customer and
    third party have failed to respond, finalise the intervention with
    the best information available

The Compliance Officer (CO) will calculate any overpayment via an ADEX
or MultiCal debt calculation.

Manual partner intervention

To identify if the outcome could affect the current or past entitlement
of the partner or ex-partner, create a manual partner intervention on
their record.

Updates made to the customer/ partner/ ex-partner records during the
intervention will be attributed to the intervention results. The partner
must be notified of the intervention.

A manual partner intervention should not be loaded if the partner/
ex-partner:

-   was not in receipt of a Centrelink payment during the period of the
    intervention
-   has a primary intervention in their own right

Finalise

Use the finalisation script to finalise the intervention. Actions should
include any debts raised and documentation.

Request for a further explanation of decision

See Customer contact about compliance intervention decision.

The Resources page contains links to guides and documentation to support
Compliance Officers in processing MIC interventions. It includes links
for assessing and coding income and assets, DOC templates, and review
and appeal information on the Services Australia website. There are also
examples of assessing Family Day Care and the Educator Payment History
Report (EPHR).

Related links

Initiation and customer contact for MIC interventions

Raising Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) debts

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) eligibility
and applications

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessing salary sacrificing/salary package arrangements for employment
income

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Customer contact about compliance intervention decision

Debt tools

Earnings Apportionment Tool (EAT)

Exempt Income

General debt raising information

Manually calculating Centrelink entitlements

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Recording and correcting employment income details

Small debt waivers

Treatment of lump sums

Upload documents service

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
