
Assessing and finalising Employment Income Interventions (phone based) (EIIP) 110-13010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting Employment Income Interventions - Phone (EIIP)

This document outlines the customer conversation, determining the
customer and/or partner's employment situation, and finalising an EIIP.
It includes delivering the education message, assessing earnings and
raising any related debts.

Customer conversation

Contact the customer to:

-   discuss the customer and/or their partner's employment situation
-   give the education message
-   address the compliance triggers

EIIP policy is that there is no need for documented verification
(payslips). Obtain information verbally from the customer.

If the customer is contacted by the Outbound Dialler, create an
intervention DOC to document customer interactions and record updates
throughout the intervention process.

If a Request for information (IRSRFI) letter is sent to the customer,
use the DOC that is created on the record.

Assessing earnings

After obtaining the relevant employment information, update the
customer's record and assess earnings. If the update results in a debt:

-   fully explain this to the customer
-   give the customer the chance to provide more information before
    finalising the outcome

If unable to contact them, send a Pre-Adverse Decision letter to the
customer and/or their partner to advise how the outcome was calculated.

Attribution of results

Before updating employment income details on the customer's record, the
Compliance Officer must make sure they have selected the IRS review.

This is also known as accessing the Review Image. This will make sure
that any results from those updates attribute to the review. For
example, debt outcomes.

Finalising an EIIP

Finalise the EIIP after:

-   the conversation with the customer, giving the education message and
    calculating any changes to the customer's and/or their partner's
    entitlement
-   the conversation with the customer, giving the education message,
    and the customer failing to call back after requesting time to get
    their wage details

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
Service Desk, DOC and letter templates and user guides.

Related links

Initiation and customer contact for Employment Income Interventions
(phone based) (EIIP)

Adding a Manual Partner Intervention

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Call and screen recording - information and access

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Earnings Apportionment Tool (EAT)

Family and domestic violence

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Interpreter Services

Recording and correcting employment income details

Recovery Fee Workload Management for Compliance Interventions

Referral for Anomalies and Mismatches for Compliance Interventions

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Types of Centrelink debts and how they are generated

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Using the MultiCal debt calculator

Viewing a Centrelink customer's digital image

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
