
Initiation and customer contact for Business Income and Bank Interest (BIBI) interventions 110-18121104

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for BIBI interventions. This includes
initiation, customer contact and updates, both verbal and documented.

BIBI interventions

These interventions are triggered from external data matching with the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The intervention gives the customer
the chance to confirm or update their business income and bank interest
information provided to Services Australia by third parties.

-   Business income declared to Services Australia differs from the
    business income details provided to Centrelink by the ATO
-   Bank interest: investment amounts declared to Services Australia
    differ from the interest income from investments assessed by the ATO

Initiation

All BIBI interventions are loaded into Customer First as
non-discretionary interventions. They are centrally initiated by the
Payment and Integrity (P&I) Operations Strategy team via Selection
Intervention Management System (SIMS).

Initiated interventions will have a Business Income and/or Bank Interest
letter sent to the customer (and their nominee if applicable) via
registered mail and/or myGov/Secure Online Mail (SOM).

Registered Mail

A Registered Mail process was implemented to support compliance
interventions. The process aims to ensure customers receive their
correspondence related to the compliance interventions.

For more information on the process and how Compliance Officers process
returned correspondence, see Registered Mail Processing.

Customer contact

A Business Income and/or Bank Interest letter is sent to the customer
asking them to contact Services Australia on the listed phone number to
discuss their income details.

If the customer fails to respond to the letter, or fails to supply
verification after agreeing to do so:

-   their payments may be suspended
-   third party information will be sought and may be applied to the
    customer's record

Verbal updates

A customer may provide a verbal updates for Bank Interest interventions.
The Compliance Officer will assess that information against the Bank
Interest match data to decide if it is reasonable and acceptable.

For Business Income interventions, Compliance Officers will gather all
required information and ask the customer to provide relevant
documentation.

Documented evidence

If information cannot be accepted verbally, the customer must be given
the chance to provide suitable evidence to support any update.

If they cannot provide suitable evidence, more information may be sought
from relevant third parties and may be applied to the customer's record.

The Resources page links to the website, contact details, forms,
templates and user guides to support staff, the education message, and
helping customers obtain bank statements.

Related links

Assessing and finalising Business Income and Bank Interest (BIBI)
interventions

Upload documents service

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Coding the Contact Screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
