
Carer notification issues 110-08040070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the notification provisions that apply to
recipients of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) when there
is a change in their circumstances.

On this Page:

Notification provisions for CP and/or CA

Recipients of CP and/or CA must observe the general 14 day notification
provisions. That is, all customers generally have 14 days to notify
Services Australia of a change in their circumstances. Exceptions apply
to Centrelink International Services (CIS) customers, and customers
notifying of bereavement events. In both these cases, the notification
period is 28 days.

Other exemptions to the 14 day rule (up to 28 days) may be granted only
by the Secretary - they may not be delegated and must be in writing.
Failure to notify of a change of circumstances may result in an
overpayment, cancellation or suspension of CP and/or CA.

Ability to comply

It is important to be aware that caring responsibilities may affect a
customer's ability to comply with the usual notification provisions -
for example, the carer may find it difficult to attend an office to
notify of a change in their circumstances. In these cases it is
necessary to sensitively discuss with the customer alternative ways of
complying with their notification obligations (for example, phone, fax,
post, e-mail, or by appointing a correspondence nominee).

Obligation to notify of a change in circumstances

CP and/or CA place an obligation to notify equally on the carer and the
care receiver. If the care receiver is a child, the obligation to notify
of a change rests with the parent to notify of any changes in
circumstances that may affect the carer's entitlement to CP. This
procedure contains a list of additional notifiable events for CP and/or
CA.

Obligation to report employment income for CP

[] CP carers can report employment income, volunteer work, training or
study activities and the number of hours they worked per week including
travel time, using the online Report Employment Income service. CP
carers can also choose to use respite of 7 days per week where they
exceed the 25 hours per week rule as an alternative to cancellation of
their CP. The procedure Reporting Employment Income via Centrelink
online account contains further information.

Obligation to notify changes to adjusted taxable income for the CA income test

CA carers who are not exempt from providing their income details for the
Carer Allowance income test must notify the following changes to their
adjusted taxable income:

-   the carer’s adjusted taxable income for the previous tax year was
    $250,000 or more
-   the carer and their current partner’s combined adjusted taxable
    income for the previous tax year was $250,000 or more, or
-   the carer or their partner are 60 years of age or over and have an
    account-based income stream

Related links

Notification provisions

General 14 day notification provisions

Appointing nominees

Obligation of nominees

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
