
Corrective Services interventions (COR) 110-13050110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting Corrective Services interventions (COR)

This document outlines the process for actioning COR interventions.

Aim

COR interventions assess entitlement to income support payments for
customers who may be in prison or other correctional facilities.

Information from Department of Corrective Services (DCS) from all states
and territories in Australia is used to data match details of current
and suspended income support customers. The primary aim of these
interventions is to ensure that customers are not incorrectly paid
income support while incarcerated.

Payments administered by Services Australia are not usually payable to
customers while they are in correctional facilities. Exceptions exist
for:

-   customers entitled to ABSTUDY Lawful Custody Allowance, and
-   certain Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers in psychiatric
    confinement for a criminal offence

The compliance trigger may include past periods. Compliance Officers
need to address the compliance trigger for the period the customer was
receiving income support.

Initiation

Customer Compliance teams initiate COR interventions after initial
checks to make sure the information in the match data is a match with
the customer's record.

Services Australia receives data from DCS and compares it with customer
data to ensure there is a correct match. DCS should only be contacted in
limited cases, for example if there are discrepancies needing
verification such as:

-   missing or invalid dates in the data which need to be determined
-   the customer disputes imprisonment or the dates of imprisonment, or
-   identity checking is needed, for example, date of birth, signature
    sample, photographs

If the selection does not relate to any Centrelink customers, the
Compliance Officer (CO) must cancel the intervention.

Customer contact before cancelling or suspending payments

Under Guidelines for the use of Data-Matching in Commonwealth
Administration, the Information Commissioner agreed to an exemption from
December 1997 to cancel or suspend payments before contact is made with
the customer for customers who have been imprisoned and are still
receiving payment.

However, a customer contact letter must be sent to the customer as soon
as possible after the action has been taken. A letter is available for
this purpose.

Note: this exemption does not apply if the customer has already been
released from prison.

The Resources page contains links to the Service Desk, the contact
details, user guides, DOC templates and intranet links.

Related links

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Aliases and other names (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse
customers, cultural considerations etc.)

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Outstanding compliance action for imprisoned job seekers

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in
psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
