
Department of Home Affairs (DoHA) Interventions 110-13050120

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting Department of Home Affairs Interventions.

This document outlines the process for initiating and contacting the
customer (carer) for DoHA Interventions. It includes discussion, action
to take if the customer does not contact, and how to assess and finalise
these interventions.

Aim

The aim of these interventions is to address the ongoing eligibility of
customer in receipt of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance when the
carer or care receiver travels overseas without their qualifying carer
or care receiver.

The purpose of the DoHA compliance interventions is to:

-   create early, effective and high quality engagement with customers
-   educate customers about their Centrelink reporting obligations to
    make sure the customer is getting the correct payment and stop
    and/or minimise customers incurring debts

This will be done by:

-   giving an education message to the customer about caring
    responsibilities and respite/portability provisions available to
    them
-   assessing the customer's entitlement
-   explaining the outcome to the customer

Data matching

Data matching is used to match all Australian and New Zealand citizens,
Australian permanent resident visa holders and holders of qualifying
temporary visas who leave Australia against Centrelink customer records.

The objective is to promote greater compliance with eligibility
conditions for Centrelink.

Centrelink customer information is matched against DoHA records using
surname, forename, middle initial, date of birth and gender as match
keys.

Compliance triggers

Carer/Care Cessation (CCE)

This intervention identifies when a carer or care receiver travels
overseas for more than 30 days. The review is loaded on the carer's
record and information relating to the travel is collected from the
Immigration Advised Movements (RSIM) screen. The carer may not meet the
eligibility criteria to receive Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) as respite may be exceeded if absence is temporary.

Initiation

Customer Compliance staff initiate these interventions after initial
checks to make sure the information in the data match matches the
customer's record.

Customer contact

The customer will be contacted by an outbound call, or via an inbound
call when responding to a Request to Contact letter (Q640).

The Q640 letter requires the customer to contact within 21 days on the
provided phone number to discuss their current circumstances.

If the customer fails to respond to the Q640 letter, their payment may
be suspended or cancelled.

Verbal updates

When the customer responds, trusting verbal information provided by the
customer is appropriate unless discussions indicate that documented
verification is required.

Completing the Intervention

Once a discussion has been held with the customer and all the relevant
information has been gathered, the customer's eligibility for payment
must be assessed while the customer is on the phone. This is to avoid
the need to make additional phone calls to the customer and issuing the
Pre Adverse Decision letter.

If the update results in a cancellation and/or debt this must be fully
explained to the customer. Advise the customer the reason for the
cancellation/debt and how and what information was used e.g. travel
dates, respite days.

Check that all activities completed as part of the Intervention are
correctly attributed to the review in IRS.

Finalise the intervention after:

-   the conversation with the customer
-   delivering the education message, and
-   calculating any changes to the customer's entitlement

If the customer has had their payments cancelled due to Failure to
Contact (FRC), the match travel period/s will not be applied to their
record. A discussion has not be held with the customer around their
circumstances to determine if there has been a loss of eligibility to CP
and/or CA.

A display on access DOC will be generated for future contact with the
customer to discuss their circumstances. The intervention will then be
finalised.

Pre Adverse Decision Letter

There may be scenarios where the debt cannot be raised and finalised
while the customer is on the phone. The customer must be given the
opportunity to provide further information before the debt is finalised.
If the customer is not on the phone, three call attempts are required to
contact the customer, if unsuccessful a Pre Adverse Decision letter is
issued.

Where the customer does not contact in response to the Pre-Adverse
decision letter or fails to give more information the outcome can be
finalised.

Related links

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Appointing nominees

Australian residence requirements for payment

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Call and screen recording – information and access

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability and
temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Carer Allowance (CA) customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Family and domestic violence

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Interpreter Services

Social workers role in Payment and Integrity

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Using the MultiCal debt calculator

Notification provisions (CLK)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Portability of payments

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre Call
staff for pension payments

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
