
Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes used to cancel a Service Update or
Review in IRS. This includes Compliance Interventions or Intelligence
and Investigations Branch and Host Reviews.

When to cancel a Service Update or Review

The IRS coordinates Service Updates and Reviews undertaken by Centrelink
staff. IRS can be used to monitor progress, action and record the result
of a review.

A Service Update or Review can be cancelled in the IRS when a decision
not to review the customer's circumstances is made.

Examples of when a review must be cancelled:

-   The review information is incorrect
-   Examination of the customer's record shows no discrepancy
-   The customer has been reviewed within the previous 12 weeks for the
    same or similar circumstances
-   Preliminary examination of the customer's record indicates that the
    information has already been provided
-   No triggers have been identified when undertaking system checks to
    determine if the review should be cancelled or continued. Note: a
    VEDA, OLS (HIC and AEC) check will only provide a trigger to
    determine whether the review should be cancelled or continued

Service Update and Review status

Only Service Update or Reviews with a primary status of Registered (REG)
or Started (STA) can be cancelled in the IRS.

Generally, a started Compliance or Intelligence and Investigations
Branch review should be progressed to finalisation, unless the review
should not have been started in the first place. For example,
information was already provided.

When the review cannot be finalised (for example it has been open for
some time without action) and there is not enough information to assess
that the customer's rate is correct, cancel the review and document why.

Service Updates and Host Reviews

Service Updates and Host Reviews cannot be manually cancelled from
within the IRS. Where a Service Update or Host Review has been cancelled
in IRS, the cancellation has occurred through a Service Profiling or
Host System auto process.

The Cancel Review Reason is also passed by the Service Profiling or Host
System. If no Cancel Review Reason is passed then IRS will apply 'NRP'
(No Reason Provided).

Intelligence and Investigations Branch reviews

These reviews have separate security which prevents a started review
from being cancelled.

Some stated Intelligence and Investigations Branch reviews can be
cancelled if the action is performed by staff who have access to cancel
a started review.

Reviews are only to be cancelled in IRS by Compliance Management Centre (CMC) or staff with appropriate authority

A review should only be cancelled by the Compliance Management Centre
(CMC) unless the relevant Operational Blueprint process indicates that
staff with the appropriate authority are able to undertake this action
for example staff conducting Corrective Services Interventions.

Automatic cancelling and combining of reviews

Reviews processed in IRS may be automatically cancelled and combined
with another review of the same Review Type.

When this occursm the most recently loaded review is cancelled with a
Cancel Review Reason of 'CMB' (Combined). If match data is present in
the cancelled review, the match data will be copied to the actionable
review and displayed on the Match Summary (IRMS) screen.

Reasons for automatic cancelling of a review

IRS will only automatically cancel a review in the following
circumstances:

-   it is combined with another review at the time the review is loaded
    (cancel and combine)
-   the review action end date has been reached, or
-   the match data in the review has been deleted

When the review is cancelled by automatic IRS processing, the Logon ID
within the review record is reset to a value of '*IR' to indicate that
the last action was generated by the IRS.

Match data from automatic cancelled reviews

All newly combined match data will be displayed on the Match Summary
(IRMS) screen. Multiple match data records will only be visible on
reviews that are automatically combined in the IRS. Manually loaded
reviews which are combined manually will not display match data.

Cancelling a review using reason 'Not a Valid Match' (NVM)

Cancelling a review for reason 'NVM' is only to be used when the match
information does not relate to the customer. Approval must be obtained
to use this reason.

Validation of cancelled reviews

Reviews cancelled in IRS are monitored to identify if:

-   a review has been incorrectly cancelled
-   the action to cancel the review was authorised
-   the correct Cancel Review Reason was used, or
-   a second review has been incorrectly manually loaded to replace a
    cancelled review

The Resources page contains a list of reviews that are able to be
cancelled, Cancel Review Reasons associated with each Review Type, an
explanation of each Cancel Review Reason and a link to the Customer
Compliance Service Desk Online Enquiry Form.

Related links

Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
