
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) Interventions 110-13060090

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff undertaking CSHC Interventions

This document outlines the process for contacting customers and
assessing and finalising CSHC interventions.

Aim

The aim of the intervention is to:

-   create early, effective and high quality engagement with customers
-   educate CSHC customers about their notification obligations to stop
    and/or minimise incurring debts

Triggers

CSHC interventions are triggered by Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) data
from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and matched with CSHC
customers.

An intervention is undertaken if the CSHC holder's income exceeds the
applicable income limit for the relevant tax year. The card may be
cancelled if their income exceeds the limit and there may be an
overpayment if they have received any payments associated with the card.

Supplements

The Seniors Supplement payment (SSP) was introduced from 20 September
2009. It replaced Seniors Concession Allowance (SCA) and Telephone
Allowance (TAL) for CSHC holders. SSP was abolished from 20 June 2015.

Before 20 June 2015, the Energy Supplement was automatically paid to
CSHC holders who chose to receive SSP. If a CSHC holder declined SSP,
they would not have received Energy Supplement.

Since 20 June 2015, the only quarterly supplement is Energy Supplement.
This is paid each quarter on or shortly after the test days of 20 March,
20 June, 20 September and 20 December. A quarter starts on a test day
and ends the day before the next test day. Payments are within a few
days after the test day.

From 20 March 2017, CSHC holders need to meet grandfathering provisions
to continue to receive Energy Supplement.

Initiation

All CSHC interventions are loaded to the Integrated Review System (IRS).
They are centrally initiated by Payment and Integrity Operations
Strategy (P&I OPS).

Customer contact

A request to contact letter is sent to the customer asking them to
contact within 21 days about their eligibility for the CSHC.

If the customer does not respond to the letter, or fails to supply
verification after agreeing to do so:

-   their ongoing eligibility to the card will be cancelled
-   the match data will be used to determine their entitlement for the
    relevant financial year(s) and any overpayments

Verification from customer or third party

The customer may be able to provide information verbally. If documented
verification is required, the customer must be given the chance to
provide suitable documents before contacting any third parties.

If the customer advises they were not required to lodge a tax return for
any of the subsequent years due to their low income, they must provide a
verbal update of their ATI for each tax year.

If the customer fails to contact or is unable to provide verification of
income, match data will be used to assess the record.

Assessing the information

Assess and apply to the customer record the information supplied by the
customer/third parties or the information in the match data.

If unable to contact the customer, send a Pre-adverse decision letter to
the customer and/or their partner to advise them how an overpayment
outcome was calculated.

Finalising the intervention

After gathering all the information and source documents, assess the
customer's eligibility for the CSHC and payments as soon as possible.

If verbal updates or verification result in an overpayment, take
appropriate action to investigate and raise a debt before finalising the
intervention.

The Resources page contains DOC and letter templates, questioning user
guide and links to forms, contact details and intranet pages.

Related links

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Quarterly Supplement

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card Holders

Cancellation of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Lodgement of the notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Raising Pension Supplement and Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP) debts

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Family and domestic violence

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Interpreter Services

Appointing nominees

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
