
Dealing with Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) applicant enquiries about End of Year (EOY) review forms 110-07070020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about common applicant enquiries
about the End of Year (EOY) circumstance review form and questionnaire.
This is sent in late October to applicants of continuing Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) students.

The review is done to confirm an AIC student's isolation or other
circumstances. This includes education details and living arrangements
for the following year and to decide their eligibility for continuing
benefits.

Applicant enquiries

Enquiries may include:

The applicant's payment has ceased:

-   Payments may have been cancelled due to non-return of the EOY
    review. If the applicant needs a new form, reissue the review form.
    If the applicant has returned the EOY review, and it has not been
    processed within 21 days of being received, send an ACTDOC to LPT

The applicant has lost or misplaced or did not receive their EOY review
form:

-   The applicant's address details on the system may be incorrect. If
    necessary, update the address details. Reissue the review form

The applicant is no longer the parent/guardian of the student and is no
longer claiming AIC:

-   The applicant will need to complete the first question on the form,
    sign the declaration and return it in the envelope supplied. The
    person who is currently the parent/guardian of the student must
    complete a new AIC claim form (SY040) if they wish to claim payment

The applicant (and/or partner) does not have a Notice of Assessment
(NOA) from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for the relevant
financial year:

-   These and evidence of any other income are needed for assessment of
    the Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA). The applicant can give an
    estimate of their income with a letter from a qualified accountant
    or tax agent stating the expected income for the particular
    financial year and the expected date they will have their NOA
    available

The applicant wants an explanation of the reassessment process:

-   The information is needed to confirm the student's entitlement for
    the coming year. If the information is not provided, payments will
    cease on 31 December

The applicant wants to know what date they have to lodge the form:

-   The applicant is able to lodge the form by 31 December of the
    following year for benefits to be payable from 1 January of that
    year. (If the EOY review form is returned after the time limit for
    BRETting, usually about 26 weeks after the form was sent to the
    applicant, it can only be processed by an AIC Smart Centre by
    treating it as a new claim activity)

Related links

Reissuing an Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY)
review form

Receiving and assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of
Year (EOY) review forms

Requesting additional information for Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) End of Year (EOY) review forms

Assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY)
review forms where additional information has been requested

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
