
Income stream reviews - coding accuracy 110-19011125

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff trained in Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR).

This document explains the process for coding accuracy reviews in
Process Direct.

Purpose

Under the Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR) process, the system
will conduct a coding accuracy check each April. This makes sure the
following income stream types are being assessed correctly:

-   Lifetime (complying and non-complying and type LIS, ANL, ARL, ARP)
-   Life Expectancy (complying and types LIE, ANN, ARS, ART)
-   Term Income Stream (non-complying and types TIS, ANN, ARS, ART)
    products

The old product type codes (ANN/ARS/ART/ANL/ARL/ARP) were not converted
to the new codes (LIE/LIS/TIS). The product type codes need to be
rectified to prevent handoffs for future coding accuracy checks.

Coding accuracy checks

In April each year, income stream providers need to supply data to
Services Australia about certain types of income streams held by
customers.

The exceptions are:

-   Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSFs)
-   Small APRA Funds (SAFs)

See Income stream reviews.

Using this data, the coding accuracy review checks all:

-   Lifetime (LIS), life-expectancy (LIE) and term income (TIS) stream
    products, and
-   Obsolete product types (ANN/ARS/ART/ANL/ARL/ARP) that have a
    confirmed product match

Note: pooled lifetime income stream products are not subject to the
coding accuracy process.

The coding accuracy check compares a range of data items, i.e.:

-   product type
-   purchase date
-   purchase price
-   relevant number
-   residual capital value

The check is conducted to see if the income stream on the customer's or
partner's record is correct. It does not replace the indexation reviews
which occur throughout the year.

If there is a full match between the provider's data and the customer's
record, the system will finalise these checks. If there is a
discrepancy, the system creates a work item for action by a Service
Officer.

Jointly owned income streams

For jointly owned income streams, data includes the total original
purchase price with a joint ownership indicator and percentage. The
agency then records the original price on the customer's record as a
dollar amount, after accounting for the percentage of ownership relating
to the original purchase price.

For example, a customer jointly owns an income stream that had an
original purchase price of $200,000. The provider would have recorded
this as $200,000 with 50% ownership. The customer's record would have
the purchase price recorded as $100,000 factoring in the % of ownership.

The AISR process is currently excluding jointly owned product data from
being applied, as it considers the data as duplicated (not recognising
the ‘jointly owned indicator’ in provider data). Unless a manual
hand-off is triggered by at least one criteria not matching, these
products are not currently being reviewed.

If a manual hand-off is created for jointly owned products, further
investigation is needed.

Auto-finalised coding accuracy updates

When the system finalises a fully matched product check, there is no
auto update to the customer's record.

If there is an error only in the provider's Australian Business Name
(ABN), the provider's ABN will need to be updated by the Service
Officer. The Document List (DL) screen is not updated.

Partially matched products

Partial matches or discrepancies will generate a change of circumstances
work item for actioning in Process Direct. The nature of the update
depends on the error generated.

Multiple data mismatches can occur for a single product. Make sure all
notes are considered before actioning the workflow.

The Resources page has links to Process Direct current issues, contact
details for the Level 2 Policy Help Desk, Income Stream Reviews and
general considerations.

Related links

Identity matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Product matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Income stream reviews

Income stream indexation review

Review of income stream products with a residual capital value

Commutation of asset-tested income streams

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
