
Receiving and assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY) review forms 110-07070040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Service Officers in Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) Smart Centres about assessing and processing
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY) circumstance
review forms.

Review forms issued

EOY review forms for the AIC Scheme are tailored to the individual
student's circumstances. Review forms are sent to the applicant in the
last week in October. AIC students must confirm their isolation
conditions, education details and living arrangements for the following
year, to determine their eligibility for continuing payments.

The completed review forms are returned to the Student Services postal
address or by fax. The form is then scanned to the student's record and
its receipt date recorded.

Lodgement of EOY review forms

The date of receipt of the scanned review forms in the AIC Smart Centre
is recorded and sorted into three groups:

-   Group 15: update education (NYR) details only is used where no
    expected changes or supporting documents required
-   Group 16: complex (CMX) assessment required is used where expected
    changes and supporting documents is required as the child moving
    from primary to secondary
-   Group 17: where the applicant is no longer entitled to benefits and
    parental income may be required for Additional Boarding Allowance to
    be paid

Failure to return review form

When the form is not returned by 31 December of the year the form was
sent, payments are automatically cancelled from 1 January.

Payments can be restored and backdated if the form is received by 31
December for the year the applicant is reclaiming. The form cannot be
accepted if not received by this date. AIC is not payable for that year.

Note: on 1 July 2018, the intent to claim provisions were repealed for
AIC customers. This does not change the existing backdating provisions
for AIC.

The Resources page contains links to the AIC - Marginal Distance
Confirmation (SY069) and AIC Medical Statement - Student Special Needs
(SY099) form.

Related links

Reissuing an Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY)
review form

Dealing with Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) applicant enquiries
about End of Year (EOY) review forms

Requesting additional information for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY) review forms

Assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY)
review forms where additional information has been requested

Determining the Entitlement End date for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Creating a Q999 or Q888 letter

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
