
Review of income stream products with a residual capital value 110-02060040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for reviewing income stream
products with a residual capital value (RCV) which may have an effect on
a customer's payments.

RCV information

Fixed term income streams commonly pay part of the investment back at
the end of the fixed term. There are two types of fixed term income
streams - fixed term pensions and fixed term annuities. The return of
capital to the income stream recipient at the end of the term is known
as RCV. This amount will be specified in the contract. Not all fixed
term income streams have an RCV. The repayment can be as high as 100% of
the original investment or the income stream recipient may choose to
have none, that is, 0% of their investment returned at the end of the
fixed term.

Review letter

If the income stream product held by the customer or their partner has
an RCV amount greater than zero recorded, the system will send a letter
to the customer on the expiry of the product term. The letter requests
details of what the customer has done with the money received at the end
of the term. If the customer invests the money, they are asked to
provide details of the new investment. If the customer purchased an
income stream product with the money, they are asked to provide an
income stream schedule issued by the product provider. The product
details, that is, the product type, product provider name, product
reference number and the RCV amount are listed on the letter and is
based on product information available on the customer's or their
partner's Centrelink record.

An STX (super term expired) review creates in Customer First and
displays on the Future Activity List (FAL) screen. This review cannot be
completed online.

Review cycle

Customers and/or their partners have 21 days from the date of issue of
the letter to provide Services Australia with the details. The system
will send a reminder letter 28 days from the date of issue of the
original letter if there has been no response. If the customer or their
partner does not respond to the reminder letter within 28 days, the
system will suspend their payment. Their payment will cancel a further
13 weeks from the suspension where there has been no reply or updates
made.

Related links

Income stream reviews

Adding or updating a term income stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
