-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Service Officers in the Centrelink Academic Reassessment
Transformation (CART) processing team.

This document outlines the process for CART reviews. This includes when
a student has received an online or postal CART letter asking them to
complete the online study review.

Changes to the CART data exchange process

Services Australia is preparing to transition to a new student
information matching solution. It will be implemented under the
Transforming the Collection of Student Information (TCSI) project.

To support the transition and manage current workloads, the agency:

-   has stopped using the current CART process to request enrolment
    information from higher education providers, and
-   will not generate CART reviews during the transition to TCSI.
    Existing CART reviews will be finalised using the current processes

There are no changes to the reporting requirements for students. They
must continue to tell the agency within 14 days of any changes to their
enrolment.

During this transition period, staff processing CART reviews:

-   should not use CART data available in the Selection Intervention
    Management System (SIMS) after 14 July 2019
-   should use CART data available on the CART Review Initiated Summary
    in Process Direct. This includes data available after 14 July 2019

Actioning a CART review

When a CART match is established, students identified as having reduced
their study load or ceased studies will be selected for review. The
customer will be sent a notification to complete an online study review.
When a CART review is started, an Integrated Review (IRV) and Change of
Circumstances (CoC) work item is created with a status of 'Draft'. The
IRV work item is not allocated to a Service Officer for action at any
point throughout the lifespan of the CART review.

The CoC work item remains in a 'Draft' status until 1 of the following
occurs:

-   Student submits a completed response to the online review
-   Online review requests supporting documentation
-   Customer fails to supply requested supporting documentation
-   Student fails to submit the review

The status of the CoC work item will also change when an automated
update fails to complete, requiring intervention by a Service Officer.
This change in status enables allocation of the CoC work item to a CART
skilled Service Officer to investigate the student's Centrelink record
and review the CART data. Where applicable, the Service Officer will
assess the customer's responses in order to action the review in Process
Direct.

If a student has reduced their study load or ceased study, the Service
Officer may attempt to contact the student to discuss their enrolment
details and advise them of the implications of the change. The Service
Officer will also discuss possible options available to the student (for
example, increasing their workload, or offering alternative payments).
Student Activity Agreements may also be negotiated at this point.

The student's entitlement may be reassessed and an overpayment raised if
it is confirmed they were entitled to a lower rate of payment than they
received or if they lost qualification to payment.

Customer notification requirements for CART reviews

Customers undertaking study or training must notify Services Australia
within 14 days if any of the following events have occurred:

-   Starting or discontinuing a full-time course of study
-   Failing to enrol in a course as a continuing student by the end of
    the enrolment period
-   Failing to commence the course by the required start date
-   Reducing their study load below the required amount
-   Changing their enrolment status in the course (for example, leave of
    absence, deferral)

For CART reviews, there are multiple dates represented in the enrolment
data submitted by the education provider:

-   Unit withdrawal date - the actual date the student withdraws from a
    unit after the Census date, or
-   Date of Effect - the last date the student registered a change in
    study status with the education provider, or the education
    provider's reporting date (load date), or
-   Load date - the date the education provider submits the CART file

The appropriate date to consider is known as the 'CART Critical Date'
and is identified by the Date of Effect Rules. For a link, see the
Resources page.

If a student responds to a CART review and advises their change of
circumstances occurred before or within 14 days following the CART
Critical Date, the date advised by the student should be accepted. This
date is known as the 'Deemed Critical Date'. For examples, see the
Resources page.

Supporting documentation for CART reviews

Students may be asked to provide supporting documentation if one or more
of the following circumstances apply:

-   Student's response contradicts enrolment information provided by
    their education provider
-   Aggregated study load
-   Cross-institutional study
-   Course structure anomalies
-   Approved Integrated Higher Education and VET courses
-   Temporary Incapacity
-   Concessional Study-load
-   Specific academic requirements
-   Commenced a new course not recorded on their Centrelink file
-   Approved overseas study

Customers are presented with a request for supporting documentation when
they have completed the online review question set and accepted the
declaration. The student will be unable to submit a completed review
until they have uploaded requested documentation.

Changes to study load and impact on student activity test and study requirements

Students often make numerous changes to the units they are enrolled in
prior to census date. It is important to note that students who reduce
their study load below the required Equivalent Full Time Study load
(EFTSL) for their payment, then increase it to the required amount
within 14 days are considered to be meeting the activity test or study
requirements for their student payment. For an example, see the
Resources page.

The Resources page contains CART review reasons, links to forms and
resources, and scenarios for raising debts as a result of a CART review.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Study requirements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

Activity test for Austudy

Qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Undertaking full-time study requirements for Youth Allowance (YA)
students

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for 66% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing the disability study load concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Coding new study details

Coding ABSTUDY education details

Changing or correcting course of study and/or educational institution
for ABSTUDY students

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Effect on student payments of enrolment in more than one course or at
more than one educational institution

Negotiating an Activity Agreement for Youth Allowance (YA) customers
returning to study after discontinuing a previous course

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Debt ownership

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
