-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the customer identity matching process between
Services Australia and the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA). This
relates to DVA clearance processing, DVA debt recovery processing and
DVA integrity checks.

Exchange of data between Services Australia and DVA

There are 2 main automated data exchanges between Services Australia and
DVA, which allow the transmission of data for a number of purposes.

Transmissions are sent between the agencies once daily on business days
via the Secure Network Interface (SNI). The data is loaded directly onto
customer records on each system, as well as a replica of the DVA
database on the Services Australia system (known as the CQEX database).
Data transmitted between the agencies includes:

-   providing DFISA rates to DVA (which Services Australia calculates
    and DVA pays) for periods of entitlement before 1 January 2022
-   grants of income support payments and DVA Adjusted Disability
    Pensions for DVA clearance processing
-   online concession eligibility
-   DVA Debt Recovery processing
-   death details
-   DVA Integrity checks

The DVA Webservice data exchange operates continuously in real time and
is triggered during daily processing on each system. To prevent
customers from receiving dual payment of income support or Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card, the exchange controls the payment of supplements
such as:

-   Pension Supplement
-   Energy Supplement
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Veteran Supplement

Both agencies send messages to see if payments are being made to
customers by the other agency, and to notify each other of grants and
cancellations. Automated processing will occur when necessary to prevent
customers receiving a payment or card from both agencies.

Other transmissions of data include shared data from Births, Deaths and
Marriages, and Managed Investment and Listed Securities data, which are
sent through the SNI data transfer services.

Identity matching for the DVA data exchange

A suite of transactions has been established to allow data to be
transmitted via the SNI and DVA Webservice. To allow this data to be
applied to Services Australia and DVA records, identity matching
processes are in place. These identify mutual customers and create a
link between Services Australia and DVA records. When a link is
established, the customer's Customer Reference Number (CRN) is stored on
their DVA record, and the DVA Unique Identification Number (UIN) is
stored on the Services Australia record.

Identity matching can be initiated by either DVA or Services Australia.
DVA sends customer details to Services Australia, where a match will be
attempted via the Indexing Manager Facility. This provides for automatic
and manual matching of external agency and Services Australia customers,
according to established indexing standards. If a match is unclear and
can't be established automatically or there are multiple potential
matches, manual matching will be carried out by the DVA Clearance Team.

At times DVA will unlink a customer's record from their corresponding
Services Australia record. DVA transmits the unlink request to Services
Australia, which produces a DVAUNL manual follow up for the DVA
Clearance Team to complete.

Services Australia initiates identity matching with DVA records when
customers become eligible for DFISA payments and during all claims,
restorations and reassessments of:

-   pension (PEN)
-   parenting (PGA)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (SHC)
-   allowances (NSS)
-   Carer Allowance (CDA)

Matching is conducted against the Services Australia CQEX database,
which contains a complete record of all DVA customers and is primarily
used for businesses to confirm concession entitlements in the Centrelink
Confirmation eServices (CCeS) system.

Matching will be completed automatically if the customer's Services
Australia and DVA details correspond closely. However, if a match is
unclear, manual matching will be conducted by the DVA Clearance Team
(SCS) via a DVALINK manual follow up. SCS can also manually link and
unlink customer records if needed.

The Resources page contains a link to ICT Security Portal and contact
details for the DVA Clearance Team.

Related links

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Completing Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances and income
coding

Recovery of debts via the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
