
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY) reviews 110-07070000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed for End of Year (EOY)
reviews for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC).

On this Page:

Circumstance review

The End of Year (EOY) reviews for AIC applicants take the form of an
annual circumstance review. For those applicants who receive Additional
Boarding Allowance (ABA), a parental income review is included. The
reviews are sent to applicants in late October to confirm a student's
entitlement to payments for the following year.

The circumstance review is designed to verify a student's education
details and their living arrangements. The review also asks whether the
student's isolation or other eligibility details are the same or have
changed. For special needs students with short-term health-related needs
or those with a deemed isolation circumstance, the applicant may be
required to provide a renewal of evidence.

The income review is designed to determine the level of ABA payable for
the following year for students who are boarding. Where parental income
has been provided, the circumstance review asks the applicant to advise
their (and their partner's) new financial year income. Where an
applicant or their partner is on income support, similar payment or hold
a current Health Care Card issued to families in receipt of the maximum
rate of FTB part A. They are not included in the income review because
these customers have their eligibility for a Parental Income Test (PIT)
exemption verified through an existing PIT link.

AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) students

AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) students will not be selected
for the review. These students will be reviewed individually by the
appropriate AIC Smart Centre. Other students who will not be reviewed
are those that are current with a future cancellation date of other than
1 January next calendar year who are completing Years 12 or 13 and
students who will be over the maximum AIC age by 1 January of the
following year.

Failure to respond

If applicants do not respond to the review, payments will be cancelled
from 1 January of the following year. However, if the form is lodged by
31 December of that year (to which the EOY review applied) and the
student is eligible, payments can be restored from 1 January.

Contents

Reissuing an Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY)
review form

Dealing with Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) applicant enquiries
about End of Year (EOY) review forms

Receiving and assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of
Year (EOY) review forms

Requesting additional information for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY) review forms

Assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) End of Year (EOY)
review forms where additional information has been requested

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
