
Travelling with or sending medicines overseas 110-15100000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for travelling to or from
Australia with medicines, or sending medicines overseas.

On this Page:

Accessing government subsidised medicine in Australia under PBS

To get Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medicine in Australia, a
person needs a prescription written by a doctor in Australia.
Prescriptions for medicine written in other countries cannot be filled
in Australia.

All medicine included on the PBS is listed in the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits.

Australia has Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) operating with:

-   Finland
-   Italy
-   Malta
-   New Zealand
-   Norway
-   Republic of Ireland
-   Sweden
-   The Netherlands
-   The United Kingdom

RHCAs allow eligible visitors restricted access to health care services
including the PBS.

If the person is:

-   Eligible and their prescribed medication is available for their
    condition on the PBS the prescription can be presented to an
    approved pharmacy and the medicine will be dispensed under the PBS.
-   Not eligible or the prescribed medication is not available on the
    PBS, the prescription can be filled by a pharmacist as a private
    prescription. Note: this may mean that the medicine costs more.

Bringing medicine into Australia

People staying in Australia for a short time may be able to bring
sufficient quantities of essential medicine for existing medical
conditions. Check requirements with the relevant Australian government
authorities.

Note: it may be necessary to check regulations about taking medicine out
of the country they are departing from.

Taking and sending PBS medicines overseas

It is illegal to take or send Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
subsidised medicine out of Australia for reasons other than for personal
use. Important information about travelling, taking or sending PBS
medicines overseas is available:

-   from the Services Australia website
-   by calling the Travelling with PBS medicine enquiry line

See Taking or sending PBS medicines overseas.

See the Process page for the procedure members of the public need to
complete if they plan to take or send PBS medicines overseas.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
more information and advice on taking or sending Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) medicine out of Australia.

Related links

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

PBS Stationery Online Ordering System (PSOOS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
