
Identity Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews 110-18071723

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff trained in Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR).

This document outlines how to process a manual identity match for an
income stream product. It provides information on the identity matching
process for the Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR) measure. A
manual identity match is required when customer details on the Service
Australia record do not match with the details supplied by an income
stream provider/ administrator.

On this page:

Purpose

The AISR measure enables income stream providers other than Self-Managed
Superannuation Funds (SMSF) and Small APRA Funds (SAF) to provide data
about all of their members electronically to the agency. This is for the
purpose of identifying and reviewing certain types of income streams
held by customers, concession cardholders and their partners.

The AISR measure replaces the voluntary electronic data exchange
currently in place with some income stream providers.

The implementation date for the changes was 1 January 2018 for voluntary
registrations, with mandatory compliance by providers required from 1
January 2019.

The identity matching process involves matching the income stream
provider's customers with those of the agency. This is done through a
combination of automatic and manual updates, depending on the quality of
matches.

Data file lodged

An income stream provider or administrator will be required to transfer
income stream data for all of their members at specific times of the
year, depending on the type of income stream product and the review
type. Upon receipt, the data file is validated to ensure the file meets
the necessary standards.

If the data file passes validation checks, the customer identity level
matching process proceeds. At this stage, the file is compared with the
agency's records to find matches. The matching service will calculate
results on each individual record and classify either a full match,
possible match or no match.

If the system identifies a full identity match, it will automatically
match the provider's customer data with that of the agency. If the
system determines that there is no potential match with a customer's
record, it will skip that record.

Possible and Multiple match

If identity information about an individual member from an income stream
provider fails to fully match with any customer, concession cardholder
or their partner, matching must be resolved manually. They are resolved
through the Identity Matching workflow, actioned in Process Direct.

The system creates a work item in Process Direct allowing a Service
Officer to match the provider's customer data with information on the
Centrelink system. The work item IDs are:

-   ISRIPM for a possible match, or
-   ISRIMM for a multiple match

The creation of a possible match occurs when there is a potential match
with a single customer. A multiple match occurs when the provider's
information matches multiple customer records.

Duplicate and deleted records

Multiple matches may occur when the customer has other CRNs which have
been deleted or marked as a duplicate. The Identity Matching process
checks for these records as part of the process and considers these as
potential matches. When a multiple match is present on the system, check
each individual record in Customer First to determine whether the record
is a UOE or deleted record located in Environment Y.

Match fields

Service Officers compare the potential matches from the provider's data
under the Unconfirmed Identity section against the rows listed in the
Possible Matches table in the workflow. The data in the Possible Matches
table is from the agency's database. There are multiple fields shown
under Possible Matches:

-   CRN
-   Last Name
-   First Name
-   Middle Name
-   Date of Birth
-   Sex
-   Address
-   Match Score

Match Score

The Match Score indicates the confidence level of a match between the
identity information provided by an income stream provider and the
agency's list of customer records. The Match Score is used by the system
when determining automatic matches, and the score can also be considered
by the Service Officer when selecting matches in the Identity Matching
workflow.

The Identity Matching workflow contains a Match Score for each potential
match that is identified when cross-referencing the provider data with
the agency's. The system calculates the Match Score based on Match Keys.

The system uses Match Keys to determine and prioritise the information
when comparing the provider and agency data.

The results from Match Keys are added together to produce the Match
Score. A full match score is 140, down to zero for no match. See the
Resources page for Match Keys.

Note: if a potential match has a high match score, the Service Officer
should not automatically assume that the system has made the right
choice.

Individual account details screen

When the Service Officer compares data in the Unconfirmed Identity table
against the Possible Matches listed, they can access the individual
accounts details screen to check more information on the customer's
record in Process Direct.

Selecting the relevant Customer Reference Number (CRN) from a row in the
Possible Matches table will provide more information about the selected
customer. The screen will display:

-   Name Types
-   Home Address History
-   Postal Address History
-   Other Address History

Uncertain matches

There may be circumstances where there are potential matches with a
similar Match Score, or where none of the potential matches appear
suitable. A Service Officer can use Customer First to investigate the
potentially matching customer records further. Scanned documents are
viewed on the customer's record via Document Tools. Scans may contain
information about the customer that has not been recorded, or recorded
incorrectly. For example:

-   A new, previously unrecorded address
-   Another known name
-   Errors in personal data on the record

None of the potential matches could be correct. Further investigation of
the potential matches could identify previously unknown and/or incorrect
information at the time of the system's comparison. Staff need to
investigate each potential match thoroughly before determining a
Confirmed Match or 'No Match' outcome.

The decision by the Service Officer to Confirm the Match will result in
the current and future exchange of data for the income stream product
linked to the customer's record. It is important that Service Officers
are confident in their decision to Confirm the identity match, or when
determining that there are no suitable matches.

No Matches

Service Officers are only required to investigate the potential matches
listed on the Identity Matching screen. Where it is determined that none
of the potential matches listed are a match, Service Officers are not
required to undertake their own search of potential matches.

Escalations

If identity information has been matched incorrectly, Service Officers
must immediately escalate the issue to their Technical Peer Support
Officer for action. These incorrect matches will then be escalated to
the Means Test team.

Historical changes to identity matching process

The identity matching process was reconfigured during February 2021.
This was to allow more potential matches for customers who partially
match via their name or date of birth. The product reference number and
address checks remained unchanged.

The Resources page contains details about current and historical
configurations.

The Resources page contains tables about system reference match type
codes and system reference type codes - August 2018 to February 2021.

Related links

Income stream reviews

Process Direct

Product Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
