
Witness statements 110-11030050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Intelligence and Investigations Branch only.

This document outlines information about a witness statement. It is a
written commitment of what a person is prepared to say if required to
testify in a court of law. It provides information about what they did,
said, saw or heard. It also links the witness to materials (exhibits) so
they can be tendered as evidence. This procedure includes information on
obtaining and drafting witness statements and recording details.

Information from witnesses

Obtaining information from witnesses is to be conducted according to the
Australian Government Investigations Standards (AGIS). When seeking a
witness statement, investigators must explain the provision of
information is voluntary (there are exceptions with Service Australia
employees).

A statement needs to be obtained by all witnesses the Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) will rely on to prove the case. A
witness statement has the following benefits:

-   aids the CDPP in forming the most appropriate decision concerning
    criminal proceedings
-   ensures CDPP disclosure obligations are met and defendants are
    informed of the prosecution case against them
-   can assist the accused person's defence provide informative advice
-   assists in focusing the investigator's mind on the relevant issues
    and materials
-   demonstrates the evidence Services Australia and others are able to
    give
-   provides a framework for the investigator and the prosecutor to work
    within
-   provides details of what evidence will be led during court
    procedures

Witnesses

Witnesses should be identified and prioritised during investigation
planning. Witnesses should be interviewed as soon as is appropriate to
ensure the best recall of events.

Witnesses can include:

-   the investigator (an investigator witness statement must be provided
    with the brief of evidence)
-   another Services Australia employee who has direct evidence or other
    system information
-   third parties for example financial institutions, employers,
    neighbours, relatives, surveillance operatives
-   the customer or their partner (not considered as witness statements
    but can be used as evidence)
-   an expert person

Witness statements

The correct template to use depends on the jurisdiction where the court
proceedings will occur.

Before taking or drafting a witness statement, time should be taken to
plan how it will be structured. It should be written in the language of
the witness. Include proofs of the offence, bearing in mind the rules of
evidence.

The Resources page contains links to a summary of the rules of evidence
and relevant publications on the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions (CDPP) web site.

Related links

Gathering information from internal sources

Requesting information from customers or their partners

Requesting information from third parties

Obtaining expert evidence

Record of Interview (ROI)

Planning, commencement and critical decision recording for fraud
investigations

Prosecutions

Brief of evidence preparation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
