
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Royal Commission into Robodebt, and explains
how to answer customers’ questions about it.

About the Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme

The Royal Commission was established on 18 August 2022 and inquired into
the debt assessment and recovery scheme commonly known as Robodebt. It
was an independent inquiry supported by its own staff and was not
managed by Services Australia.

On Friday 7 July 2023, the Royal Commission delivered a final report
with its findings to the Governor General.

Robodebt is a commonly used term to refer to the operation of the Income
Compliance Program, a debt assessment and recovery scheme. The program
began operating as a pilot in early 2015. It progressed through various
iterations under different names until late 2019, including:

-   PAYG Manual Intervention Process
-   Online Compliance Intervention (OCI)
-   Employment Income Confirmation (EIC)
-   Check and Update Past Income (CUPI).

Under the Income Compliance Program, the agency calculated some debts
using averaged Australian Taxation Office (ATO) income information.

When there were unexplained differences between a recipient’s reported
income and the ATO’s data, the agency used averaging to calculate those
debts.

See Income Compliance Program for more information.

What a Royal Commission does

A Royal Commission is an investigation into a matter of public
importance. It is independent of the government.

Each Royal Commission has broad powers to:

-   gather information and documents
-   compel witnesses to give evidence
-   hold public hearings.

The Royal Commission determines who will be called as a witness, based
on how their knowledge or expertise can help inform the inquiry.

See the Resources page for:

-   the Royal Commission’s website

Related links

-   Social workers’ role in Payments and Integrity
-   Income compliance program
-   Income compliance refunds
-   Income compliance program class action

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
