
Processing end of course reviews for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and PES students 110-07040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details of processing end of year reviews for
ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY PES and PES students.

When to use end of course (SY075) form

The SY075 form is sent to all ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY PES and PES students
before their recorded student end date.

It gathers details from current students to get future study intentions.
This helps to reduce disruptions for continuing students to their
payments. It also allows other assistance to be given to non-continuing
students. For PES, the SY075 form can be used as an abridged claim in
certain circumstances.

Continuation of payments

For student payments to continue, the student must satisfy:

-   study requirements for ABSTUDY, or
-   study requirements for ABSTUDY PES, or
-   the qualifying study rules for PES

The Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) or ABSTUDY (SY075) form is
automatically produced:

-   8 weeks before an ABSTUDY Student End Date, and
-   4 weeks before an ABSTUDY PES or PES Student End Date

ABSTUDY PES students transferring to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from
Parenting Payment Single (PPS) because their youngest child turns 8
years old, no longer qualifies for ABSTUDY PES on completion of their
current course.

Returning the form/notifying study details

Options for students to notify their study intentions:

-   [A self service option is available for customers.] view and manage
    their study details online if they are registered for Online
    Accounts and are authenticated
-   [A self service option is available for customers.] lodge their
    SY075 via Upload documents service.
-   [A self service option is available for customers.] over the phone
-   visit a service centre to use the self-service facilities or give
    their new course details verbally
-   by post or fax

A written response is not necessary unless there is doubt about the
student's continuing eligibility. If the PES student's course is a short
course, do not accept details over the phone, e.g. no more than 30 weeks
full-time. PES students undertaking short courses must return the SY075
or complete their response via the Manage their study details online
service, unless:

-   the course is part of an articulated short course sequence, or
-   the student’s previous course was a long course

Processing sites

For details of local processing sites for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY PES and PES,
see Processing Services.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the student before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the online version of the SY075
and Processing Services.

Related links

Manage study details option online

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
