
Requesting referral for optical surveillance 110-11040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Intelligence and Investigations Branch only.

This document outlines the process for deciding if optical surveillance
should be used to obtain information or evidence for a criminal or
administrative investigation within the Intelligence and Investigations
Branch. It also provides details on how to refer the case for optical
surveillance.

Collecting information

The collection of all information as part of a fraud matter must be
undertaken in compliance with the Privacy Act 1988. Of specific
relevance when collecting information are Australian Privacy Principles
(APP 1 - 5). In particular APP 3 states that personal information must
only be collected if the information is reasonably necessary for, or
directly related to, one or more of the entity's functions or
activities.

If the personal information is sensitive information, unless consent is
provided one of the exceptions in subclause 3.4 must apply to collect
the information.

Specific considerations for optical surveillance

As optical surveillance is an intrusive and costly investigation
technique, there are specific considerations to take into account. These
considerations are:

-   other avenues of enquiry have been considered and found to be
    unsuitable or inconclusive and it is considered the surveillance
    will enable the collection of information or evidence that will
    assist in proving the allegation
-   the benefits of obtaining the information by using optical
    surveillance are considered to outweigh the intrusion on the privacy
    of the customer and other surveillance subjects; and
-   the costs associated with conducting the surveillance are reasonable
    in comparison to the expected outcome of an evaluation case

Requesting optical surveillance

A Critical Decision Record (CDR) must be completed and approved before
requesting optical surveillance.

It is recommended that the investigator seek guidance from the Senior
Investigator/Approver of Investigation on both the appropriateness of
using optical surveillance and the preparation of the CDR.

The Resources page contains examples of when optical surveillance could
be considered to collect evidence in connection with suspected
non-compliant behaviour.

Related links

Critical decision recording

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
