
Gathering information from internal sources 110-11030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Intelligence and Investigations Branch only.

This document outlines methods for getting information for both criminal
and administrative investigations from internal sources (customer
information maintained by Services Australia). It also covers the use of
search tools for interrogating internal data and limited external data.

Customer records and files

Internal sources include customer records/files, archived information,
self service records, and Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) recordings.

The agency’s systems contain customer records in relation to payments
and programs administered by Services Australia.

Digital images of scanned documents (claims, forms and documents
provided by customers) can be viewed in customer records/files.

Archived information can be obtained using the Customer Archive
Retrieval (CAR) and the Archive and Culling Engine (ACE) tools.

Call Recording information can be obtained for inbound and outbound
calls when done using Services Australia Workspace. Staff with Verint
access can search, retrieve and listen to customer call recordings.

Customer and investigation files can be requested from the Records
Management Unit (RMU) using the Records Management service request
webform. The Resources page contains a link to the form.

Search tools

The Intelligence Query (iQ) Tool allows users to interrogate historical
internal and external data to build a historical intelligence view of
customers.

The Historical Family Allowance (HFA) system holds details of endowees
(and their dependents) paid Family Allowance between 1975 and 1988.

The Online Search (OLS) facility draws on current and historical
Centrelink customer data as well as limited data from the Australian
Electoral Commission (AEC) and Medicare (HIC) as user access permits.
Users can search for information such as names, addresses, birth dates
or bank account details.

Self service records

Interactive Voice Response (IVR) records can be retrieved using the
Archive and Culling Engine (ACE) in relation to Phone Self Service
contact by customers, for the report of employment income service only.
While the customer can perform other transactions using IVR, these are
not recorded, for example request advance payments, update telephone
numbers.

When a matter is contested and an expert witness statement is needed to
attest to ‘Self Service’ by customers, investigators should contact the
Relationship and Intelligence Management section for help.

CCTV recordings

CCTV is used to assist in the protection of staff, customers, visitors
and resources from criminal or antisocial behaviour. CCTV is used during
the opening hours of the office. Images are stored for at least 30
working days. CCTV coverage includes customer entrances, waiting areas
and customer service areas, interview rooms.

The Investigation Toolkit contains a link to the CCTV Guidelines which
outlines the process for requesting CCTV footage.

The Resources page contains a link to the Records Management service
request webform.

Related links

Locating digital images

Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR)

Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE)

Online Search (OLS) facility

Using Centrelink self service

Gathering information and evidence for fraud investigations

Call and screen recording – information and access

Creating or reviewing the investigation plan

Critical decision recording

Obtaining expert evidence

Prosecutions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
