
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the notification provisions for Family Tax
Benefit and Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Notification provisions

The notification provisions relate to the period of time a customer has
to notify Services Australia of a change in their circumstances and be
considered to have notified in time. This period of time is called the
notification period.

The notification provisions for Family Tax Benefit and CCS are as
follows:

-   Customers in receipt of CCS must notify Services Australia as soon
    as possible of any change of circumstances which may affect their
    eligibility for CCS or their amount of entitlement
-   Customers receiving Family Tax Benefit by instalments must notify
    Services Australia as soon as possible of any change in
    circumstances that would reduce their entitlement or affect their
    eligibility for Family Tax Benefit.
-   In the case of a change of address, when accommodation details are
    updated the date used should be the date the customer moved (date of
    event). If the customer's rate of rent assistance decreases, a debt
    should be raised straight away as only income related debts are left
    until reconciliation.
-   All customers have their Family Tax Benefit reconciled at the end of
    the financial year and customers who do not notify of any changes of
    circumstances will have to pay back any amounts to which they were
    not entitled.

Date of effect

The date of effect should always be the date of event for non-income
related changes.

In the event that a customer's Family Tax Benefit instalments are
restored after being cancelled and Family Tax Benefit is paid
retrospectively from date last paid, the customer's rate of Family Tax
Benefit for the retrospective period would be based on the previous
income estimate. This is the case even if at point of client contact,
the client provides a new estimate that may be relative to the
retrospective period. The new estimate must be taken from date of
notification.

Related links

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
