-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to conduct a CART review. The CART initiative
allows enrolment data on students to transfer between the Services
Australia and higher education providers.

CART review process

The agency does enrolment checks on customers receiving certain student
related payments. This will verify study details and help detect
discontinued study or reduced study load. These payments include:

-   Youth Allowance (Student)
-   Austudy (Student)
-   ABSTUDY
-   Pensioner Education Supplement
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement

The CART process will help prevent overpayments and strengthen
participation for higher education students. CART allows the agency to:

-   remain aware of a student's current study circumstances,
-   explore and provide other means of assistance and
-   adjust payments

The enrolment checks match the student's study details held on their
record against information the education provider supplies. This will
allows the agency to determine a student's enrolment status and
workload.

Note: on 16 September 2019, the agency stopped asking for student data
from the 41 universities participating in the CART data exchange
process.

The agency sends a 'Request' file on a regular schedule to each
participating CART education institution. The 'Request' file contains
data of all students getting a student payment who have advised they are
undertaking study with that institution.

CART reviews:

-   Part-time Review (PUE) - where the students Equivalent Full-time
    Study load (EFTSL) has reduced below the required EFTSL
    corresponding with their most recent education details on their
    Centrelink record
-   Withdrawn Review (WUE) - where the students report as withdrawn

CART review notifications

Once a CART match establishes, the system will select students for
review if they identify as:

-   having reduced their study load or
-   ceasing studies

[] Students registered for online services will receive a notification
letter through myGov Inbox advising they have to complete an online
review. Customers not registered for online services will receive
notification by surface mail. It will ask them to:

-   register for online services to complete the review, or
-   contact the agency via phone or face-to-face channels

Initial notification letters generated by CART reviews are created at
the same time as the online review, and are sent to customers 2 days
later.

[] Encourage customers to register for online services to complete the
review within 22 days of the commencement of the review. Students who
fail to respond to the CART review will receive a reminder notification
to complete their review. It will also inform them of the deadline to
respond before their payments suspend.

Generally, the reminder notification will issue 18 calendar days after
the initial request. This may differ depending on what day of the week
the 18th day falls on. The Resources page contains a table showing when
the reminder notification issues.

CART online review

[] Students can access their online study review using their Centrelink
online account through myGov. A reminder message, including the date to
complete the CART review by, will display to customers.

Customers can update their study details via:

-   Online services > Tasks
-   Online services >My Profile > Study Details > CART Review
-   Online Service >Study Menu > CART Review

Customers who have an outstanding CART review are unable to update their
study details via the Express Plus mobile app. Notifications will
present to customers on the Express Plus app. It will direct them to log
into the Centrelink online account to complete outstanding tasks.

The CART online review will present enrolment information including:

-   information their education institution provider supplies, and
-   current education details held on their Centrelink record

This enables the student to confirm or update their study details via
their online account. Questions will display based on individual
responses to their study load information.

The student's response to the online CART review will determine if
supporting documentation is needed. If the student has responded to
their review, and supporting documentation is needed, they are given 14
days from the day of the request to provide the information.

To submit their review, students will need to:

-   upload the necessary documentation if needed, using the Upload
    documents service
-   complete the CART online review question set
-   complete a declaration, acknowledging their responses are true and
    correct

If the customer cannot supply the requested documents immediately, they
can skip the document upload step. The customer is given 14 days to
provide the documents. They can upload information and submit the review
at a later date by selecting the Centrelink Academic Reassessment task
in their online service.

Following the upload of supporting documents, customer must complete a
further declaration to enable the submission of the completed review.

Note: students will not have access to the Manage Study Details service
in their online account or mobile app while they have an outstanding
CART Review.

CART suspensions, cancellations and application of CART (university) data

Where a customer does not 'Submit' their CART review within 22 days,
their payment will suspend with reason code SLR - Study Load Reduced.
Staff outside of CART or Payment Review teams are not to manually
restore via the Benefit Action (BA).

After completing the CART review question set, the customer has 14 days
to provide supporting documents if they are unable to do so immediately.
The system will update their study details (CART data), as advised by
their university, if the customer does not:

-   upload the required documents, and
-   submit their completed review

The system will apply the CART data where the customer fails to complete
the CART review within 36 days of the review creation. On day 37, the
CART data is automatically applied to the student's record. This may
result in:

-   cancellation of their payment with a reason code NST - Not a Full
    Time Student,
-   decreased rate of payment, and/or
-   overpayment

Managing customer enquiries

If a student contacts the agency about their CART Review, review the
CART Review Initiated Note in Process Direct.

Where the student needs to provide documents, tell the customer to
upload the information as soon as possible.

[] Staff must encourage customers to register for online services to
complete the review within 22 days of the start of the review. Where the
customer makes an informed decision not to register for online services,
record a Fast Note - select Auto Text use Students, ABSTUDY &
Apprentices > CART > CART Review Enquiry.

This template captures customer responses and creates an ACTDOC for
allocation to CART skilled staff via Workload Manager (WLM).

Where the customer contacts due to their payment being suspended SLR,
Service Officers must not restore their payment, or tell the customer
that their payments will be restored.

Tell the customer that when the information has been assessed, they will
be notified of the outcome or can check their online account.

Customers seeking priority processing of their CART review must meet
hardship or vulnerability criteria to enable prioritisation of their
review. See Table 3 on the Process page. Do not contact CART processing
teams directly to request urgent processing.

Contact regarding a debt

Review the CART Review Initiated Note in Process Direct. If the required
information was:

-   returned, it would have been considered in the reassessment of the
    student's circumstances and documented on the CART Review Initiated
    Note in Process Direct
-   not returned, the debt will be raised based on the information
    provided by the CART participating institution

After a decision is made, the decision can be reassessed, if the
customer:

-   requests a further explanation of the decision or
-   provides additional information

If the student contacts about the repayment of the debt, refer to the
Debt Recovery team. For example, to enter into a repayment arrangement.

Electronic Messaging

Before the 16 April 2018, customers would receive an electronic message
to contact about their study details. With the migration to Process
Direct, this Electronic Message has now been decommissioned.

If customers contact about a notification to complete an online study
review, refer to Processing CART reviews.

The Resources page contains a table showing when the reminder
notification will issue. It also has a list of educational institutions
participating in CART.

Contents

Processing Centrelink Academic Reassessment Transformation (CART)
reviews

Related links

General course requirements for Centrelink administered payments for
students

Study requirements for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Activity test for Austudy

Qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Undertaking full-time study requirements for Youth Allowance (YA)
students

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Debt ownership

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
