
Income stream customer reviews - defined benefit income streams 110-19011120

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information on the indexation review letters.
Customers, or their partners, get these letters if they have a defined
benefit income stream that did not update with the Automation of Income
Stream Reviews (AISR) process.

Purpose

Process Direct creates a customer review when a customer's information
cannot be matched to an income stream provider. Customers get a 'Request
for review of information about your income stream product' letter.

For details about data matching, see:

-   Identity Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews
-   Product Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews
-   Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing

See Income stream reviews for more details about:

-   review cycles
-   due dates, and
-   requests for information

Requests for review information

Customers, or their partner, get a review letter when their income
stream product:

-   could not be matched to the provider's information, and
-   they have not updated their product details

With the letter, they get a defined benefit income stream schedule. The
letter issues 14 days after the maturity date of the provider’s
automated review.

The letter asks the customer to get their income stream provider to
complete the schedule and return it.

If the provider issues their own schedule, the customer attaches this to
the covering letter and returns both.

Note: the customer must return the covering letter. This has the review
barcode for scanning purposes.

These letters may list any income streams held by their partner, where
the partner does not get an income support payment. The customer must
provide the requested information for each product listed.

If the customer gets letters from Services Australia online, they will
get an SMS or an email. This will tell them that the review letter is in
their myGov inbox.

Failure to respond to requests for review information

Customers will get a reminder letter on day 29 if they do not respond to
the initial review letter. Their payment will auto-suspend FSS (Failure
to Supply Schedule) if they do not respond to this reminder. If the
customer gets letters online, the review letter should be in their myGov
inbox.

If the customer has not received the request or reminder letters, a
Request for Information (RFI) for an income stream schedule should be
issued with the Product Reference Number of the product. See Requesting
information (CLK).

If customers do not respond to the suspension notice by supplying their
income stream schedule, their payments will cancel 13 weeks after the
initial suspension.

Review activity generated in Process Direct under AISR

The review activity generates in Process Direct. These reviews are:

-   not on the Future Activity List (FAL) screen, and
-   must not be actioned from FAL

Reviews generated by Process Direct differ to reviews on FAL, as they do
not have to be manually finalised. The system will:

-   periodically check for the required updates to the income stream,
    and
-   close the review when the review information is supplied or applied

The Notes section shows how the customer data was supplied. For example,
the customer uploaded an income stream schedule.

Do not to complete the update until:

-   all requested information has been provided, and
-   the details are complete for that product's review

For details about the various types of reviews, see Income stream
reviews.

Completing the review

Customers cannot complete these reviews:

-   online, or
-   verbally (for example, in person or by telephone)

They must return the income stream schedule or provide a similar
schedule, completed by their provider.

The Resources page contains a link to Process Direct current issues.

Related links

Identity Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Product Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Income stream reviews

Income stream customer reviews – account-based and market-linked income
streams

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing

Income stream indexation review

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
