
General 14 day notification provisions 110-08040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the obligation for customers to notify Services
Australia within a specific period of a change in their circumstances.
It provides detailed information on when the notification period begins,
and exceptions to the normal rule.

Notification period and exceptions

The notification period is the period of time that a customer has to
notify the agency of a change in their circumstances, and be considered
to have notified in time. The notification period depends on whether the
customer is a:

-   notification customer (not required to report) - the notification
    period is usually 14 days
-   stimulus customer (required to report) - for notification period see
    Stimulus customers

The following are exceptions to this rule:

-   28 day rule for International Services (CIS) customers
-   Notification provisions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care
    Subsidy (CCS)
-   Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy
    (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
-   28 day rule for bereavement
-   Exemptions granted by the Secretary
-   Notification rules for students in receipt of ABSTUDY payments

The notification period commences on the day after the day the
notifiable event or change of circumstances occurs, or the day after the
person becomes aware that the event or change of circumstances is likely
to occur.

Customers are informed of their notification requirements when
completing claims and on the back of letters sent to them. When
customers claim using a paper claim form, they sign a statement
acknowledging that they understand the notification requirements. Online
claims and/or verbal Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) cannot be submitted
until the customer agrees to the ‘Claim Declaration’ that contains the
notification requirements. Once a customer has signed their claim form
or submitted their claim they are bound by the notification provisions.

Stimulus customers

Stimulus customers must report either via [A self service option is
available for customers.] self-service (including online, Express Mobile
App or phone) or the Reporting Statement (SU19) in order to receive
payment for a given fortnight. Changes in circumstances which occur in a
particular entitlement period must be either:

-   reported on the report due date (for customers on 2 weekly reporting
    frequency), or
-   reported by the Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) in the fortnight
    when the change occurred (for customers who are on variable
    reporting)

Parenting Payment (PP) partnered customers with partners receiving a
stimulus based payment

The PP (partnered) recipient's 14 day notification period commences from
the stimulus customer's due to lodge day following the date of event.

Notification period ends on a public holiday or weekend

Depending on the date of the event, some notification periods will end
on a weekend or a public holiday. In these situations, the notification
period will end on the next working day after the weekend or public
holiday.

As each state of Australia may have public holidays on different days
(for example, Queen's Birthday, Labour Day) the public holiday must be a
holiday gazetted in the customer's state of residence, or a national
gazetted public holiday.

Customer becomes subject to a reduced notification period

The customer must be advised in writing about their new notification
period. It is for this reason that the new notification period will not
come into effect until seven days after the determination of the
circumstance change which caused them to have a shortened notification
period.

Example: a customer returns from overseas and their notification period
is reduced from 28 to 14 days.

Customer becomes subject to an increased notification period

The increased notification will apply from the date of event that led to
the extension of the notification period.

Example: a customer who leaves Australia permanently or intends to be
away for at least 12 months will have their notification period extended
from 14 days to 28 days from the date they left Australia.

Payments that can no longer be granted (for example, Partner Allowance,
Widow Allowance) should not be cancelled where a customer notifies
multiple events within 14 days. This applies when the first notifiable
event results in an adverse decision and second notifiable event results
in a favourable decision which nullifies the earlier adverse decision.

Working Credit

Customers eligible for Working Credit may have other reporting
requirements.

If the customer has variable employment income, the customer's
employment income reporting frequency will be two weekly.

A customer who does not have a mutual obligation requirements profile
and has no employment income or stable employment income will be
profiled as a notification reporter.

Where an employment income reporting profile has been determined and the
customer has a partner, both customers will have the same reporting
frequency applied.

An example of when a payment, that can no longer be granted, should not
be cancelled can be found in Resources page of Partner Allowance (PA)
qualification and savings provisions.

The Resources page contains an example of how to calculate the 14 day
notification period.

Related links

Notification provisions

28 day rule for Centrelink International Services (CIS) customers

Notification provisions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

28 day rule for bereavement

Notification period extensions granted by the Secretary

Disability notification issues

Carer notification issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
