
Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Compliance and Review staff.

This document outlines how to monitor Review Types and Review Reasons in
IRS. This includes as Compliance Interventions or Intelligence and
Investigations Branch and Host Reviews. These are the main methods of
classifying reviews.

Review Types

Review Types are a means of defining the objective of the Service Update
or Review.

They also indicate the source of the Service Update or Review data such
as Tax File Number Declaration Form (TDF), Tip-off (TIP) or Host (HST).

Review Reasons

A Review Reason is a code which defines the sub-type of review within
the Review Type. For example, assets, domestic circumstances, and
foreign income.

The Review Reason is the main customer circumstance or risk that the
review is targeting.

Cluster Codes

A Cluster Code or Service Reason is also used to identify the way
reviews were generated for loading on IRS.

Reviews processed from within IRS such as Compliance Reviews and Random
Sample Surveys will have a Cluster Code of IRS.

Service Updates and Host System Reviews are identified by a Cluster Code
of the System which has processed the Service Update or Host Review, for
example NSS, PEN, PGA, SHC.

Review Class

A combination of Cluster Code, Review Type, Review Reason and Cycle
Number indicates the Review Class that is being conducted.

All Service Updates and Reviews have a Cycle Number, even if the Service
Update or Review is not subject to Cycles. A Service Update or Review
not subject to Cycles will have a Cycle Number of 000 applied.

New Review Cycles can be manually added to a Review Class but access to
update a new Review Cycle is currently restricted to a few Compliance
and Fraud staff in Services Australia Canberra. The updating of a new
Review Cycle is performed using the Review Class Enquiry (IRRCE) screen.

Review Category

The Review Category of a Service Update or Review defines the high level
classification to which the Service Update or Review is allocated for
reporting purposes. For example:

-   CMP - Compliance
-   BAT - Business Assurance Team
-   AAR - Administrative Action
-   HST - Host Reviews, and
-   SVU - Service Updates

Review Region

The Review Region should display the Review Region of the actioning
officer who processed the Review.

For Reviews processed in IRS, the Review Region can be updated at any
time during the review actioning period, or when the review is
finalised.

As no actioning can occur on a Service Update or Host Review directly
from within IRS, the Review Region should be automatically updated to
the Review Region of the review officer who has finalised the last
action for the Service Update or Review in the Host System.

Service Updates and Reviews

All Service Updates and Reviews are subject to updates to a Review
Region generated by mapping changes in Activity Management.

As a result, sometimes a Service Update or Host Review will appear in a
search for reviews processed from within the IRS, for example a search
under a Review Type of 'TIP' for Tipoff Interventions.

Including a Review Reason in the search will exclude the Service Updates
and Reviews from that search (for TIP reviews that would be 'FTW' for
full time work).

Once the Service Update or Host Review has been finalised it will update
to reflect the correct Review Region.

The Resources page contains information on Review Types, Review Reasons
and Review Classes (cycles) in IRS, and a method to locate the Review
Types and Review Reasons codes.

Related links

Navigating in the Integrated Review system (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Extracting Service Updates and Review data in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
