
Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Compliance and Review staff.

This document outlines information for staff who select and conduct
reviews in the IRS. This includes Compliance Interventions or
Intelligence and Investigations Branch and Host reviews. The procedure
is for situations when a review must be manually loaded onto the system.

IRS reviews

An IRS review is an action initiated by Centrelink to ascertain whether
a customer is receiving their correct entitlement. The reason or trigger
for the review may be generated by the Centrelink computer system, or it
may come from a staff member or third party.

Most new compliance reviews are generated by Services Australia Canberra
or by the Report a Suspected Fraud system.

Creating new reviews in the IRS is actioned via the Centrelink system on
the New Review (IRNR) screen.

Manually loading service updates and reviews

A number of Review Types will not allow a user to manually load a
review, except when the review is for the partner of a customer who is
being reviewed. A review should never be manually loaded on a non
current customer unless the Review Type is a type which specifically
reviews non current customers. A new review should not be manually
loaded on a suspected partner who is not in receipt of Centrelink
payments.

There are occasions when it is necessary to manually load a new review,
however, care must be taken to load the review under the correct Review
Reason which reflects the main reason for the review.

Service Updates and Host Reviews are not able to be manually loaded from
within IRS, however, Host Reviews can be created using the Review
Registration (RVR) screen in the Centrelink system. Creating a new
review using this screen will automatically load a new review to IRS.

The Resources page contains the Austrac Access and Disclosure document
and Review Types which can be manually loaded to IRS.

Related links

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Manually loading a Partner Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System

Linking reviews in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
