
Assessing and finalising Business Income and Bank Interest (BIBI) interventions 110-18121110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the conclusion of the process for BIBI
interventions.

Assess

If the customer:

-   provides income information to clarify any discrepancy, apply to the
    customer record where possible
-   does not provide suitable income information to clarify a
    discrepancy, apply the third party information where possible
-   and third party failed to respond, finalise the intervention with
    the best income information available

The Compliance Officer (CO) will calculate any overpayment via ADEX or
MultiCal.

When they cannot be contacted, a Pre-Adverse Decision letter will be
sent to the customer and/or their partner to advise them how the outcome
was calculated.

Manual partner intervention

Identify if the outcome could impact the partner's (or ex-partner's)
current or past entitlement. Create a manual partner intervention on the
partner's/ex partner's record.

Updates made to the customer and partner/ex-partner records during the
intervention will be attributed to the intervention results. The partner
must be notified of the intervention.

A manual partner intervention should not be loaded if the
partner/ex-partner:

-   was not in receipt of a Centrelink payment during the period of the
    intervention
-   has a primary intervention in their own right

Finalise

Use the finalisation script to finalise the intervention. Actions should
include any debts raised and documentation.

If the customer does not contact in response to the Pre-Adverse decision
letter or fails to give more information, the review will be finalised.

Request for further explanation of decision

See Customer contact about compliance intervention decision.

The Resources page contains links to the website, contact details, DOC
and letter templates, and user guides and business income examples to
support staff.

Related links

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Customer contact about compliance intervention decision

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Debt tools

General debt raising information

Initiation and customer contact for Business Income and Bank Interest
(BIBI) interventions

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Small debt waivers

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
