
Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews 110-07060060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the assessment process for annual PIT reviews.

Annual PIT review

An annual Parental Income Test (PIT) review is conducted from September
each calendar year to determine dependent Youth Allowance (YA) and
ABSTUDY customer's continuing entitlement to payment.

Annual PIT review letters are issued to dependent Youth Allowance (YA)
and ABSTUDY customer except when they:

-   are exempt from the PIT, or
-   have had taxable income details copied from the
    parent(s)/guardian(s) Centrelink file via the PIT Copy process
-   will turn 22 years of age prior to the Entitlement Period Start Date
    (EPSD) of the entitlement period that covers 1 January
-   submitted PIT information for a new claim on/after 1 September using
    the Advise Parental Income (API) online service. In this
    circumstance, both financial years are collected during the claim
    process

The system will automatically issue the annual PIT review letter on the
customer's next entitlement period end date (EPED), where the customer:

-   has their payment cancelled prior to the annual PIT review letters
    being issued, and later restored after that date
-   claims YA/ABSTUDY after the annual PIT review letters have been
    issued, and have not provided their parental income details for the
    current financial year, or
-   was previously exempt from the PIT and their exemption ceases after
    the annual PIT review letters have been issued

As part of the annual PIT review process, customers are issued a One
Time Access Code (OTAC) and their parent(s)/guardian(s) can respond
using the Advise Parental Income (API) online service. See Completing
Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and Current Tax Year
(MOD JY) for more details.

As the OTAC is linked to the review activity, the parent(s)/guardian(s)
can use the OTAC multiple times, until the review has been completed.

When the parent(s)/guardian(s) provides the PIT information to Services
Australia for the annual PIT review, the:

-   information is assessed, and
-   the customer's record is updated

Information returned via the API online service will usually be
automatically applied to the customer's record.

If the parental income information is not supplied for an annual PIT
review:

YA customers are:

-   issued a reminder notice, 28 days after the initial issue date of
    the review letter
-   suspended 'YAR' (Failed to return PIT review form) if the
    information is not supplied within 21 days after the reminder notice
    is issued, unless the parent(s)/guardians(s) request an extension
    for lodging the review details
-   cancelled 'PIA' (Parental Income not Available) if the information
    is not supplied and recorded by 31 December

ABSTUDY customers:

-   are not issued a reminder notice
-   will cease to receive any means tested ABSTUDY payments from 1
    January, if the information is not supplied and recorded by 31
    December

Change of circumstance PIT review

A Change in Circumstance Parental Income Test (PIT) review is conducted
when there is a change in a dependent YA or ABSTUDY customer's
parent(s)/guardian(s) circumstances. See Changes which may affect the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for reasons a Change of Circumstance PIT
review may be issued.

The PIT review:

-   is issued via the customer's preferred contact channel, and
-   includes a One Time Access Code (OTAC). This allows the
    parent(s)/guardian(s) access to the Advise Parental Income (API)
    online service

In limited circumstances, customers may also receive a YA/ABSTUDY
Current Family Circumstances (SY012E) or Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details
(Mod JY) form for completion.

Parental Income (PIR) review

The PIT does not apply if PIT linked parent(s)/guardian(s) get certain
social security benefits, pensions, or Department of Veterans' Affairs
payments.

If the parent(s)/guardian(s) payment is suspended or cancelled, the PIT
exemption is no longer applied and the system will automatically issue a
PIR review.

The PIR review is issued via the customer's preferred contact channel,
and includes a One Time Access Code (OTAC). This allows the
parent(s)/guardian(s) access to the Advise Parental Income (API) online
service.

Note: Service Officers must not cancel PIR reviews where the
parent(s)/guardian(s) payment has been restored or re-granted, and there
is a gap in their entitlement. For example, where a parent's payment is
SUS/CAN from 1 September and the payment is either restored, or another
payment is granted, from 15 September.

As there is a gap in the PIT exemption between 1 September and 15
September, the dependent YA or ABSTUDY rate of payment must be assessed
based on the combined parental income for this period.

Employment Income Nil Rate (EIR) review

The PIT does not apply if PIT linked parent(s)/guardian(s) get certain
social security benefits, pensions, or Department of Veterans' Affairs
payments.

If the parent(s)/guardian(s) is taken to be receiving their income
support payment entirely as a Home Equity Access Scheme loan or during
an employment income nil rate period, the PIT exemption is no longer
applied for that period, and the system will automatically issue an EIR
review.

The EIR review:

-   is issued via the customers preferred contact channel, and
-   includes a One Time Access Code (OTAC). This allows the
    parent(s)/guardian(s) access to the Advise Parental Income (API)
    online service

Note: Service Officers must not cancel EIR reviews.

Verification of parental income

This is required:

-   in new claims
-   when requesting PIT estimate reviews
-   where the estimate is unreasonable or doubt exists to the validity
    of the information given

In the situations below where the parent(s)/guardian(s) give the actual
income, the Date of Issue on the Notice of Assessment issued by the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) is accepted.

-   Advise Parental Income (API) service
-   MOD JY
-   verbally

Parental income details can be verified from the parent(s)/guardian(s)
record, if actual taxable income is available on the FAO Income for
Previous Year (FIPY) screen.

Note: never use estimated income displayed on a parent(s)/guardian(s)
FIPY screen, i.e. income recorded as part of an FAO non-lodgement.

For the parental income test, if the parental income is below the
tax-free threshold or they do not need to lodge a tax return, an
estimate is recorded as the actual income on the Household Income and
Assets (NHI) screen. The parent(s)/guardian(s) has to give any taxable
or other income details for the relevant financial year.

Note: record details where the parent(s)/guardian(s) is providing
verified income. Do not record estimated income where a PIT exemption is
recorded.

The parent(s)/guardian(s) will be asked to give:

-   an estimate if unable to give the actual taxable income
-   a date when evidence of income can be given

See, Assessing and coding parental income for ABSTUDY, Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme and Youth Allowance (YA).

Issuing of PIT review letters

The PIT review letters are issued at different times based on the
customer's circumstances. For:

-   YA customers, the annual PIT Review letters are issued over a ten
    day period based on the customer's Entitlement Period End Date
    (EPED). Generally, these letters are issued from the first Monday
    after the September ICT Major Release
-   ABSTUDY customers, the annual PIT Review letters are issued on a
    single day after the September ICT Major Release
-   YA and ABSTUDY customers, the Change of Circumstance, PIR or EIR PIT
    review letters are issued, after the change in circumstance occurs
    on the parent(s)/guardian(s) record, and ripples to the customer's
    record

Rate of payment

The rate of payment for a dependent YA or ABSTUDY customer is based on
their parent(s)/guardian(s) financial situation. Generally, the PIT
assesses the combined income of the parent(s)/guardian(s) in the base
tax year. As the base tax year changes each calendar year, parental
income must be updated annually. This information is collected in the
annual PIT review.

Depending on the financial situation of the parent(s)/guardian(s), the
assessment may take effect from the following dates:

For Youth Allowance:

-   the payment period that includes 1 January of the next calendar year
-   the first payment period ending after 30 September (the entire
    period of the first pay period ending after 30 September is
    affected), if parental income has increased to more than 125% of the
    base tax year income and more than 125% of the parental income free
    area, or
-   date of notification (if there has been a decrease in parental
    income that will last for a minimum of 2 years)

For ABSTUDY:

-   1 January of the next calendar year
-   1 October of the current calendar year (if parental income has
    increased to more than 125% of the base tax year income and more
    than 125% of the parental income free area), or
-   date the decrease occurred (if there has been a decrease in parental
    income that will last for a minimum of 2 years)

For more information, see Increase or decrease in parental income for
Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme.

Additional information

YA/ABSTUDY PIT reviews cannot be processed when returned incomplete.

When the additional information/evidence is provided, the PIT review can
be assessed.

If the additional information is not returned, the Service Officer will
suspend the customer's record for failing to reply to correspondence.

Extension request

Customers may request an extension for providing the updated parental
information. It may be necessary for the PIT review letter to be
re-issued.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance provide more information or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights, and record an application for
    a formal a review of the decision if they ask for one

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms and example letters.

Related links

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA)

Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Dealing with ABSTUDY customer enquiries about annual Parental Income
Test (PIT) reviews

Linking parent records with dependent student, Australian Apprentice and
job seeker recipients or claimants - Parental Income Test (PIT)

Linking sibling records with customers/students/Australian
Apprentices/job seekers - Parental Income Test (PIT)

Raising PIT debts for Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY payments

Assessing and coding parental income for ABSTUDY, Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme and Youth Allowance (YA)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Process Direct

How to code and action a manual review

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card Options Online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
