
Check and update past income (CUPI) service 110-18100129

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Employment Income Confirmation (EIC) and Check and Update Past Income
(CUPI) Operational Blueprint pages are under review. Compliance Officers
must seek advice from the Policy Engagement Team before actioning an EIC
or CUPI. Contact the team by the Customer Compliance Service Desk
Enquiry page.

This document outlines the check and update past income (CUPI) service
and provides information for Compliance Officers (CO) who are helping
customers to use the online service.

Information about the CUPI service

[] The check and update past income (CUPI) service is a Pay-As-You-Go
(PAYG) compliance system for customers to check and update their past
employment income online.

CUPI service is triggered by external data matching with the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO). Customers receive a contact letter advising them
to review the information within the letter and access the online
service to check and update their past income details. The contact
letter includes the information received from the ATO, a URL and
confirmation code (for non-current customers only) and will outline the
consequences for failing to complete the service by the due date.

[] Customers can complete the service online at any time, without first
visiting or calling Services Australia, by:

-   completing the interactive online workflow via their Centrelink
    online account, or
-   using the URL and confirmation code in their initial contact letter
    or first reminder letter from the agency

The contact letter advises that if the customer is not able to register
or they need help updating their past income information they can
contact Compliance.

If the customer updates the information provided by the ATO, they may be
required to provide documents to validate this update.

The CUPI service uses data analytics to determine if a no-debt outcome
will be calculated. If a no-debt outcome is generated CO’s are not
required to progress the intervention, as part of this process the
review is initiated and finalised no-debt. CO’s can identify these types
of reviews by the Integrated Review System (IRS) review reason 'DDC'.

Responding to queries about the online service

When customers contact Services Australia about the CUPI service, COs
are required to:

-   answer any queries the customer has
-   encourage the customer to complete the service online
-   explain the help text available in the online service
-   help the customer access the service online
-   assist where the customer is unable to confirm their identity online

Assisted compliance to complete the CUPI service

Rather than actioning the CUPI service online, customers can opt to have
a CO help them check and update their past income over the phone.
Assisted compliance is also intended for vulnerable customers and those
with extenuating circumstances.

Manual handoff for CUPI processes

The CUPI service is referred for manual handoff in the following
situations:

-   initial contact letter is returned or tracking expired
-   an error is preventing the system from updating the customer's
    contact details
-   a possible anomaly or mismatch is identified
-   customer received allowances, lump sums or other income
-   customer has indicated they do not have payslips or bank statements
    and does not accept the application of ATO match data
-   customer has triggered one or more handoff reasons
-   document validation is required
-   an assessment edit is preventing automatic assessment

Unearned income

Unearned income is non-employment income.

If undisclosed unearned income is identified during the CUPI service, a
manual assessment will need to be undertaken. For example, information
from the customer indicates the income is compensation rather than
earned income. The assessment of unearned income is undertaken after the
online service is referred for CO action due to manual handoff.

Manual processing

A manual assessment may be required if the CUPI service cannot be
progressed using the Verify Employment Income workflow in Process
Direct.

A CO is required to manually finalise the assessment and determine the
amount of any overpayment using the debt calculation tools ADEX or
MultiCal.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
