
Unearned Income Intervention (UII) 110-13020000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about interventions undertaken by the
Customer Compliance Division to address the risk of overpayments to
customers related to income (from means other than personal exertion) or
assets owned by customers, partners or relevant family members.

On this Page:

UII triggers

Unearned Income Interventions (UII) are triggered from a number of
sources, including:

-   internal data matching and profiling of data held by Centrelink
-   external data matching with third parties such as the Australian
    Taxation Office (ATO), State Government land title offices,
    Commonwealth Superannuation Corporation, Department of Employment
    and Workplace Relations (DEWR).
-   information received from the public via the Centrelink reporting
    fraud online form or the Australian Government Services Fraud
    Tip-off Line

Objectives

The main objectives are to:

Identify customers and/or their partners who may be receiving or may
have received incorrect payments.

Verify the accuracy of details declared to Centrelink.

Educate customers to encourage voluntary compliance. This includes:

-   deterring people from attempting to claim payments to which they are
    not entitled
-   explaining how and when to advise of changes in circumstances
-   the voluntary surrender of payments to which people may not be
    entitled
-   the voluntary disclosure of changes in circumstances which affect
    rates of payment

Improve the integrity of Centrelink records.

Outcomes of interventions

Where an incorrect payment is identified, action may be taken to cancel,
suspend or vary a customer's payment and to recover any overpayment. As
a result of conducting unearned income and asset interventions, the
outcome can be to:

-   stop payments to those people who are no longer qualified
-   reduce or increase payments to the correct rate
-   raise a debt for any past payments that were received when not
    entitled
-   provide assistance to people who may be entitled to another type of
    allowance/pension/payment

Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

UII are triggered by information received from the ATO, Commonwealth
Superannuation Corporation, State Government land title offices,
information received from the public and internal data matching and
profiling.

These interventions are designed to assess income and assets from
trusts, companies, investment properties, foreign funds, Commonwealth
superannuation, land titles, public advice and other assets.

Annual Investment Income Report (AIIR)

AIIR are triggered by information received from the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO).

The aim of these interventions is to assess income from investments to
ensure the customer and/or partner is receiving and/or has received the
correct rate of payment and to raise overpayments if necessary.

Family Day Care (FDC)

FDC are triggered by information received from the DoE.

The aim of these interventions is to assess income from customers who
are FDC Educators to ensure they and/or their partner are receiving
and/or has received the correct rate of payment and to raise
overpayments if necessary.

Data matching

All Customer Compliance Division data matching is conducted in
accordance with the Guidelines on Data Matching in Australian Government
Administration issued by the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner. See the References page for the relevant links.

Contents

Initiation and customer contact for Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

Requesting verification for Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

Assessing and finalising Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Adding a Manual Partner Intervention

Recovery Fee Workload Management for Compliance Interventions

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Initiation and customer contact for Business Income and Bank Interest
(BIBI) interventions

Assessing and finalising Business Income and Bank Interest (BIBI)
interventions

Initiation and customer contact for Automation of Income Stream (AoIS)
interventions

Assessing and finalising Automation of Income Stream (AoIS)
interventions

Related links

Study Load Interventions

Referral for Anomalies and Mismatches for Compliance Interventions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
