
Public Eligibility quality checking processing 111-22090030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for checking a random sample of
public eligibility transactions to ensure business rules have been
correctly applied. The quality checking process for public eligibility
transactions must be conducted in the CDMS environment. Enrolment data
is captured from CDMS via the overnight log file of Medicare details for
the Quality Control System (QCS).

Objectives

QCS is used to select public eligibility transactions for quality
checking and to record the results.

For how to interpret quality checking information on the QBBI screen,
see The QCS for Medicare.

The objective of the quality checking procedure is to:

-   give checkers the tools to be able to identify strengths and
    weaknesses in the processing of Medicare public eligibility
    transactions
-   highlight opportunities for continuous business improvement, using
    effective quality checking processes
-   make sure Quality Checkers have the same understanding of the
    process
-   ensure Quality Checkers are completing the checks in a consistent
    manner, by documenting the quality checking process

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for ensuring:

-   quality checking is performed on a daily basis for every processing
    day available on QBBI
-   checkers have completed the appropriate training
-   quality checks are undertaken as outlined in this procedure
-   results of quality checks are recorded appropriately
-   issues are addressed and corrections made immediately (see the
    Feedback section below)

When source documents are hard copies, they must be held in the section
until the quality check is finalised. If the documents have been
archived, it is the responsibility of the Manager/Team Leader to recall
the documents.

Quality Checkers must ensure that:

-   Medicare public eligibility processing business rules have been
    applied correctly
-   quality checking is performed on the specified sample size
-   feedback is given to the processing Service Officer
-   quality checking errors are recorded and reported using the online
    Error Explanation Sheet

Note: at the end of each month, quality checks (post-checking) must be
completed by close of business (COB) on the first working day of the new
month.

Quality checking of own work

Quality Checkers must not quality check their own work. If a Quality
Checker's own work is selected, it must be passed to an accredited staff
member to conduct the quality check.

See also Quality Checking Own Work Policy.

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Before undertaking quality checking, selected staff members must:

-   successfully complete the training, MCA00802 - Claims and
    Eligibility Quality Checker and the assessment, MCA00835 - Claims
    and Eligibility QC
-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   have reviewed the quality checking procedure and emailed the
    Manager/Team Leader advising they have been reviewed and understood
-   undergo refresher training every 12 months

Only accredited Quality Checkers can undertake quality checking.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New starters

New starters will have their work reviewed and corrected on the day the
work is performed until they are considered proficient.

Any errors detected during this process are not reported for quality
checking purposes.

Any errors identified for a new starter in transactions selected for
post-checking must be recorded as errors.

See also Quality Checking New Starters Policy.

Note: the Medicare Pre-check Form for New Starters is used for verbal
updates when no other form applies.

Pre-checks capability standards

-   100% checked for four weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days
-   50% checked for two weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days
-   25% checked for two weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days

Post-checks

Post-checks (QBBI) involve checking a statistically valid, random
selection of work processed the previous day. The results are reported
to executives and relevant stakeholders each month.

Targeted checks

In addition to the pre and post-checks, targeted checks provide an
opportunity to look at other areas of the process.

Targeted checks for Medicare public eligibility processing may be:

-   checks on staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy (separate procedure)

Sampling Plan

Post-checks

The Quality Control System (QCS) in the CICS mainframe randomly selects
a number of public eligibility transactions for quality checking (QBBI).
These transactions:

-   are work processed the previous day
-   are a selection of Service Officers from different source office
    codes
-   appear under the legacy (CICS) transaction IDs

Any unactioned quality checking is not reported as part of the accuracy
of processing Key Performance Indicators (KPI).

Multiple public eligibility processing activities selected for quality
checking

When conducting quality checking, all public eligibility processing
updates on the date of processing must be checked for accuracy and
compliance.

If several updates have been performed in CDMS on the same Medicare
card, QCS may select the same card multiple times on the same day.

In these cases, quality checkers must only populate one QCS transaction
line with a valid status code.

All other selections should remain unactioned. They will no longer
appear on QBBI after about 21 days.

Targeted checks

-   Checks staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy - a sample of previously checked work is rechecked

Process for undertaking checks

Time frames

If quality checking for QBBI is not performed for a particular day, the
work must be checked within 2 working days.

At the end of each month, quality checks (post-checking) must be
completed by close of business (COB) on the first working day of the new
month

Resources

Public eligibility processing updates selected for quality checking may
have been actioned from several different types of source documentation.
This includes:

-   Medicare Enrolment Application forms
-   Medicare Copy/Transfer Application forms
-   Medicare Safety Net forms
-   written correspondence
-   family assistance forms including digital images
-   Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) forms
-   Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) forms

Recording confirmation of details

When a public eligibility processing request has insufficient or
incomplete information, a Service Officer may be required to confirm
information with a member of the public over the phone. Notate this
information:

-   on the VG4 form, or
-   in the office use only section of the Medicare Enrolment Application
    or Copy/Transfer form

Service Officers must not write on family assistance forms.

Quality checks enquiries

Quality Checkers may need to contact the Services Delivery Quality and
Support Team for clarification of the quality checking process.

For example:

-   confirmation of the appropriate error status code
-   informing of delays in forwarding error documents
-   QCS faults (for example, an error code cannot be entered)
-   quality business rules

The LDQ Quality team is only responsible for the management of the
quality checking procedures. They can be contacted using the applicable
quality checking contact on the Quality Processes page..

Quality Checkers requiring clarification on processing business rules
should contact the relevant service delivery - Tier 2 or Tier 3.

Errors

Errors, except My Health Record, must be recorded and any follow-up
action sent to the Service Officer for correction.

My Health Record error information must be sent via email to the My
Health Record Support team for correction.

Document and processing errors

For quality checking:

-   document error is when a Service Officer has processed the
    transaction and has not detected that the original paperwork was
    incomplete or contained insufficient information to support the
    action taken
-   processing error is when a Service Officer has processed or entered
    information incorrectly which does not match the original paperwork
    submitted

Recording and reporting results

Errors should be identified during the quality checking process
(post-checks) by following the steps outlined in the program quality
checking procedure.

Quality checkers are required to record the following:

-   QBBI - only the error that is deemed to have the greatest impact
-   Error Explanation Sheet - all errors

Exception: My Health Record errors. Do not enter into QBBI. Use the MHR
error email template and send to My Health Record Support. No error
codes are required.

All quality checking results (post-checks) are reported to executives
and relevant stakeholders each month.

Post-checking results recorded by each program are measured against
respective, endorsed key performance measures. Each program is expected
to meet or exceed their endorsed key performance measure.

Feedback

After performing the quality check (post-check) on selected
transactions, the Quality Checker must provide feedback to the
processing Service Officer. This feedback should be:

-   positive for transactions identified as error-free
-   given the same day or as soon as possible after the quality check is
    completed

Analysing errors

In consultation with the processing Service Officer, the Quality Checker
is to:

-   determine the reason(s) for the error (underlying factors)
-   identify any possible weaknesses in processing, gaps in business
    rules, issues relating to environmental factors and system faults
    and limitations
-   (for My Health Record errors) complete the email and send to My
    Health Record Support
-   complete an online Error Explanation Sheet (EES). See the Guide to
    completing the online Error Explanation Sheet

Correction of errors

Appropriate action must be taken to correct errors.

Recurring errors must be brought to the attention of the:

-   Manager/Team Leader of the processing area, and
-   Service Officer concerned

Remedial action (such as training) needed to reduce the occurrence of
errors should be planned by the Manager/Team Leader and undertaken as a
matter of priority by the Manager/Team Leader.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are regularly reviewed and updated by the
respective programs in consultation with the LDQ Quality team. This
incorporates endorsed changes to program business policy and procedures
and ensures that error codes are current and appropriate.

The Resources page contains information about the error status codes
(including the non-error code), user guides and intranet links.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
