
Answering calls in Centrelink 111-05010000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures for staff during initial phone contact
with customers and the public.

Greetings

When answering a call the Service Officer can use any of the greeting
phrases or an appropriate greeting of their own, for example:

-   'Hello, this is [Service Officer’s name], can I start with your name
    please?' (unauthenticated record)
-   ‘Hi, my name is [Service Officer’s name], may I start with your
    Centrelink reference number please?’ (unauthenticated record)
-   ‘Hi, this is [Service Officer’s name], how can I assist you today?’
    (authenticated record)
-   ‘Hello, my name is [Service Officer’s name], how can I help you
    today?’ (authenticated record)

The Service Officer will then authenticate the customer appropriately,
depending on the authentication level achieved on Services Australia
Workspace.

Confirming customer phone numbers

This may be completed in the IVR. Check the Update Phone Number
instructions on Customer Overview to confirm the action required.

Customer Overview will display cards with a Green icon for successful
interactions that need no further action:

-   Phone number confirmed
    The phone number the customer is calling from has been checked
    against the number on the customer record
-   Updated phone number
    The customer has successfully updated their phone number in the IVR

Customer Overview will display cards with an Amber or Red icon if
Service Officer action is needed:

-   Phone number check required
    The IVR could not confirm the customer’s phone number. Check phone
    details and update if necessary
-   Please update Phone
    The IVR has received new telephony details from the customer.
    However, the update was not completed.as the customer did not have
    the required level of authentication
-   Attempt to update phone number failed
    There was a technical error in the IVR. Check phone details and
    update if necessary
-   An alternate method
    Ensure all contact details are updated from claim information in new
    claims and scanned images

Confirming family assistance income estimates

If the customer has Voice Print Authentication this may be completed in
the IVR. Staff are to check the income estimate instructions on Customer
Overview to confirm if action is required.

Customer Overview will display cards with a green icon for successful
interactions that need no further action:

-   Income estimate confirmed: the customer has confirmed the income
    estimate recorded and no further action is needed

Customer Overview will display cards with an amber or red icon if
Service Officer action is needed:

-   Income estimate update required: the customer has indicated they
    would like to update their family assistance income estimate. Update
    income estimate via normal processes
-   Income estimate update failed: there was a technical error in the
    IVR. Check and update income estimate via normal processes if
    required

Checking the Customer Issues page

Service Officers must check the Customer Issues page in Customer First
at every customer contact. Customer Overview will warn if there are
issues on the Customer Issues page.

The Customer Issues page is used to ensure any mandatory actions or
handoffs are handled correctly.

Any payment related issues must be actioned if the Service Officer has
the capability.

Any actions outside the Service Officer's skills must be handed off to
the relevant queue or business area, and the customer advised why their
call is being transferred.

Privacy

Privacy and confidentiality provisions administered by the agency must
be followed at all times. This includes times when a Service Officer may
accidentally access a record of a person they know.

If staff during the course of their duties inadvertently access the
information of a person in whom they have a personal interest, staff
must record the incident on the Inadvertent Access Register . This was
previously known as the Oops register.

Call transfers from Child Support

When an announced transfer (warm) is received from Child Support, a full
authentication check is not required because both agencies have a
similar authentication procedure.

Child Support will provide the necessary identifying details to locate
the correct customer record when transferring the call. Note: if the
customer has a password on their record, check this before proceeding
with the enquiry.

The Resources page contains intranet links to privacy and secrecy and
information release.

Contents

Answering a call with Services Australia Workspace

Authenticating an employer

Telephone standards

Handling a call on hold

Receiving personal calls

Conferencing a call with Services Australia Workspace

Related links

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Recording interactions

Finalising and terminating customer contacts

Inadvertent access and authorised access

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Transferring calls

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
