
Healthcare Identifiers Service (HI Service) quality checking 111-22070000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the HI Service. This is a national system for
uniquely identifying healthcare providers (organisations and individual
healthcare providers) and individuals.

HI Service

A healthcare identifier is a unique 16 digit number. The HI Service
forms the basis of other eHealth initiatives such as the My Health
Record System.

Services Australia manages the allocation, maintenance and disclosure of
healthcare identifiers to healthcare providers and the public. This is
legislated under the Healthcare Identifiers Act 2010.

The HI Service responsibilities include:

-   Initial registration and maintenance of a Seed Organisation,
    Responsible Officers (RO) and Organisation Maintenance Officers
    (OMO) details
-   Initial registration and maintenance of a Network Organisation and
    OMO
-   Initial registration of Healthcare Provider Individual applications,
    where the provider's profession is not within coverage of the
    Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) and
    maintenance of all Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individuals
    (HPI-I) records
-   Healthcare Provider Directory (HPD) entry on request and
-   Registration of Individual Healthcare Identifiers (IHI) where the
    individual does not have a Medicare or Department of Veteran's
    Affairs entitlement

Objectives

The Quality Checking process for the HI Service program aims to ensure
quality is maintained or improved and processing errors are reduced or
eliminated.

Reporting of HI Service quality checking results provides stakeholders
with an assessment of quality checking accuracy; for example: consistent
application of the business rules.

Roles and responsibilities

Quality Checkers:

-   examine the documentation to ensure the accuracy of the HI Service
    processing
-   make sure the business rules of the programme are adhered to and the
    data entered into the system is accurate

Quality Checkers must not check their own work.

Team Leaders (TL5) make sure:

-   applications to be quality checked by National Office (NO) are
    placed in the appropriate folders on a daily basis
-   quality checking for specific form types is performed on site on a
    daily basis for
-   timely feedback is provided to processing staff on accuracy of
    processing results
-   for recurring errors, staff are given extra training, or notify NO
    if training material may need updating

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

To complete quality checks for the HI Service, the quality checker must
have:

-   subject matter expertise
    the staff member completing the check has product knowledge,
    understands the business rules and/or knows where to source them
    (typically Programme Support Officer (PS04) or higher)
-   reviewed Quality Checking HI Service Procedures and emailed Team
    Leader (TL5 and TL6) advising procedures have been reviewed and
    understood
-   undergone refresher training (of the quality checking process) if
    required

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks are completed on staff new to HI Service processing. New
starters generally have their work reviewed and corrected with the
guidance of a mentor until they are deemed capable. The pre-checking is
a safeguard to improve the quality of the business process.

Any errors detected by the mentor during this process are not reported
for accuracy of processing purposes. The combined efforts between the
mentor and new starter will be subject to quality checking the following
day. Any errors identified for a new starter in transactions selected
for quality checking must be recorded as errors.

Localised spreadsheets have been created and kept on site to track the
pre-checks. The results are not included in the accuracy of processing
results.

Pre-check Capability Standard

The following details the amount of pre-check to establish a staff
member's capability to move to post-check.

-   Level of pre-check: period - condition
-   100%: 4 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   50%: 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   25%: 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days

Post-checks

The quality checks to be completed for HI Service processing are set at
20% of the previous day's processed work.

Targeted checks

Staff members who have been identified with quality issues should have
the same amount of checking as the new starters (see above standards).

A separate procedure has been created for Aim for Accuracy and is held
by the helpdesk.

Sampling plan

It is a program requirement that 100% of HI Service applications undergo
quality checking until such time accuracy of processing consistently
meets the required KPM of ≥95%.

The sampling methodology will be reviewed annually, or as required, to
ensure there is capacity to complete the required quality checking.

Process for undertaking checks

Timeframes

Quality checking must be conducted as soon as possible after processing
is complete. This ensures processing service level agreements are met.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to:

Healthcare Identifiers eHealth Programme (EHP) through eBusiness Systems

Shared drive where the following are stored:

-   electronic applications
-   quality checking spread sheets

Documentation

HI Service applications subject to quality checking can be actioned from
several different sources. This includes but is not limited to:

-   HW018- Application to register a Seed Organisation
-   HW041 - Application to Register a Network Organisation
-   HW040- Application to replace a Responsible officer or add/ remove
    an Organisation Maintenance Officer for an Organisation
-   HW042 – Application to amend Organisation Officer's personal
    information
-   HW037 – Application to amend a Healthcare Organisation record
-   HW044 – Application to deactivate, reactivate or retire a Healthcare
    Organisation record
-   HW033 - Application to Register a Healthcare Provider
-   HW034 – Application to amend a Healthcare Provider Record
-   HW014 – Application to link or unlink a Contracted Service Provider
    to or from a healthcare provider organisation record
-   3054i - Application to request or update a PKI certificate
-   2888 - Application to create, verify or merge an Individual
    Healthcare Identifier

If a field on the form has incomplete or insufficient information, or
the information has been omitted, a Service Officer may be required to
verify this information with the applicant. Information verified with
the applicant must be notated on the HI Service file note in the
workflow management database.

Notations in the database become part of the source (supporting)
documentation that is subject to quality checking.

Errors/ evaluation questions

Critical errors

An error is defined as critical when there is an impact to the:

-   agency by allowing the registration to proceed without sufficient
    information to support legislative requirements
-   individual or organisation, affecting the use of a PKI certificate.
    An error which impacts either the issuance of a PKI or the
    requirement to issue a new PKI due to an error in processing. There
    is potential for the agency to lose their Gatekeeper accreditation
    if PKI certificates are issued in error
-   agency's reputation, by keying errors being available for viewing
    externally, by either being sent in a successful registration
    letter, or by an individual viewing the incorrect information in the
    Healthcare Provider Directory

Non-critical errors

An error is defined as non-critical when there is no identifiable risk
to the business process (registration) and will not impact on Services
Australia reputation.

Non critical errors will recorded as feedback and any action required
will be sent to the Service Officer for correction.

Note: while non critical errors are recorded as part of the quality
checking process, they do not impact the quality result reported to
stakeholders (that is, only critical errors are used to calculate the
accuracy of processing results).

Document errors

For quality checking, a document error is defined as 'a document
received from an individual, provider or organisation representative
which features omitted, incomplete or incorrect information'. The error
code(s) are applied when the Service Officer has not detected the
document is in error and has processed the transaction without
identifying/noting the use of additional evidence to support the action
taken.

Processing errors

For quality checking, a processing error is defined as 'information
processed/keyed into the system which does not match the document
submitted by an individual, provider or organisation representative'.
The error code(s) are applied when the Service Officer has keyed or not
keyed information as per the business rules.

Recording Results

Post Checks

Quality checking is recorded on the 'HI Service QC Spreadsheet –
template'. A new spreadsheet is to be created every month populated with
the quality checking results, one by Operations, and one by the
Programme area.

The Process page has information about the spreadsheet.

These spreadsheets are sent to the quality Framework Section each Monday
(by midday) for weekly reporting, and completed and forwarded by the
first working day of the new month for monthly reporting.

Feedback

After performing the quality check on each work item, the eServices
Programme Support Officers (PSO4) is to provide feedback to the
appropriate Service Officer.

This feedback:

-   includes positive feedback for transactions identified as error free
-   should be given the same day the quality check is completed, or as
    soon as possible after the quality check has been undertaken
-   must determine the reason for the error/s (underlying factors). This
    helps identify any weaknesses in processing, gaps in relevant
    business rules, and issues relating to environmental factors, system
    faults and limitations

Identification of underlying factors for errors

The Team Leader/eServices Programme Support Officers (PSO4), in
consultation with the processing staff member, analyses the error/s to
determine the underlying factors for the error occurring. This helps
identify any weaknesses in processing, gaps in relevant business rules,
and issues relating to environmental factors, system faults and
limitations.

Information gathered in the feedback process must be entered in the
underlying factors on the HI Service quality checking spreadsheet.

Managing and storing feedback

The feedback will be recorded in the coaching files and addressed if
required during coaching sessions.

Analysing errors

Analysis of errors will be completed by the Team Leader (TL5) or
Programme Support Officers (PSO4). The HI Service quality checking
results are maintained by the business areas. This information includes
the details of the errors as recorded on the quality checking
spreadsheet.

Analysis on errors is to be completed by the Team Leader (TL5). Error
documentation to be kept on site (for root cause analysis) should it be
required.

Change Management

As part of continuous improvement, the quality checking procedure is to
be reviewed annually by the HI Service programme and the Quality
Framework Section (QFS). This incorporates endorsed changes to programme
business policy and procedures, and ensures error codes are current and
appropriate.

It is the responsibility of both Tier 2 and the Tier 3 to ensure issues
with the quality checking procedure or tools are escalated to QFS using
the applicable Quality Checking contact on the Quality Processes page.
See Resources page for a link.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes that do not have critical to quality
implications will be incorporated in the review of the procedures.

Quality check enquiries

All quality checking enquiries are to be directed to:

-   The relevant Medicare Health Programme Support Officer (PSO4)
-   Team Leader (TL5) – eServices team – Transformation and eServices
    Programme. Any enquires that cannot be resolved on site can be
    directed to the programme area
-   Provider Operations Assistant Director – Digital Health programme -
    National Office

The Resources page contains lists of error status codes (and the
error-free code), a matrix which identifies where a quality checking
error could occur and the document application check list.

Related links

Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service - Your Health

Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) quality checking in QST

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
