
Patient Claims quality checking processing 111-22090020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process for Medicare patient
claims.

A patient claim involves the claimant and the patient. The medical
service is provided to the patient. The Medicare benefit is paid to the
claimant for fully paid accounts or to the provider for unpaid or
partially paid accounts. Both are mandatory components of the claiming
process, however they do not have to be the same person or be on the
same Medicare card.

Quality checking for patient claims involves checking a random sample of
patient claims transactions to see whether the program business rules
have been applied correctly.

On this Page:

Objectives

The Quality Control System (QCS) is used to select the following
transactions/transmissions for quality checking and to record results:

-   Medicare patient claim transactions and patient claim online
    transmissions
-   bulk bill vouchers and bulk bill online transmissions
-   public eligibility

For more information about how to interpret quality checking information
on the QBBI screen, see The Quality Control System (QCS) for Medicare in
Resources.

The objective of the patient claims quality checking procedure is to:

-   give checkers the tools to be able to identify strengths and
    weaknesses in the processing of Medicare patient claims and
    highlight opportunities for continuous business improvement, using
    effective quality checking processes
-   make sure quality checkers have the same understanding of the
    process
-   ensure quality checkers are completing the checks in a consistent
    manner, by documenting the quality checking process

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for ensuring:

-   quality checking is performed on a daily basis for every processing
    day available on QBBI
-   checking is undertaken by accredited Quality Checkers
-   quality checks are undertaken as outlined in this procedure
-   results of quality checks are recorded appropriately
-   issues are addressed and corrections made immediately (see the
    Feedback section below)

Where source documents are hard copies, they must be held in the section
until the quality check is finalised. If the documents have been
archived, it is the responsibility of the Manager/Team Leader to recall
the documents.

Quality Checkers must ensure that:

-   Medicare patient claims processing business rules have been applied
    correctly
-   quality checking is performed on the specified sample size
-   feedback is given to the processing Service Officer
-   quality checking errors are recorded and reported using the online
    Error Explanation Sheet

Note: at the end of each month, quality checks (post checking) must be
completed by close of business (COB) on the first working day of the new
month.

Quality checking of own work

Quality checkers must not quality check their own work. If a Quality
Checker's own work is selected, it must be passed to an accredited staff
member to conduct the quality checks.

See also Quality Checking Own Work Policy in Resources.

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Before undertaking quality checking, selected staff members must:

-   successfully complete the training MCA00802 - Claims and Eligibility
    Quality Checker and MCA00835 - Claims and Eligibility QC
-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   have reviewed the quality checking procedure and emailed the
    Manager/Team Leader advising they have been reviewed and understood
-   undergo refresher training every 12 months

Only accredited Quality Checkers can undertake quality checking.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New starters

New starters will have their work reviewed and corrected on the day the
work is performed until they are considered proficient.

Any errors detected during this process are not reported for quality
checking purposes.

Any errors identified for a new starter in transactions selected for
post checking must be recorded as errors.

See also Quality Checking New Starters Policy in Resources.

Note: the Medicare pre-check form for new starters is used for verbal
updates where no other form applies, see Resources for a link.

The information below guides the amount of checking to be completed for
new starters:

Pre-checks capability standards

-   100% checked for four weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days
-   50% checked for two weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days
-   25% checked for two weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days

Post-checks

Post-checks (QBBI) involve checking a statistically valid, random
selection of work processed the previous day. The results are reported
to executives and relevant stakeholders each month.

Targeted checks

In addition to the pre and post-checks, targeted checks provide an
opportunity to look at other areas of the process.

Targeted checks for Medicare patient claims processing may be:

-   checks on staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy (separate procedure)

See Resources for a link to several Aim for Accuracy policies.

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

A guide for the amount of checking for new starters is:

-   100% checked for four weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days
-   50% checked for two weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days
-   25% checked for two weeks or nil errors for three consecutive days

Post-checks

The Quality Control System (QCS) randomly selects a number of patient
claims transactions for quality checking (QBBI). These transactions:

are work processed the previous day

are a selection of Service Officers from different source office codes

include manual patient claims from any patient claim processed using the
following suite of transactions:

-   NP**
-   NH**
-   NS**
-   NE**

include online patient claims where a Service Officer has manually
intervened

Note:

-   two-way claims should be left unactioned by the Quality Checker
-   where an online patient claim is partially processed by one Service
    Officer and finalised by another, the QCS will place the claim to be
    checked under the source office code of the Service Officer who
    finalised the claim

Multiple patient claims transactions selected for quality checking

Where several updates have been performed on the same Medicare card, the
QCS may select the same card multiple times on the same day.

For transactions with:

-   the same time stamp, action the first transaction line with a valid
    status code. Leave the additional transaction line(s) unactioned
-   different time stamps, action all transaction lines. If an error is
    identified in each transaction line, the relevant error status code
    must be applied against the corresponding time stamp

Note: all unactioned quality checking items will no longer appear on
QBBI after approximately 21 days.

Targeted checks

-   Checks staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for accuracy - a sample of previously checked work is rechecked

Process for undertaking checks

Time frames

If quality checking for QBBI is not performed for a particular day, the
work must be checked within two working days.

Note: at the end of each month, quality checks (post checking) must be
completed by close of business (COB) on the first working day of the new
month

Resources

Medicare mainframe

Operational Blueprint

Source documentation

-   Medicare claim forms
-   Invoices
-   Receipts

Online claims

-   Text messages

Quality checks enquiries

Quality Checkers may need to contact the Quality Management Section for
clarification of the quality checking processes. For example:

-   confirmation of the appropriate error status code
-   informing of delays in forwarding error documents
-   Quality Control System (QCS) faults (for example, an error code
    cannot be entered)
-   quality business rules

The Quality Management Section is only responsible for the management of
the quality checking procedures. They can be contacted using the
applicable quality checking contact on the Quality Processes page. See
Resources for a link.

Quality Checkers requiring clarification of processing business rules
should contact the relevant area, that is, Tier 2 or Tier 3.

Errors

Errors must be reported and any follow-up action sent to the Service
Officer for correction.

Document, processing and referral errors

For the purposes of quality checking, a:

-   document error is defined when a Service Officer has processed the
    transaction and has not detected that the original paperwork was
    incomplete or contained insufficient information to support the
    action taken
-   processing error is defined when a Service Officer has processed or
    entered information incorrectly which does not match the original
    paperwork submitted
-   referral error is defined when a Service Officer has identified an
    anomaly that might warrant a referral to Health Compliance

Recording and reporting results

Quality Checkers must record any errors identified during the quality
checking process (post-checks) by following the steps outlined in the
program quality checking procedure.

Errors should be identified during the quality checking process (post
checks) by following the steps outlined in the program quality checking
procedure.

Quality checkers are required to record the following:

-   QBBI - only the error that is deemed to have the greatest impact
-   Error Explanation Sheet - all errors

All quality checking results (post-checks) are reported to executives
and relevant stakeholders each month.

Post-checking results recorded by each program are measured against
respective, endorsed key performance measures. Each program is expected
to meet or exceed their endorsed key performance measure.

Feedback

After performing the quality check (post-check), the Quality Checker
must provide feedback to the processing Service Officer. This feedback
should be:

-   positive for transactions identified as error free
-   given the same day or as soon as possible after the quality check is
    completed

Analysing errors

In consultation with the processing Service Officer, the Quality Checker
or Manager/Team Leader is to:

-   determine the reason(s) for the error (underlying factors)
-   identify any possible weaknesses in processing, gaps in business
    rules, issues relating to environmental factors and system faults
    and limitations
-   complete an Error Explanation Sheet (EES). See the Guide to
    completing the online Error Explanation Sheet in Resources

See Resources for a link to Undertaking Root Cause Analysis.

Correction of errors

Appropriate action must be taken to correct errors, that is, payments
and history adjusted, overpayment recovery action sought and/or
escalated to the Tier 2 area if necessary.

Recurring errors must be brought to the attention of the Manager/Team
Leader of the processing area, and the Service Officer concerned.

Remedial action (such as training) needed to reduce the occurrence of
errors should be planned by the Manager/Team Leader and undertaken as a
matter of priority.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are regularly reviewed and updated by the
respective programs in consultation with the Quality Management Section.
The review ensures that the error codes are current and applicable and
that approved changes to program business policies and procedures are
included.

The Resources page contains information about the error status codes
(including the non-error code), attachments and a list of links to the
Intranet.

Related links

Claims processing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
