
Managing reviews and appeals paper files 111-17020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines creating, storing and handling review and appeal
files.

Review and appeal records

Review and appeal records can be made up of electronic records and a
paper file(s), including on and off file (batch) documents and an
electronic record. In some cases, a review and appeal record may also
include magnetic media.

Due to archiving and disposal regulations, different rules apply at
different levels of review and appeal.

Electronic records are used for Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
cases.

Separate customer-related files are created for:

-   Administrative Appeals Tribunal second review cases
-   Court appeals

Service Officer action

Service Officers must make sure all documentation obtained or created
for a review of a decision is scanned to the customer's electronic
record.

For an ARO review, the paper file will likely not be needed. This is
because all documents are likely to be on the customer's electronic
record. If evidence from the paper file is relevant to the review, the
ARO will obtain the paper file and any relevant evidence will be scanned
to the customer's record.

Staff should be aware that anything they record on the customer record,
attach to a customer file or batch store can be provided to the AAT or
to a Court as evidence. Screen shots and DOCs are normally included in
documentation provided to the AAT and to Courts. Staff must make sure
they are factually correct, complete and professionally worded.

The Resources page contains a link to the Records Management service
request webform.

Other related links

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Court Appeals after an unfavourable decision by Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) (AAT second review)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
