
Storing documents 111-17010020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the storage of documents for a customer's record.
These may be stored as an on-file document, an off-file document (batch
storage) or as a scan batch.

Documents for new claims

Documents from a customer or third party may be received with a
claim/reclaim or as a separate document. They may confirm a customer's
entitlement or notify a change of circumstances.

For details of what documents go on a customer's file or are batch
stored, see the Resources page.

Documents processed on site at a service centre as part of a new claim
are attached to the new claim or placed in an 'on-file' or 'off-file'
storage batch and are not scanned.

All documents received for a new claim that has been processed on site
and not scanned are attached to the claim if it is still in the service
centre. All processed new claims received in the Records Management Unit
Victoria (RMU Vic) are scanned to the customer's record. For reclaims,
processed documents will be stored on site with attach-to-file documents
until dispatched to RMU Vic in a tamper-proof satchel where they will be
scanned to the customer's record.

Any previous claim documents scanned at a service centre are stored in a
scanned batch and destroyed on site as per instructions below.

Separate documents received and processed on site at a service centre to
confirm a customer's entitlement may be batch stored.

Scanned documents

Medical information received at a service centre is to be scanned and
then batch stored in the Scanned Document batch.

Any documents scanned at a service centre should be:

-   placed in a scan batch on site. and then
-   destroyed with the batch header on site in the secure waste
    container 70 calendar days after being scanned

Scanning of legacy customer correspondence

Some customer correspondence received by RMU before July 2012 was not
attached to customer files. This was with new processes to manage the
high volume of customer correspondence.

When a customer file is requested for retrieval, all paper
correspondence is retrieved and placed on the hard copy file before the
file is forwarded to the requestor. As part of the agency's records
consolidation strategy, these 'legacy' documents received before July
2012 and not yet attached to the customer file are now being scanned.
This removes the need to place them on the customer's paper file in the
future.

So that staff can recognise these legacy documents, they are scanned
with a date of receipt. For example, 31/12/YYYY, where YYYY is the year
it was received by the agency. This ensures documents display in yearly
chronological order on the customer's electronic record. The scanned
images will display the date stamp showing the actual date of receipt.
When reviewing a customer's history, check both electronic and paper
records (if they exist).

The Resources page contains rules for storing documents based on their
origin and type, relevant forms and intranet links.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
