
Quality Call Framework accreditation of Quality Checkers 111-22011000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Quality Checker accreditation/reaccreditation
process.

Quality Call Framework

The Quality Call Framework establishes a single set of quality
expectations. This makes sure phone services delivered by the agency are
of a high quality and meet the expectations of customers and government.
It is an integrated approach to quality checking through the consistent
assessment of national Quality Call Standards.

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Staff seeking to become Quality Checkers must undertake an accreditation
program. The accreditation will make sure they have the right skills,
attributes and knowledge. Quality Checkers are selected by a business
team based on operational need.

Accreditation as a Quality Checker will remain current for 12 months.
The accreditation can be renewed when there is an operational need for
Quality Checkers.

Calibration

Calibration measures the variation in the application of the Quality
Call Standards. Calibration exercises and activities provide business
teams with information to facilitate continuous improvement and drive
consistent outcomes.

All Quality Checkers must complete a calibration activity (minimum 1
calibration call) within 3 months of completing accreditation or annual
reaccreditation. If calibration has not been completed within the
required timeframe, accreditation/reaccreditation will be revoked and
evaluation forms will be removed.

Business teams can complete additional targeted calibration exercises as
required.

Responsibilities

Business Teams are responsible for:

-   facilitating the 3 steps in the Quality Call Framework Quality
    Checker accreditation process
-   retaining for 12 months the completed Step 1: Quality Checker
    Prerequisites form for each staff member
-   facilitating learning and development activities for staff relevant
    to this topic as required
-   reviewing Quality Checker suitability with careful consideration to
    unfavourable performance or code of conduct issues
-   facilitating the calibration activity including making available
    calls for calibration

The Resources page contains links to relevant intranet pages, Australian
Public Service (APS) work level standards and the Step 1: Quality
Checker Prerequisites form.

Related links

Quality Call Framework

Quality Call Framework quality checking

Quality Call Standards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
