
Process Direct 111-12000000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Process Direct which retrieves customer
information from multiple sources. These include Customer First, Income
Security Integrated System (ISIS) and SAP.

Accessing Process Direct

To access and use Process Direct, staff must have the ZCCRM_DHS_CPO
security role approved in ESSentials.

Extra roles are needed for Workload Management and to access operational
information through Work Optimiser. See Workload Management.

Process Direct is accessed via a desktop icon. This displays once the
above role has been approved. To ensure the latest software updates are
installed, staff must close all browsers and shut down their computer
every evening. This allows the cache to clear.

There are 2 versions of Process Direct, CPTv3 and CPTv5. When a staff
member selects a piece of work to complete, Process Direct will load the
version needed to process the work type.

Record locking conflicts

These conflicts can inhibit required interactions between the systems.
This can affect the accuracy of data on customer records.

Unlike Customer First and Customer Record, Process Direct does not
‘lock’ records. A locked record prevents access in ISIS until a
transaction is finalised.

Staff processing work in Process Direct can avoid record locking
conflicts. First check if the record is ‘locked’ by another staff member
in Customer First or Customer Record.

The Resources page contains a link to the Operational Performance Branch
intranet page.

Contents

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Reporting ICT issues in Process Direct

Process Step Automation (PSA)

Record and transaction locking in Process Direct

Related links

Accessing and personalising Customer First

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Customer First SAP native processes

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

Searching for a customer on the system

Social Applications

Workload Management

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
