-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to conduct quality call checks across the
agency, as outlined in the Quality Call Framework.

Quality Call Framework

The Quality Call Framework provides a single set of quality expectations
to ensure phone services delivered by Services Australia are of a high
quality and meet the expectations of customers and government. It is an
integrated approach to quality checking through the consistent
assessment of national Quality Call Standards.

Quality checking

Quality checking measures a call against the Quality Call Standards.

All staff who undertake inbound and or outbound phone calls across
Services Australia will have their call work evaluated within the
framework. This is regardless of their classification, employment status
(such as ongoing, non-ongoing, casual) or work type. Quality checking
can be undertaken by listening side-by-side/remotely or by recordings.

The number of calls to be evaluated is 9 calls per quarter per staff
member.

Where call recording is implemented, a minimum of 30% of the evaluation
sample size for each branch (in each quarter) must be evaluated by
listening to recorded calls.

Calibration

Calibration measures the variation in the application of the Quality
Call Standards. Calibration exercises and activities give business teams
information to drive consistent outcomes and continuous improvement.

Staff participating in calibration exercises or activities must be
accredited as a Quality Call Framework Quality Checker.

All Quality Checkers must complete a calibration activity (minimum 1
calibration call) within 3 months of completing accreditation or annual
reaccreditation. Where calibration has not been completed within the
required timeframe, accreditation/reaccreditation will be revoked and
access to online forms will not be available.

Business teams can complete additional targeted calibration exercises as
required.

Aim for Accuracy

Aim for Accuracy provides assurance of the integrity and reliability of
quality checking results.

Business teams facilitate an Aim for Accuracy exercise where it is
possible to re-evaluate an end-to-end call that has been quality
checked.

Responsibilities

Quality and Aim for Accuracy Checkers are responsible for:

-   evaluating the call against the Quality Call Standards
-   identifying business improvement opportunities
-   providing feedback that focuses on aspects of the call that were
    done well and identifies areas for improvement
-   capturing the results of the evaluation in the system
-   ensuring the results of the evaluation are provided to the staff
    member
-   not checking their own work
-   maintaining privacy and secrecy when handling customer and staff
    information, in accordance with the Privacy Act 1988
-   undertaking a calibration activity (minimum of 1 calibration call)
    within 3 months of completing accreditation or annual
    reaccreditation
-   participating in Aim for Accuracy as required

Dispute management

When a staff member disagrees with the evaluation outcome, it should be
discussed with their immediate supervisor. Business teams are
responsible for setting the dispute management process for staff and
Quality Checkers.

The Resources page contains links to user guides and a presentation on
giving feedback.

Related links

Quality Call Framework

Quality Call Framework accreditation of Quality Checkers

Quality Call Standards

Quality standards in service delivery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
