
Classifying Centrelink digital images via the Kofax Validation Queue 111-10010110

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Kofax Validation system for Centrelink. Kofax
Validation is used for manual classification of documents digitised
through scanning from service centres, Record Management Units (RMU) and
received via inbound fax.

What is Kofax used for?

The main purpose of the Kofax Validation application for Centrelink
digitisation is to enable manual classification of digital images when
the system could not automate the process.

Staff can also use Kofax Validation to merge, split, rotate, delete or
reorder pages within documents.

Scanning via Multi-Function Device

Documents scanned via this method will present either:

-   directly onto the customer's record if automatic classification can
    occur, or
-   sent to the Kofax validation queue for manual classification. Once
    the document has been classified it will appear on the customer's
    record

Inbound faxing

Documents received via this method will be sent to the Kofax validation
queue for manual classification. Once the document has been classified
it will appear on the customer's record.

Classification of documents within Kofax

Classification is the process of determining the Customer Reference
Number (CRN) and type of document.

Documents scanned on an MFD will automatically classify at the point of
scanning if a valid CRN is entered into the MFD and a barcoded form or
reclassification page is the first page scanned.

If this does not occur, manual classification will be required. This
will result in a delay in attaching the document to the customer record.

If a document cannot be read and needs a rescan, see Requesting a
document rescan, retrieval or location.

When is manual classification needed after scanning?

Manual classification is required if a valid CRN is not entered into the
MFD and/or a barcode cannot be read by the MFD.

To manually classify an image, the Digitisation Solutions Team (DST)
view the image and assign a CRN and/or form code to it. Documents
requiring this manual classification will be delayed from attaching to
the customer record. The Resources page contains a link to scanning
dates and classification timeframes.

Once a digital image is attached to a customer's record, Workload
Management creates a work item for processing (if required). Images
scanned Store Only will not create a work item, but can be viewed on the
customer record.

For more information on classification guidelines, see Classifying
Centrelink digital images via the National Queue. The same processes are
required for Kofax classification.

Escalating a document to the Classification Support Queue:

A document can be escalated to the Classification Support Queue when
additional support and expertise is required to finalise the
classification process.

To escalate a document, enter the Q004 form code in the Form Type field,
leave the CRN field blank and press Enter to close the batch. It is
important that Q004 is entered so the document is mapped to the
Classification Support Queue to minimise potential delays.

Orphan and Administrative documents

Escalate to the Classification Support Queue any image that cannot be
attached to a customer record because:

-   there is not enough information in the document to locate a customer
    record, establish a customer’s identity, or create a new record –
    Orphan documents
-   they do not relate to any customer. For example, invoices –
    Administrative documents
-   they are part of a process where the documents cannot be attached to
    a record. For example, tip offs or inappropriate images -
    Administrative documents, or
-   there is a business reason why the documents cannot be attached to a
    record but they still need processing. For example, a single page
    contains details for multiple customers - Administrative documents

In some cases, an Administration document may also be an Orphan
document. For example, an invoice addressed to Services Australia where
the owning team or agency cannot be identified.

Note: classification of a document as Orphan or Administrative should
only be undertaken by Technical Peer Support staff assigned to action
images from the Classification Support Queue.

Kofax Validation sub-queues

There are sub-queues within Kofax Validation:

-   Scan for processing queue - documents that require activity creation
    on the customer record to initiate processing
-   Store only queue - documents that have been processed before
    scanning and therefore do not require activity creation
-   RMU queue - for validation of documents scanned for storage at RMU.
    These documents have been processed and therefore do not require
    activity creation
-   Fax queues - documents received via inbound fax that require manual
    classification

Medical Information File Envelope (MIFE) documents

MIFE documents are medically sensitive information lodged by customers.
They are accessed for decisions about:

-   new claims
-   reviews
-   work capacity assessments, and
-   exemptions from mutual obligation requirements

To identify a MIFE document, the MIFE indicator tick box will be
selected in Document Tools in Customer First or the Documents tab in
Process Direct.

The Resources page contains:

-   links for classification guidelines and codes
-   Intranet links to the ICT Security Portal and Workload Management
    pages
-   a link to the Multi-cultural Guide for international customer record
    creation tips, and
-   Kofax specific information, including links to Validation
    sub-queues, a filtering taskcard and helpful keyboard shortcuts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
