
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Customer Overview and helps staff identify the
reason for the customer's contact. Customer Overview is a snapshot of
recent information from the customer's record, in one spot, in
chronological order. Icons and meaningful descriptions give Service
Officers a clear description of the customer's overall experience.

Customer Overview location

Smart Centres

Customer Overview will autofill in the Services Australia Workspace when
a customer has entered their Customer Reference Number (CRN) or Customer
Access Number (CAN) in the IVR. See the Resources page for a link to
Services Australia Workspace.

If the customer has not entered their CRN/CAN, Customer Overview will
not fill until the Service Officer enters the CRN/CAN.

Service Centre

Customer Overview fills through the Interaction tabs in the Front of
House app (FOH) when a Service Officer enters the customer's CRN/CAN.

Customer Overview functions

Customer Overview:

reduces the time and need for a customer to recall and communicate:

-   a history of contact, and
-   reason for call

shows a Service Officer the recent customer experience or interactions
with Centrelink

reduces the time to find relevant details on multiple screens

shows real time data on the customer's record

gives direct links to knowledge articles and specific Operational
Blueprint content to help Service Officers

gives a snapshot of possible issues affecting a customer’s
circumstances, such as:

-   debts
-   suspensions
-   claim status
-   cancellations

shows actions taken, such as:

-   updating or confirming their phone number, and
-   the messages customers have already heard in the Smart IVR (Smart
    Centre only)

shows customer interaction across all channels, for example:

-   service centre visits
-   inbound and self service phone calls, and
-   completed, and partially completed, self service transactions

shows letters and other correspondence the customer has recently
received, such as:

-   emails
-   SMS, and
-   push notifications

shows details of online or app completed transactions

Customer Overview elements

Aggregated cards

If there is more than one instance of the same item on the same day,
only one card per activity or event is shown. The card shows how many
times the item occurred on that day. If there are multiple activities,
each activity has a different card.

Read card indicators

Letter titles change to a darker blue to show that the card produced a
PDF version of the letter.

Recent items

Cards with a date in the past 7 days:

-   display the number of days in red text
-   can range from ‘Just now’ to ‘7 days ago’

This will show how old the event is.

Chronological order

Cards are in date order, with the most recent item at the top. There are
some exceptions such as business imperative indicating cards. For
example, update phone number cards.

Expanded Card

Cards with extra information can be expanded and collapsed by:

-   clicking on chevron (Service Centre only)
-   clicking on the blue title (Smart Centre only)

Expanded cards display ‘more...’ text to load the next 10 activities
from that day.

Correspondence PDF

Correspondence cards include:

-   letters
-   emails
-   push notifications, and
-   SMS sent to the customer by Centrelink

There is a short description on the card to help identify the content of
the correspondence.

Click on the card to open the full PDF version of the letter, email,
push notification or SMS.

The Resources page contains FAQs and links to mySupport, Digital Support
Products, myGov website and the Services Australia website.

Related links

Telephone standards

Answering calls in Centrelink

Centrelink phone protocols

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

How users can create a myGov account and link services

Voiceprints for phone self service

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Front of House (FOH) services and app

Self service terminals

Access Management for Self Service (AMSS) - Staff-assisted access for
phone self service and nominees online

Using Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
