[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) for the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
program.

Objectives

The AIR program quality checking process aligns Services Australia’s
Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

See the Resources page for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify AIR process
    improvements
-   ensures consistency in quality checking

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders must ensure:

-   Quality Checkers complete the process for Quality Checker
    accreditation prior to performing quality checks
-   Quality Checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the QST by sending
    an email to Quality Operations & Technical Support
-   Quality Checking error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as
    part of the coaching conversation to support learning and
    development needs
-   they analyse any errors. For example, did the errors occur because
    there is limited training, understanding of the business rules,
    environmental or system based issues
-   positive quality checking results are discussed with the Service
    Officer
-   they analyse data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities
-   quality checks are done as specified in the sampling plan
-   they notify senior management of serious error which places the
    agency’s reputation at immediate risk
-   they escalate systemic issues
-   the quality checking outcomes disputes is followed

Quality checkers or Programme Support Officer (PSO) must:

-   carry out quality checks as outlined in the sampling plan
-   update and maintain technical knowledge, procedures and policies
-   maintain a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   complete root cause analysis and identify systemic issues
-   report and escalate trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   give constructive and non-judgemental feedback. Include reference
    materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explain the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct the
    error (where applicable) when giving feedback
-   examine system information/source documents to make sure Australian
    Immunisation register processes are in line with business rules,
    policies and procedures
-   make sure they do not check their own work. If a quality checker’s
    own work is selected, it must be passed to another accredited
    quality checker to check

Quality team must:

-   provide support for quality checking in the QST
-   provide relevant reports as needed
-   arrange QST training for Quality Checkers
-   support the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Quality Checker accreditation must be renewed annually. See Quality
Checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division for more
information.

To be accredited, quality checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   meet accreditation standards annually
-   renew Quality Checker accreditation annually

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks will be applied to new starters and when there are new
processes introduced into the Programme. Staff will have their work
reviewed and corrected until deemed proficient. These results are not
included in accuracy of processing results.

See Resources for a link to Quality Checking New Starters Policy

Programme/post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA). The
results are provided to management and stakeholders as needed.

Targeted checks for AIR are completed for:

-   staff when there is a substantial new process introduced or an
    identified quality issue
-   Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is completed
    every 12 months. This confirms the accuracy of quality checking
    results. The process involves rechecking a sample of previously
    checked work to decide if quality checking procedures have been
    followed correctly

Sampling plan

Pre-check

New starters will have 100% of their work checked until they reach the
program accuracy KPI, with a minimum of 40 activities per work type
checked.

Programme/post-checks

A risk based approach will determine the bias in the sample.

The sample is prioritised according to the risk of the work type:

-   High risk work items checked at 2.3%
-   Medium risk work items checked at 2.2%
-   Low risk work items checked at 2.0%

Targeted checks

Team Leaders can submit a Quality Targeted Check Request form for
specific targeted checks.

Source documentation

AIR transactions selected for quality checking will be obtained from
work types allocated through the Processing and National Demand
Allocation (PaNDA) tool. Source documents will be obtained through PaNDA
and/or the Practice Profile.

Quality checking is also performed on the following documentation (where
applicable):

-   scanned applications
-   supporting documentation, for example, accreditation certificate for
    a practice relocation
-   faxes
-   letters
-   Medicare mainframe AIR system pends

Note: if a notation has been made, this becomes part of the source
(supporting) documentation that is subject to quality checking. This
will be in the form of notations in PaNDA, CDMS, and/or Medicare
mainframe.

Process for undertaking checks

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a random sample of work.

-   Pre-checks - quality checks are normally done within 1-2 business
    day of the work being completed
-   Programme/Post checks - where possible quality checks are completed
    within 4 calendar days of being allocated in the QST. At the end of
    the month any program check not completed is automatically abandoned
    after 3 calendar days

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Quality checks enquiries

Checkers must consult their Programme Support Officers if they have any
questions about quality checking.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with submitted
checking results that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to
Quality Operations & Technical Support by email.

Note: when in training direct disputes to a Trainer/Floor-walker in the
first instance.

Errors

An error is information processed or keyed that does not match the
documents supplied, or the supporting documents uploaded on the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

The error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

A critical error is when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

A non-critical error is when it does not impact the above criteria.
Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Note: only critical errors are used to calculate the accuracy of
processing results.

See Resources for lists of error codes.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool (QST). A system-generated email
is sent in real time to the Service Officer and their Team Leader
advising them of the outcome. Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Feedback is emailed to the Service Officer and their Team Leader. It
gives details about the:

-   check
-   result (including any errors identified)
-   quality checking dispute process

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded/stored in the Quality & Support Tool. Discussion
notes about the feedback should be detailed in coaching sessions.

Correcting Errors

Critical /Non-critical errors - Quality Checkers provide instruction in
the feedback email. Service Officer’s correct critical/non-critical
errors.

Correction of errors

If errors have been identified, action must be taken to correct the
error. Errors are to be corrected by the original processing Service
Officer. Where corrections cannot be made by the original processing
Service Officer, the Team Leader will be responsible for ensuring the
corrections are undertaken.

Change management

The Quality Checking procedure is reviewed by the business/programme and
in consultation with Quality Operations & Technical Support. The review
ensures that the error codes are current and approved policy changes are
included.

Changes needing immediate action will be updated accordingly. Changes
that are not critical to quality will be included in the review of the
procedure.

The Resources page contains guides for error status codes (including the
non-error code), a link to the online Quality Reporting form and a list
of links to the intranet, including Quality policies.

Related links

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Quality Checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division

Navigate Australian immunisation Register (AIR) system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
