
Quality Checker accreditation 111-20121135

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines mandatory information for Quality Checker
accreditation for staff in the Health Service Delivery Division.

Role of a Team Leader

Team Leaders give approval for a Service Officer (SO) to start the
accreditation process. The Team Leader must ensure the:

-   SO is proficient in the work type they will be checking prior to
    completing quality checker accreditation process
-   SO meets the minimum standard for each requirement in the quality
    checker prerequisites table on the Resources page
-   reaccreditation process is followed

Role of a Quality Checker

Quality Checkers must maintain up-to-date business and technical
knowledge in the work types they quality check. Quality Checkers must
not check their own work.

Quality checkers must:

undertake quality checking training (where applicable) and be accredited
before conducting quality checks

ensure consistent assessment of work items in line with Operational
Blueprint procedures

identify and record errors correctly and complete corrective action
where required. Analysing errors helps to identify:

-   trends
-   weakness in processing
-   gaps in business rules
-   system faults
-   issues relating to environmental factors
-   limitations in training or development opportunities

give consistent and constructive feedback to staff

work with leadership and program teams to ensure quality checks are
consistent

provide relevant feedback about systems, procedural, policy and work
flow issues to the relevant team

complete reaccreditation every 12 months

Providing Feedback

Prior to becoming a Quality Checker, the Service Officer must fully
understand the feedback process. Resources contains more information
about providing feedback.

The Quality Checker must give feedback using the method outlined in the
quality checking procedure.

Feedback must be provided for every identified error. The feedback must:

-   describe the error identified, and what was incorrect
-   explain the impact of the error
-   explain the action that should have been taken to correct the error
-   include any relevant reference material that supports the action,
    such as Operational Blueprint details if available
-   be to the point, non-judging and constructive

The feedback function can be used for positive feedback, but only when
the outcome of the check is error free.

Quality Operations & Technical Support

Quality Operations & Technical Support:

-   provide support and oversee the accreditation and reaccreditation
    process
-   provide data/reports on quality checking
-   maintain the Quality Checker accreditation register
-   support quality checking in the Quality and Support Tool (QST) by
    providing QST training and access

Reaccreditation

Quality Checkers must complete reaccreditation every 12 months. Quality
Operations & Technical Support send a reminder email to the Quality
Checker and their Team leader 1 month prior to the accreditation end
date.

The Quality Checker must:

-   complete the reaccreditation assessment
-   return the completed assessment to Quality Operations & Technical
    Support for checking

Quality Operations & Technical Support will update the Quality Checker
accreditation register with the date reaccreditation is completed.

If the Quality Checker fails to complete the reaccreditation process by
the due date they will no longer be an accredited Quality Checker.
Access to quality checking work will be removed. To regain Quality
Checker accreditation after accreditation has lapsed, the Service
Officer must complete the full accreditation process.

The Resources page contains:

-   the Quality Checker prerequisites table
-   a link to the accreditation assessment form
-   a link to contact details
-   intranet links to our master plan, the Enterprise Quality Framework,
    the Plain English Policy and information about Feedback

Contents

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Related links

Quality checking procedures

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
