
Notification Handler (NOHL) 111-26010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Notification Handler
(NOHL).

Overview

The Notification Handler exists to assist in applying the correct
business rules for customers who are required to tell Centrelink of
changes in their circumstances. The way in which dates of effect are
derived depends on the mechanism under which we ask customers to notify
us of changes in circumstances.

Regimes

There are currently two regimes under which customers are required to
notify of changes.

Regime 1

The first is for those customers who are stimulus customers, that is,
are required to return forms in order to be paid. These customers are
required to tell us at the end of an entitlement period of changes in
that entitlement period. This includes both fortnightly reporting cases
and variable reporting cases. For customers subject to this notification
regime, date of effect of a change is the date of event, except for
income from employment which is applied to the full entitlement period.

Regime 2

The second regime applies to other customers where they are obliged to
notify us when changes in their circumstances occur. These customers are
given a specific number of days (their notification period) in which to
notify us of changes in their circumstance.

Favourable decisions

For favourable decisions (decisions where the customer's rate
increases), the rule is that increases in rate are effective from the
date Centrelink is advised of the change. The incentive is for the
customer to notify changes as soon as possible. Where the customer’s
rate remains the same, the date of effect for the continuing rate will
equal the date of event.

Unfavourable decisions

For unfavourable decisions (decisions where the customer's rate
decreases), the general principle is that, if the customer notifies the
change within the allowable notification period, they do not need to
repay money already received. This leads to three variations.

-   Variation 1 - If the date of event, date of receipt and date of
    action of the change all occur in the same entitlement period, we
    apply the reduction in rate from the date the event happened
-   Variation 2 - If the customer notifies in time and we action the
    change in the period following the period in which the event occurs,
    then we reduce their rate from the beginning of the period in which
    we action the change. The customer has notified in time so we do not
    recover any money for the period in which the event occurs
-   Variation 3 - The third variation is basically the change introduced
    in October 1997. If the customer notifies in time but we don't
    action the change after the end of the period following the period
    in which the event occurs, then the customer is allowed to keep
    monies received up to the end of the notification period. There is a
    recoverable debt from the day after the end of the notification
    period until the customer's "date paid to"

If an event leads to a reduction in the customer's rate and they have
not notified in time, the reduction in rate is applied from the date of
event.

Rules

There are many different rules which may appear on the Date of Effect
Explanation (DOER) screen, to explain the decision made on a particular
date used in an assessment. Not all of the decisions are made by NOHL,
some of them are overrides either by Child Support or by the benefit
system specific rules that apply.

Note:

-   Numbers 1 to 9 and 15 to 18 are business rules, the others (0, 10 -
    14, 22, 23, 98, 99) are explanations
-   Rules 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 86 indicate
    that a FAO/NOHL assessment is involved. The Process page contains a
    detailed description of the NOHL rules.

s126 Debt Period Limit

S126 Debt Period Limit (DPL) allows the period (and therefore the
amount) of a debt to be limited to the period for which a circumstance
applied to a customer. This is one application of s126(4) of the Social
Security (Administration) Act 1999 (SSAA). The References page contains
a link to the SSAA.

When a change of circumstances that reduces a customer's rate for a
period in the past is actioned, the debt period is calculated as
follows:

-   The start of the debt period is dependent on whether the customer
    notified the change in time or late. If the change was notified in
    time (but actioned late), the start of the debt period is generally
    NPED + 1 (see rule 5). If the change was notified late, the start of
    the debt period is generally DOV (see rule 6). The Process page
    contains a detailed description of the NOHL rules, including rules 5
    and 6
-   The end of the debt period is dependent on whether S126 DPL applies.
    If S126 DPL applies, the debt period end is the last day on which
    the circumstance change which reduced the customer's rate applied.
    If S126 DPL is excluded, the debt period end will be deferred to the
    later of: a further circumstance change coded within the same
    activity, a legislative date such as a CPI date, or the DOR of the
    activity (see rules 1 and 2). The Process page contains a detailed
    description of the NOHL rules, including rules 1 and 2

For example:

If a customer has been paid $400 per fortnight for the period 1 January
2004 to 30 June 2004 and we are later advised that for the period 1
January 2004 to 28 January 2004 the customer had income of $1000 per
fortnight, the customer's calculated rate will change to $0 for the
period 1 January 2004 to 28 January 2004.

Assuming a DOR of 1 July 2004, the debt period and amount is:

If S126 DPL applies:

-   Period 1 January 2004 to 28 January 2004
-   Amount $800.00 ($400 x 2 fortnights)
-   In this case, the debt period is limited to the period of increased
    earnings

If S126 DPL does not apply:

-   Period 1 January 2004 to 20 March 2004
-   Amount $2257.00 ($400 x 5 fortnights + 9 days)
-   In this case, the debt period is extended to the next CPI date

S126 DPL has been applied as default processing in activities completed
after the September 2003 Major Release; however, as S126(4) is a
discretionary section of the SSAA, the S126 screen can be used to
exclude S126 DPL within an activity. This action may result in a debt
being calculated for a longer period and a larger amount than the system
would have calculated had S126 DPL been allowed to apply.

s126 Earnings Debt Reduction

S126 Earnings Debt Reduction (EDR) allows periods of calculated rate
increase identified within a debt calculation activity to be used to
reduce the amount of the debt to be raised. This is one application of
S126(4) of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 (SSAA). The
References page contains a link to the SSAA.

Note: originally, EDR only applied where the activity involved changes
to earnings however in December 2005, the EDR principle was extended to
include all of the customer circumstances which applied during the debt
period (not just earnings).

When a debt is calculated (resulting from an earnings or non-earnings
change), there may be some periods within the debt period for which the
customer has been underpaid (for example, one off income may have been
reported for an incorrect period, or income may have been apportioned
incorrectly previously). EDR is a system process which automatically
uses these rate increases to calculate arrears which can be used to
reduce the debt.

EDR applies in the following circumstances:

-   The activity contains earnings or non-earnings updates
-   The activity is producing a debt for one of the NSS, PEN or PGA
    systems
-   There is at least one period of underpayment (that lies within the
    debt period) within the activity
-   No EDR exclusion has been coded on the S126 screen

EDR applies to rule 1 and rule 2 calc points. Rate increases are
normally deferred to DOR, but EDR allows these rate increase to be
applied from DOV (and not deferred). The Process page contains a
detailed description of the NOHL rules, including rules 1 and 2.

If EDR results in a net result of arrears, the arrears are automatically
suppressed before the AR screen is displayed. This is because the
purpose of EDR is to reduce debt amounts raised; therefore any arrears
identified which would not have been paid had EDR not applied cannot be
paid to the customer.

EDR will be applied as default processing in activities completed after
the June 2004 Major Release; however, as S126(4) is a discretionary
section of the SSAA, the S126 screen can be used to exclude EDR within
an activity. This action may result in a debt being calculated for a
larger amount than the system would have calculated had EDR been allowed
to apply.

The Resources page contains a list of the Notification Handler (NOHL)
legislative definitions sorted by Section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999 (SSAA), a list of SSAA references applicable
to of NOHL manual overrides, a list of SSAA references applicable to
each of the NOHL rules, a list of graphic examples for NOHL rules and a
list of NOHL glossary terms and definitions.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
