
Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) quality checking in QST 111-22020347

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) for the IHI in Healthcare Identifiers (HI).

Objectives

The IHI in HI quality checking process aligns with Services Australia's
Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers identify process
    improvements
-   ensures consistency in quality checking

In scope

The following work type is covered by this procedure:

Request or update an Individual Healthcare Identifier form (MS003)

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders make sure:

-   quality checkers complete the process for quality checker
    accreditation
-   quality checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the QST by sending
    an email to the Services Delivery Quality and Support Team
-   timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of
    the coaching conversation to support any learning and development
    opportunities
-   analysis of errors - if errors were due to factors such as limited
    training, understanding the business rules, environmental or system
    based issues
-   positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with the Service
    Officer
-   analysis of data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities

Quality Checkers:

-   carry out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   update and maintain technical knowledge, procedures and policies
-   maintain a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   identify root cause analysis and identifying systemic issues
-   report and escalate trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   give constructive and non-judgemental feedback, including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explain the impact of errors and action to correct the error (where
    applicable) when giving feedback
-   adhere to program business rules

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If their work is
selected, it must be given to another staff member who has been trained
to conduct quality checks.

Quality Team:

-   provide support for quality checking in the QST
-   provide relevant reports as required
-   arrange QST training for quality checkers
-   support the business with flexible and fit-for-purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

For accreditation, Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the quality checking procedure
-   meet accreditation standards annually

Quality Checking accreditation must be renewed annually.

See Quality checker accreditation.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks:

-   apply to new starters
-   apply when new processes are introduced

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.
Results are used to support ongoing training.

Program/ post-checks

These randomly select work completed the previous business day in PaNDA.
The results are provided to management and external stakeholders as
needed.

Targeted checks:

-   apply in response to business triggers or when there is a
    consistent/long-term quality issue identified.
-   apply to Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is
    completed every 12 months. This is to confirm the accuracy of
    quality checking results. The process involves rechecking a
    representative sample of previously checked work to determine if
    quality checking procedures have been followed correctly

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Staff have 100% of their work reviewed until deemed proficient. As a
guide, new starters are considered proficient in accordance with the
Learning and Development training and consolidation plan.

Program/ post-checks

10% of the monthly IHI MS003 work type is selected for quality checking.

Targeted checks

To arrange these, Team Leaders send an email request to the Service
Delivery Quality and Support Team. The request needs to include the
staff member’s details, the reason and the time required for the
targeted check.

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Pre-checks: consult with the Learning and Development Team for training
and consolidation plan for this work type.

Program checks

Where possible, quality checks are completed within 4 calendar days of
being allocated in the QST.

At the end of the month, any program check not completed is
automatically abandoned after 4 calendar days. Exception: work will not
be abandoned for 100% program quality checks.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   program specific processing systems
-   PaNDA
-   QST
-   skill tags added on the QST

Error definition

For quality checking, an error is information processed or keyed into
the system that does not match the documents submitted or uploaded to
the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

An error is defined as non-critical when it does not meet the above
criteria. Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Quality Checkers record in the QST the outcome of each quality check
they complete.

The system sends an email in real time to the Service Officer and their
Team Leader advising the quality check outcome.

Individual results are captured in the QST.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the check, the
result (including any errors identified) and the quality checking
dispute process.

Identifying underlying factors for errors

Team Leaders are to raise any underlying factors for errors, and:

-   share with their team, or
-   escalate to Tier 3 to share with all teams

Managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded/ stored in the QST.

Correcting errors

Errors are corrected by:

-   Quality Checkers as part of quality checking, or
-   Tier 3 Team Leaders if further resolution is required from the Data
    Integrity team

Critical errors

Quality Checkers must correct critical errors immediately, as they are
identified.

Non-critical errors

Quality Checkers provide instruction in the feedback email. Quality
Checkers are correcting non-critical errors.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers must consult their subject matter experts for questions
about Individual Healthcare Identifier.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to the Service
Delivery Quality and Support Team by email.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with to the Service Delivery Quality and Support
Team. The review ensures error codes are current and approved policy
changes are included.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains links to intranet pages, forms and contact
details. It also lists the error status codes (critical and
non-critical).

Related links

Quality checker accreditation

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Create Verified Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
