
Transferring calls 111-05030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the protocols and guidelines for call transfers
to other customer segments (queues), as well as external transfers to
service centres, Specialist Officers and Managers.

Dealing with a customer's initial enquiry/issue

Wherever possible, answer customer enquiries or resolve issues at the
first contact. Even if it means putting the customer on hold while
seeking help.

To reduce the ability of a caller to access a queue from a separate line
of business, let the caller know the most appropriate phone number to
use to seek help next time. Follow this wherever possible by answering
the customer's enquiry or resolving issues at the first contact.

If not able to help due to the caller contacting the incorrect line and
trying to be transferred between queues, quickly finalise the call by
politely thanking them for calling. Give them the most appropriate phone
number for help.

If the enquiry is outside the scope of the staff member’s knowledge or
training, the call can be transferred unannounced to an experienced
Service Officer using the transfer options in Services Australia
Workspace. This may be applicable for multiple payment enquiries.
However, calling the wrong line and trying to be transferred between
queues is not an appropriate reason to be transferred.

At every contact, check the customer's address (including postal
address) and phone details (including mobile numbers) and updated them
if required.

If the customer has verified their identity via IVR, there is no need to
confirm address details. [] The customer can view/ update their address,
accommodation or contact details online.

Unannounced call transfers

To reduce the ability of a caller to access a queue from a separate line
of business, let the caller know the most appropriate phone number to
use to seek help next time. All calls that require transfer to another
Smart Centre Call queue are to be transferred unannounced, with some
exceptions (see below). Undertake a Proof of Record Ownership (PORO)
check where appropriate.

Explain the reason for the transfer to the customer, and then transfer
the call to the appropriate queue by selecting the POI button in
Services Australia Workspace if the customer has been authenticated.
Note: the Service Officer must remain in the customer's record until the
transfer has been completed so that the customer's record is transferred
to the next Service Officer.

Requirement for a document on the customer's record

Use a DOC or Fast Note to detail the customer's enquiry to prevent them
having to repeat the details.

Exceptions:

-   Customers who are clearly distressed
-   Transfers to Social Workers
-   Transfers to the Customer Relations Unit, or transfers outside of
    the Smart Centre Call, for example, service centre
-   Transfer from the Customer Relations Unit to a Main Business Line
    due to lack of Main Business Line knowledge
-   Customers with a complex enquiry that cannot be explained in the DOC

Call transfers within and out of the Smart Centre Call network

There are 2 ways to transfer calls within the Smart Centre Call network:

-   Priority Transfer (announced). or
-   National Transfer (unannounced)

These transfers can be made with or without Services Australia Workspace
and are described in the procedures.

Transfers out of the Smart Centre Call network can also be made with or
without Services Australia Workspace and are always announced. ScreenPop
is not always available in all sites outside the Smart Centre Call
network.

Transferring OADC and YEE calls from eastern states after 5.00 pm (AEDST)

Older Australians, Disabilities and Carers (OADC), Youth, Education and
Employment (YEE) and Boutique queues close at 5.00 pm local time.

Calls that are in the queue before 5.00 pm will be answered by OADC, YEE
and Boutique staff in Central and Western Australian Smart Centres.

If a call needs to be transferred to OADC, YEE or Boutique queues from a
customer in a state where the queue has already closed, explain to the
customer that the queue is now closed and to call back the next business
day. Give them the correct number to contact.

Transferring Online Service Support Hotline (OSS) and After Hours BasicsCard calls into main lines outside Business Hours

Calls entering the OSS and After Hours BasicsCard line outside the hours
of 8:00 am - 5:00 pm local time (customer's local time of day) must not
be transferred into any Business Line that is not open in the caller's
state.

If the Service Officer receives one of these calls and the customer asks
to be transferred to another business line from a state where the queue
is currently closed, explain to the customer that the queue is currently
closed and to call back during business hours. Give them the correct
number to contact. To reduce the ability of a caller to access a queue
from a separate line of business, let the caller know the most
appropriate phone number to use to seek help next time. Follow this
wherever possible by answering the customer's enquiry or resolving
issues at the first contact.

When not able to help due to the caller contacting the incorrect line
and trying to be transferred between queues, quickly finalise the call
by politely thanking the customer for calling. Give them the most
appropriate phone number for help.

Transferring Child Support calls after 4.45 pm (AEST)

Child Support queues open at 8:30 am and close at 4:45 pm local time.

Calls that are in the queue before 4:45 pm local time will be answered
by Child Support staff in Central and Western Australian Smart Centres.

If a call needs to be transferred to Child Support from a customer in a
state where the queue has already closed, explain to the customer that
the queue is now closed and to call back the next business day. Give
them with the correct number to contact.

The Resources page contains a link to the Staff Feedback Tool.

Contents

Announced and unannounced call transfers

Conditions for transferring or referring calls

Conditions for transferring or referring calls to specialist staff and
managers

Identifying Smart Centre Call queues responsible for various payments

Transferring a non-priority call within the network

Transferring a priority call within the network

Transferring a call with Services Australia Workspace

Related links

Timeliness standards for callbacks and ACTDOCs

Answering calls in Centrelink

Finalising and terminating customer contacts

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
