
Calling a customer or returning a customer's call 111-05050050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document describes the responsibilities when calling a customer.

On this Page:

Domestic calls

Calls to a customer located in Australia are to occur between the hours
of 8:00am and 8:00pm local time.

International calls

If a call is to be made to a customer who is temporarily absent from
Australia, there are protocols for enabling International Direct Dial
access.

Between the hours of 8am to 5:30pm AEST, Monday to Friday, Service
Officers can call the switchboard, advise what country the customer is
in, and the call will be connected.

Outside the hours of 8am to 5:30pm AEST, Monday to Friday, Service
Officers need to arrange for Telstra to enable international calls to be
made from a particular phone. Requests are placed through the Authorised
Centrelink Representative (ACR), usually the Administrative Officer in
the relevant service centre, who will submit the appropriate MySupport
request to Telstra.

Note: requests for International Direct Dial access require EL2
approval.

Norfolk Island calls

Between the hours of 8am to 5:30pm AEST, Monday to Friday, Service
Officers can call the switchboard, advise the customer is on Norfolk
Island, and the call will be connected.

Norfolk Island has its own Island/Country Code which is +6723. All
Norfolk Island telephone numbers are a 5 digit number:

-   all landlines start with 2#### for example 21234
-   all mobile telephones start with 5#### for example 51234

Where international calling is enabled dial: 0011–6723-(plus the 5 digit
landline or mobile) for example 0011–6723-21234.

Outside the hours of 8am to 5:30pm AEST, Monday to Friday Service
Officers may need to arrange for Telstra to enable international calls
to be made from a particular phone. Requests are placed through the
Authorised Centrelink Representative (ACR), usually the Administrative
Officer in the relevant service centre who will submit the appropriate
MySupport request to Telstra.

Note: requests for International Direct Dial access require EL2
approval.

Use of mobile phones

When a Service Officer is calling a customer on a mobile phone, other
than as a result of a request for a callback, the Service Officer should
ask if the customer wants to continue the call on the mobile phone, or
if there is another phone number they would like to be contacted on.

When a customer calls on a mobile phone, the Service Officer should not
offer to call them back to reduce the cost to the customer, even if the
customer has been in a queue for some time. Customers concerned about
the cost should be advised instead to call back from a landline or
public phone.

Participation Solutions Team (PST) skilled Service Officers receiving a
PST related call may call customers back if they have contacted the
agency using their mobile phone and ask to be called back. However,
customers can avoid additional phone charges by using a landline or the
free phones available in service centres.

Maintaining privacy

When a call is answered the Service Officer can advise their name and
that they are calling from Services Australia, however it is important
that the customer's privacy is maintained. It would not be appropriate
to disclose the reason for the call or to identify the team the Service
Officer works with until the person being called is identified as the
person to whom the information relates. In certain circumstances, the
Service Officer may identify they are calling from 'Centrelink'. See
Process page for more detail.

If the person sought is not available or cannot be identified, an
attempt to call again later will be made.

If the person refuses to identify themselves, for example, they think it
is a scam call, the Service Officer should advise the customer of the
correct number to call back on the next business day. Record a DOC
advising of reason for the unsuccessful call attempt.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the Services
Australia switchboard.

Related links

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Creating ACTDOC and Callback work items

Call and screen recording – information and access

Customer initiated contact with Service Officer

Telephone standards

Protocols for customer requested appointments

Timeliness standards for callbacks and ACTDOCs

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
