
Advice of a scam or theft or loss of personal information 111-04000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Services Australia protocols for staff to follow
when a customer advises they have been a victim of a scam or their
personal information has been lost/stolen and is being misused (or at
risk of being misused).

Services Australia protocols

Services Australia plays an important role in supporting customers who
have provided personal information because of a scam, or their personal
information was stolen/lost and is being misused (or is at risk of
misuse) to commit identity fraud against the agency or in the community.

It is important all staff help the customer if unauthorised changes
and/or claim for payment without consent is identified by:

-   following Identity fraud, and
-   then referring them to the Scams and Identity Theft Helpdesk if
    appropriate

Reporting scams

Scams are defined as 'a fraudulent invitation, request, notification or
offer, designed to obtain personal information or money or otherwise
obtain a financial benefit by deceptive means'.

Scams are constantly evolving as technology gives scammers more
opportunities to trick people into giving away their personal
information or pay money. The method of deception could be via a phone
call, SMS message, email, or social media platform. Scams often:

-   impersonate our Brand, other Government or well-known organisations
-   request urgent action
-   threaten life or arrest
-   offer technical assistance to gain remote access to a computer or
    device
-   promise a financial reward or rebate
-   guarantee a financial return on investments
-   impersonate prospective companions for dating and romance

If a customer is impacted by a scam, and has not provided personal
information, a referral to the Scams and Identity Theft Helpdesk is not
required.

The customer should be encouraged to report:

-   General scams to Scamwatch
-   Cyber-related scams to the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC)

Electronic messages and other genuine agency notifications

Genuine notifications and contact from Services Australia, such as SMS
messages, emails, outbound calls, and in some cases letters, can be
incorrectly perceived as a scam when the person was not expecting it.
Genuine notifications can also be an indication of unauthorised
activity.

It is important that Service Officers determine why the notification was
sent or call was made, and in appropriate circumstances, transfer the
customer to the Scams and Identity Theft Helpdesk. See:

-   Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message
-   Troubleshooting Centrelink self service
-   Troubleshooting myGov
-   Operational Blueprint - messages

Common types of scams and tactics

The Services Australia brand is often misused by scammers. They do this
because the brand is well known and recognisable to most residents of
Australia. Without realising, the phishing lure (email or SMS, or
impersonation phone call etc.) can create a false sense of authenticity
without the customer realising.

Scammers also use various deceptive tactics, both technical and
psychological, ultimately with the goal of tricking people into visiting
a fake website, providing personal information, providing money, or
opening/downloading attachments that contain malware. These messages,
commonly referred to as ‘lures’ often look convincing and may pretend to
be real people or organisations.

Services Australia plays an important role in:

-   disrupting scammer’s activity when the Services Australia's brand is
    misused e.g. a fake website that looks like myGov, or the scammer is
    actively trying to steal agency issued credentials e.g. copy of the
    Medicare and/or concession card
-   supporting customers when they inadvertently responded to a scam and
    provided their personal information

Simulations

Some emails appear to be a scam, but are pre-designed simulations. The
simulation email sometimes includes Services Australia brand, or is
co-branded and includes reference to the Australia Taxation Office
(ATO). Similar to a scam email, the simulation includes hyperlinks that
navigate to a safe website that is designed to educate staff on the
dangers of receiving phishing emails at work, and clicking on
hyperlinks.

Simulations are developed to mimic phishing scams. Unless analysis is
available to indicate otherwise, Helpdesk staff should treat all reports
of a phishing emails as a scam.

Reporting identity crime or lost/stolen personal information

Scammers or cyber criminals structure their dishonest activity to steal
personal information. This often includes digital copies of documents
used to establish or confirm a person's identity in order to commit
identity fraud. Identify fraud is a serious crime and can result in
long-term and far-reaching consequences for victims.

Once a person's identity has been stolen, it can be difficult to
recover, and it may cause problems and financial loss for many years.
The consequences for some victims can also be overwhelming, resulting in
emotional distress.

Stolen or lost personal information can result in various forms of
unauthorised activity against the victim or the agency, for example:

-   access to government online services and records
-   lodging fraudulent claims for payment
-   access to online banking
-   opening new bank accounts and taking out loans or credit
-   taking out phone plans and other contracts
-   accessing email and social media accounts
-   impersonating genuine people to scam others

If a customer is affected by the loss/theft of their personal
information, and this is being misused or at risk of being misused,
customers can be referred to the Scams and Identity Theft Helpdesk.

Payment destination has been changed without consent or fraudulent claim lodged

If a customer contacts to advise they have not received their payment or
identified a fraudulent claim for payment has been lodged, including
payments related to emergency events, Service Officers are to see
Identity fraud for advice on:

-   correcting the customer's record
-   recalling and reissuing payments (if applicable)
-   securing the customer's record
-   reporting the suspected fraud and corruption, and
-   reporting the potential privacy incident

The Resources page contains links to more information and support.

Related links

Identity fraud

Third party Data Breach

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting myGov

Privacy incidents

Emergency payments - preventing fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
