
External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) quality checking in QST 111-22050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) in Health Service Delivery for the EBPRP.

Objectives

The EBPRP quality checking process aligns the Enterprise Quality
Framework and the 7 quality principles.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers identify process
    improvements
-   ensures consistency in quality checking

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for ensuring:

-   Quality Checkers complete the process for quality checker
    accreditation
-   Quality Checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the QST by sending
    an email to the Services Delivery Quality and Support Team
-   timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officers as part of
    the coaching conversation to support any learning and development
    opportunities
-   analysis of errors. If errors were due to factors such as limited
    training, understanding the business rules, environmental or system
    based issues
-   positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with Service
    Officers
-   analysis of data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities

Quality Checkers:

-   carry out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   update and maintain technical knowledge, procedures and policies
-   maintain a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   identify root cause analysis and identifying systemic issues
-   report and escalate trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   give constructive and non-judgemental feedback including appropriate
    reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explain the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct the
    error (where applicable) when providing feedback

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If their work is
selected, it must be given to another staff member who has been trained
to conduct quality checks.

Quality Team:

-   provides support for quality checking in the QST
-   provides relevant reports as required
-   arranges QST training for quality checkers
-   supports the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Staff members selected to undertake quality checking must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   maintain a personal correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   review EBPRP quality checking procedure/agreed standards
-   meet accreditation standard annually

Team Leaders email the Services Delivery Quality and Support Team to
request a skill tag be added in the QST for the staff member.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks will be applied to new starters and when there are new
processes for the Programme. Staff will have their work 100% reviewed
and corrected until deemed proficient. These results are not included in
accuracy of processing results.

Letters

Letters are to be checked for the correct customer and scenario before
being sent to the claimant.

Programme/ Post-checks

Programme/ Post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in PANDA. The results are provided to management and
external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted Checks

Targeted checks for EBPRP are completed for:

-   staff when there is a substantial new process or an identified
    quality issue
-   Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) every 12 months. This
    confirms the accuracy of quality checking results. The process
    involves rechecking a sample of checked work to decide if quality
    checking procedures have been followed correctly

Sampling plan

New starters will have:

Pre-checks: 100%`of their work checked until they reach the program
accuracy Key Performance Indicators (KPI), with at least 30 activities
checked

Letters checked for the correct customer and scenario before sending to
the claimant

Programme/ Post-checks completed daily on a statistically valid sample
of incentive transactions. The results are used to report on the health
of the program. All discretionary claims are to be checked, and always
sent to the Programme Management Team for assessment

Targeted checks

-   Team Leaders are to send an email to Services Delivery Quality and
    Support Team to request the staff member's details, the reason and
    the time needed for the targeted check
-   Aim for Accuracy to be developed as a separate process

Source documents

EBPRP transactions are randomly selected for quality checking in the QST
from work types allocated through PaNDA. Source documents will be
obtained through FileNet.

Quality checking is performed on the EBPRP claim form, letters and
receipts (if applicable).

Note: if a notation has been made, this becomes part of the source
(supporting) documentation that is subject to quality checking. This
will be in the form of notations in PaNDA.

Process for undertaking checks

Timeframes

Pre checks: quality checks are expected to be completed within one
business day of work completion

Programme/ Post checks

-   If possible, quality checks are completed within 4 calendar days of
    being allocated in the QST. High-risk work is prioritised for daily
    action
-   At the end of the month, any programme checks not completed are
    automatically abandoned after 4r calendar days

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to PaNDA, QST and program specific
processing systems

Quality checks/ checking enquiries

Quality checks

Enquiries about the sample of work being checked can be emailed directly
to the EBPRP Processing team.

Quality checking

Checkers must consult their subject matter experts for the issue
encountered if they have any questions about quality checking.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with submitted
checking results that cannot be resolved on site should be emailed to
the Service Delivery Quality and Support Team.

Errors

An error is information processed or keyed that does not match the
documents supplied, or the supporting documents uploaded on the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

The error codes are categorised as.

a critical error when there is a potential risk to:

-   a customer's, privacy, eligibility, payments, record or application
    assessment being finalised
-   the agency's reputation

a non-critical error when it does not impact the above criteria.
Generally, this relates to administrative errors

Note: only critical errors are used to calculate the accuracy of
processing results.

The Resources page lists error codes.

Recording results

Each time they complete a quality check, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in QST. This sends an email straight away to the Service Officer
and their Team Leader advising the outcome. Individual results are
captured in QST.

Feedback

After performing quality checking on selected transactions, an email is
sent to the Service Officers and Team Leader's email box. The email
includes details about the check and the result, including any errors
identified.

Feedback on errors must:

-   be direct and to the point, non-judgemental and constructive
-   describe the error, and what was incorrect
-   explain the impact the error has, for example to the
    recipient/claimant, Services Australia
-   explain the action to be taken to correct the error (where
    applicable)
-   include any relevant reference material that supports the action,
    such as an Operational Blueprint file
-   provide the opportunity for development and not be used for punitive
    purposes

Method for managing and storing feedback

Record feedback in QST.

Detail discussion notes about the feedback in coaching sessions.

Analysing errors

Error analysis is conducted by the:

-   Team Leader or Program Support Officer as required for local issues
-   Assistance Programmes Branch for analysis of the programs

Correction of errors

If errors have been identified, the original processing Service officer
(where required), must take action to correct them.

When corrections cannot be made by the original processing Service
Officer, the Team Leader is responsible for ensuring an escalation
process is in place for corrections.

If the error requires a file fix, the Quality Checker must send the
request for the file fix. See Processing claims for EBPRP.

Change Management

Quality checking procedures are regularly reviewed and updated by the
Programme in consultation with Learning Development and Quality. The
review ensures the error codes are current and applicable and that
approved changes to Programme business policies are included.

Issues with the Quality Checking Procedure are recorded and escalated to
Quality Management via email.

The Resources page contains quality checking error status codes (and the
non-error code), intranet links and links to contact details.

Related links

External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

Quality Checker accreditation

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
