-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the national proficiency procedures for Quality
On Line (QOL).

QOL

QOL is the quality checking program for activities completed in Customer
First/Customer Record. QOL uses sampling to select activities for
checking based on proficiency levels of staff coded on the Quality
Sampling Summary (QSS) screen.

What is QSS?

The QSS screen is used to determine how much work is selected for QOL
checking for individual staff members. It is located in Customer
First/Customer Record and can only be updated by staff at the APS5 level
and above. Access to the QSS screen is automatic, based on the
positional number the staff member occupies in ESSentials.

Proficiency levels for QOL

In QOL, a staff member's proficiency level determines how much work is
selected for quality checking. Staff must have proficiency assessments
completed on a regular basis to ensure the correct level of work is
being sampled.

Proficiency levels in QOL relate to a sample and minimum correctness
rate.

Automation of QOL proficiency

Parts of the QOL proficiency assessment process are completed through
automation. The automated process:

-   aligns with the QOL proficiency assessment process
-   applies monthly updates on the Quality Sample Summary (QSS) screen
-   is separate to the Quality Management Application (QMA) auto
    sampling framework

All staff with at least one system and/or benefit line on the QSS screen
will have their proficiency automated unless an exemption is applied.

See the Resources page for details on QSS Automation including how the
process works, which components are automated, as well as those that are
exempt from automation.

Proficiency assessments

Assessments of proficiencies can be done at any time. In QOL,
proficiency assessment is applied by system and benefit types in:

-   new claim (NCL), and
-   non-new claim (NNCL) activity types

Generally, there are 3 kinds of proficiency assessments:

Proficiency Advancement
After 2 weeks of new staff starting with the agency or existing staff
starting new work, regular assessments of proficiency need to be
undertaken until the staff member progresses to a 'P'roficient level

Annual Proficiency review
Proficiency must be reviewed every 12 months for staff who are at the
‘P’roficient level to ensure accuracy

Trigger Proficiency assessments
Triggers in performance may require a staff member's proficiency to be
reviewed. When any staff member establishes a pattern in not meeting
quality requirements, an assessment may be undertaken at the line
manager's discretion. These assessments may result in proficiency being
reverted to a Learner level. Trigger proficiency assessments may result
from:

-   major change in business processing
-   reduction in accuracy
-   change of activities being processed
-   return from long leave or temporary placement

Proficiency advancement quality requirements

For staff to advance through the proficiency levels, each benefit type
or skill type must be individually assessed, with staff having achieved
all of the following:

-   Time - processed activities for a minimum of 2 weeks to a maximum
    period of 14 months from the date of the proficiency advancement
    assessment
-   Volume - 20 or more activities checked through QOL during the period
-   Accuracy - achieved the minimum correctness rate needed for the
    proficiency level

When making a Proficiency advancement assessment. It is important to
consider all relevant factors including:

-   overall accuracy
-   learning and development needs
-   volume of Technical Peer Support (TPS) contacts
-   national feedback reports
-   other indicators of quality that will aid in the assessment

Annual proficiency review quality requirements

Note: this applies to staff who are on the 'P'roficient level for QOL.

Proficiency reviews are to be undertaken every 12 months for each
benefit type to ensure staff continue to achieve and maintain the
quality requirements to remain at the 'P'roficient level.

Staff are to meet all of the following:

-   a minimum of 20 activities completed/processed
-   a minimum of 5 activities checked and passed in QOL
-   achieve at least 95% correctness rate, and
-   have had the activities QOL checked up to 12 months from the date of
    the annual assessment

If staff do not meet proficiency quality requirements above, line
managers can apply a non-standard quality assessment. See Non-standard
Proficiency assessment for more information.

Proficiency data for manual assessments

The following 2 reports in the QOLStat tool are used when assessing and
reviewing proficiency:

-   Correctness Report - displays correctness rate achieved
-   Selection Report - displays the volume of work processed and quality
    checked

The Resources page links to the QOLCheck and QOLStat Guide.

Non-standard proficiency assessment

The non-standard proficiency assessment is applicable to annual
proficiency reviews only and apply to staff unable to meet the volume of
activities needed for the period assessed. Line managers may use this
method to conduct annual proficiency reviews without the need to consult
with the Service Delivery Quality Centre.

See the Process page for further details. Application of this process
must be documented and retained for potential audit purposes.

If a standard and a non-standard proficiency assessment cannot be
applied, an alternative assessment can be requested.

Alternative proficiency assessment

Support for an alternative assessment must be endorsed by the:

-   line manager for the individual staff member
-   EL2 Business Owner for the specific piece of work or business team

The minimum correctness rate must be achieved when applying an
alternative assessment method.

The business case for an alternative QOL proficiency assessment must be
approved by the Service Delivery Quality Centre in writing before being
applied.

Proficiency updates on return to work/duties after an extended absence/higher duties

When a staff member returns to work/duties after a period of more than 3
months, proficiency can be reverted to ‘L’earner level at Manager’s
discretion. Regular assessments can then be done to update proficiency.

The Resources page contains QOL proficiency level table, minor systems
table, automation of QOL proficiency on the QSS screen, the QOLCheck and
QOLStat Guide, QOLStat Feedback Report Guide.

Content

Quality Sampling Summary (QSS) screen

Related links

Quality On Line (QOL)

Quality Management Application (QMA) in Process Direct

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Service Officers

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Quality Management Officers
(QMO)

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Team Leaders

Disputing Quality On Line (QOL) and Quality Management Application (QMA)
results

Quality Standards in service delivery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
