
Staff Feedback Tool 111-24000000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains an overview of the Staff Feedback Tool and its
role in providing internal feedback.

About the Staff Feedback Tool

The Staff Feedback Tool is designed to formally record, manage and
report on compliments and internal feedback. It is available to
Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare staff. The Staff Feedback Tool is
used to:

-   recognise high quality work by staff
-   build staff capability, by identifying and addressing learning and
    development needs
-   identify and address process and communication gaps
-   achieve greater consistency
-   improve quality of service

When to use the Staff Feedback Tool

The Staff Feedback Tool is only used to provide feedback between staff
and business areas.

The types of feedback that can be captured in the Staff Feedback Tool
include:

-   Feedback: Advice or recommendations to improve the quality of
    service delivered
-   Compliment: An expression of praise for a staff member, product or
    service

When not to use the Staff Feedback Tool

It is not to be used to record feedback from customers. However, the
Staff Feedback Tool can be used to provide feedback to staff after
investigation of a complaint has identified a service failure.

Centrelink and Medicare customer feedback is recorded in the Customer
Feedback Tool. See:

-   Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback
    Tool
-   Managing customer complaints and feedback

Child Support customer feedback is recorded in either:

-   Cuba for customer complaints and compliments. See Recording Child
    Support complaints and compliments in Cuba
-   iRegister for customer suggestions. See: Child Support iRegister

How to access the Staff Feedback Tool

The Staff Feedback Tool can be accessed via:

-   'Customer Service' links on the Services Australia Intranet (SAI)
    home page
-   'Quick links' on the Staff Feedback Tool SAI page

All staff can access and use the tool without applying for a specific
role via the ICT Security Portal.

Those who manage staff will need to apply for manager access. This
provides the access to view, edit and finalise feedback and compliments.
Refer to Management of the Staff Feedback Tool. If manager access is
required by a staff member who does not currently hold a management
position, the staff member's team leader must endorse and apply for
access on the staff member's behalf.

Note: staff without manager access can only view the feedback they have
submitted.

How feedback notifications are sent - role of Office Locator

When a staff member submits a feedback form, an email containing a link
to the feedback item is sent to the 'Receiving Office' selected by the
feedback provider.

The Staff Feedback Tool uses the Staff Feedback Tool mailbox listed for
the organisation unit in Office Locator.

Note: updates to information contained in Office Locator, including
mailboxes to be used for Staff Feedback Tool notifications, need to be
made via the Office Locator Tool Support Request Form.

The Resources page contains links to the Staff Feedback Tool and
intranet page, Office Locator and other feedback links.

Contents

Recording feedback in the Staff Feedback Tool

Management of the Staff Feedback Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
