
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the common types of letters issued by Centrelink.
It includes how to action Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities, process
incomplete letters and create manual letters in Customer First. Do not
update MFUs and manual letters in Process Direct.

Government intent

Centrelink sends letters to customers to notify them about:

-   changes to eligibility and entitlement
-   their obligations
-   important policy changes

Batch Laser Advice (BLA) letters

Most letters sent to customers are BLA (batch) letters. BLA letters are
generated and auto-sent after 'end-of-day' processing and activities are
completed on the customer's record.

To view BLA letters that are:

-   recent, see the History Summary (HS) screen in Customer First or
    Customer Record
-   older, use the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE)

Online Advice (OLA) letters

Service Officers or specialist officers can create a manual OLA letter
to:

-   tell customers about benefit/payment changes
-   tell customers their rights and responsibilities
-   ask for documents
-   ask customers to make or attend an appointment

Note: manual letters must be generated in Customer First. Do not use the
manual letter selection in Process Direct as this workflow is not
endorsed for use.

Most OLA letters are delivered by post. Customers who subscribe to myGov
Inbox for their Centrelink letters can receive some OLA letters
electronically.

Each OLA letter contains a 'shell' or template of standard text. Staff
can:

key fields or use pre-approved text to complete the letter (where
required). All text must meet letter standards for plain English and
minimum content requirements, see the Resources page

preview OLAs before finalising them for local or central print

view:

-   recent OLA letters on the customer's HS screen
-   older letters using the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE)

SAP Outbound Correspondence (OC) letters

SAP OC is another platform used to create and send letters. Most are
batch letters created from activity on the customer's record. Some are
'immediate' letters created by Service Officers, such as requests for
information and duplicate Rent Certificates.

SAP OC letters are visible for 120 days in:

-   Process Direct > HS screen. To view older letters, see Table 4 in
    Archive Search Display in Process Direct
-   Customer First > Search Outbound Correspondence tool. To view older
    letters, select the Archive Search option

Online letters

Customers subscribed to myGov Inbox will receive most of their letters
electronically in their myGov Inbox or Express Plus Centrelink mobile
app. These include:

-   BLA and SAP OC letters
-   some OLA letters

Most OLA letters are delivered by post. Customers who subscribe to myGov
Inbox for their Centrelink letters can receive some OLA letters
electronically.

Correspondence print status codes

For a list of print status codes, see the Resources page of Viewing or
reissuing a letter or electronic message.

Requesting copies of letters

If a customer asks for a copy of an original letter, see Viewing or
reissuing a letter or electronic message.

Requesting duplicate documents

[A self service option is available for customers.] Customers can use
the Documents and Statements option online to request, view, print and
save documents. These can include:

-   Income Statements
-   Payment Summaries
-   Deduction Statements
-   Rent Certificates, and
-   Reporting Statements (SU19)

Feedback

Staff can give feedback, suggest improvements or report errors for
forms, letters and electronic messages.

The Resources page contains links to letter standards, delivery methods
and standards for Centrelink letters, and the Forms, Letters and
Electronic Messaging Feedback webform.

Contents

Bereavement letters

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Request for Information (RFI) letter

Related links

Requesting Information (CLK)

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Using myGov accounts

Changing settings to print a letter or electronic message on a local
printer

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

Issuing Online Advice (OLA) letters to Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Income Statement for detailed income and asset information

Compensation letters (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
