
Call and screen recording - information and access 111-17081500

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines call and screen recording and access.

Call recording

Verint records inbound and outbound customer calls and a random sample
of screen recordings in most business areas and locations. Staff must
use Services Australia Workspace (also known as Softphone) for these
calls so they record. Call recording is automatic when using Services
Australia Workspace.

Call recording relies on a number of IT processes. Services Australia
(the agency) cannot guarantee to record all screens and calls.

Why use call and screen recording

The purposes of call and screen recording include:

-   learning and development to support staff, and
-   quality to look at performance, processes and issues

Other approved uses:

-   support with complaints and feedback management
-   review of decisions
-   fraud, internal audit and security
-   release of information
-   support with difficult calls

See the Resources page for the agency’s Call and Screen Recording
Policy.

Access to call and screen recordings

The agency keeps call recordings in a secure data centre for 7 years and
screen recordings for 90 days. The agency stores audit logs of all staff
access to call and screen recordings. Staff need approval before access
to call and screen recordings is provided.

Not all roles have access to search for call and screen recordings.

Staff can also ask for call and screen recordings sent as a link. They
can then listen to the recording through Verint.

Live call monitoring can be used within Smart Centres as an alternative
to side by side listening. The purpose of live call monitoring is to
support staff building capability under the Pathway to Excellence
(previously known as Flightpath for Proficiency).

Administrative access (informal release) of call recordings

Recordings of conversations between a customer and the agency may be
available to customers. This is through the agency’s administrative
access (informal release of information) processes. This is access to
information already provided to the customer during the call.

A customer can verbally request a copy of a call recording. A Service
Officer will submit this request on behalf of the customer. The relevant
business team will retrieve, review and release the recording to the
customer where available and appropriate.

Guidelines for business areas actioning these requests are:

-   Ensure the call recording is reviewed in its entirety
-   A request under administrative access includes the customer’s
    discussion between themselves and the agency. Where a staff member’s
    voice is recorded whilst the customer is on hold this is not part of
    the customer's conversation with the agency. This may be removed
    from the call recording prior to release
-   Determine whether to remove any sensitivities from the call
    recording in accordance with privacy and secrecy provisions. See the
    Resources page for contact details of relevant teams for guidance
    and advice
-   The business area may need to consider further action after the
    release of a call recording. This may be relevant if there were
    quality or customer service concerns within the call

The Process page explains how to process a customer request for a copy
of a call recording.

Roles - Centrelink and Medicare

This includes Service Delivery Partners.

Service Officers, social workers and Assessment Services

-   manage requests from customers to access their calls with the agency
-   playback recordings sent to them as a link for quality assurance or
    analysis

Quality Checkers, Team Leaders, operational leadership and support staff

Search for and playback call and screen recordings in line with approved
uses.

Roles - Child Support

Service Officers

-   Manage requests for copies of calls made to Child Support
-   Objections Officers can ask for call recordings sent as a call link
    through the Verint system
-   Playback call and screen recordings they participated in as part of
    quality assurance or analysis

Quality Checkers, Team Leaders, Operational leadership and Senior
Support staff

Search for and playback call and screen recordings in line with approved
uses.

Program Manager (EL1) and above

Approve APS6 requests for retrieval of 'own' call and screen recordings

The Call and Screen Recording team will assess any requests for access
outside the standard roles and responsibilities listed above.

The Resources page contains contact details, links to user guides,
policy and macros.

Related links

Level 1 - Managing customer complaints and feedback

Level 1 complaints - Child Support

Customer aggression - Response

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Customer requests access to their personal information

Quality Call Framework quality checking

Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
