
Quality Call Framework (QCF) checking in the Smart Centre Division 111-19052427

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines detailed information on how the process for
Quality Call Framework (QCF) operates in Smart Centres.

On this Page:

Quality Call Framework (QCF) in Smart Centres

The Quality Call Framework (QCF) is a set of expectations to ensure the
telephone services delivered by Services Australia are of the highest
quality. The QCF provides consistent standards for all teams across the
department, so all telephone work is evaluated in the same manner. See
Quality Call Framework.

The Portfolio Operations Quality Team supports the operations of Quality
Call Framework in Smart Centres.

Variations to the QCF sample

The number of calls evaluated is 9 calls per quarter per staff member.
The number of calls evaluated may be varied with the approval of a
National Manager.

In September 2019, new variations were introduced which determine a
staff member’s sample size based on:

-   the number of non-quality call evaluations from the preceding 2
    quarters (6 months)
-   whether or not your site has transitioned to the Central Listening
    Model

Each quarter, Team Leaders check the number of calls sampled, the number
of calls that were required, and the number of non-quality calls for the
preceding two quarters via SmartCoach > ShowMe.

If a staff member requires a change in sampling levels, lodge a
variation request.

The approved QCF sample variations for Smart Centres can be located on
the Quality Call Framework Hub via Services Australia Intranet. See the
Resources page for a link.

Out of Scope Call Monitoring

Calls outside of the scope of QCF, for example learning and development
or back on track, are to the Team Leader’s discretion. Each situation is
to be assessed on a case by case basis. The Quality Call Framework
methodology and resources must still be used for Out of Scope calls, but
checkers must ensure they select the Out Of Scope option on the
evaluation form.

Team Leaders are to ensure they follow clause H15 Call Monitoring in the
DHS Enterprise Agreement 2017-2020, that is:

-   H15.1 Recorded information, in so far as it is used in relation to
    the employee, will be used as a part of gaining an overall picture
    identifying learning and development opportunities or needs
-   H15.2 Employees will be advised in writing prior to a fixed period
    during which their calls may be monitored. In this process, a fixed
    number of calls are randomly selected and assessed to improve the
    quality and accuracy of individual interactions with customers
-   H15.3 Employee performance will always be assessed holistically, and
    not based solely upon data capture

See the Resources page for a link to the DHS Enterprise Agreement
2017-2020.

Multilingual Calls

Language skill tags can temporarily be removed to undertake evaluations.
The decision to remove a language tag is at the discretion of the Team
Leader and should be coordinated with Real Time Operations. See the
Resources page for a link.

Calibration for accreditation and re-accreditation

From 1 January 2019, Quality Checkers for Quality Call Framework are
required to complete a calibration activity (minimum of 1 calibration
call) within 3 months of completing accreditation or annual
reaccreditation. See Quality Call Framework accreditation of Quality
Checkers.

Related links

Quality Call Framework

Quality Call Standards

Quality Call Framework accreditation of Quality Checkers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
