
Manage Medicare scanning 111-17050402

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the various avenues by which Medicare documents
are scanned. It provides specific information on how documents are
scanned using Multi-Function Devices (MFD) within smart centres, service
centres and mobile servicing centres. It will also cover how to request
a rescan and contingency plan if scanning is not available.

Local scanning

Local scanning is where Medicare documents are scanned on an MFD where
they are received.

Documents scanned via this method will either:

-   present directly in Processing and National Demand Allocation
    (PaNDA) ready for allocation, or
-   be sent to Kofax validation for further action. Once the Medicare
    document has been validated it will appear in PaNDA

Kofax validation is currently managed by the Digitisation and Scanning
team.

Requesting rescans of paper Medicare documents

A rescan is needed if the details on the original image cannot be read
or used.

To request a rescan, submit the Request for document rescan, retrieval,
or location webform, see the Resources page. This generates a
rescan/retrieval request to the original scanning site if received in a
service centre, or alternatively will generate an email to the Rescan
Retrieval Triage mailbox for action.

Definition of a rescan

A rescan is where the current digital image cannot be processed due to
one or more of the following reasons:

-   image is not readable, and the unreadable information is needed to
    complete the action on the customer’s application
-   image has missing pages which may be due to poor scanning (for
    example, the image looks like pages have been misfed)

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the webform,
and information about cleaning MFD scanners and documents accepted/ not
accepted.

Related links

Categorisation and validation of scanned Medicare documents

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

Work Optimiser for Team Leaders and Analysts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
