
eServices quality checking in QST 111-21062214

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) for eServices.

Objectives

The eServices quality checking process aligns Services Australia's
Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers identify process
    improvements
-   makes sure consistency in quality checking

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders must make sure:

-   Quality checkers complete the process for Quality Checker
    accreditation
-   Quality checkers have the right skill tags in the Quality and
    Support Tool. Send an email to the Services Delivery Quality and
    Support Team to get more information
-   error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of the
    coaching conversation. This supports any learning and development
    needs
-   they analyse any errors, for example, did the errors occur because
    there is limited training, understanding the business rules,
    environmental or system based issues
-   positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with the Service
    Officer
-   they analyse data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities

Quality Checkers must:

-   carry out quality checks as outlined in the sampling plan
-   update and maintaining technical knowledge, procedures and policies
-   maintain a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   complete root cause analysis and identify systemic issues
-   report and escalate trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   give constructive and non-judgemental feedback. Include appropriate
    reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explain the impact of errors and actions needed to fix the error
    (where applicable) when providing feedback
-   make sure they do not check their own work. If the Quality Checker's
    work is selected, it must be given to another accredited checker to
    checks

Quality Team must:

-   provide support for quality checking in the QST
-   provide relevant reports as needed
-   arrange QST training for Quality Checkers
-   support the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

To be accredited Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the quality checking procedure
-   meet accreditation standards annually
-   renew Quality Checker accreditation annually

See Quality checker accreditation for more information.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks apply:

-   to new starters
-   when new processes are introduced

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.
Results are used to support ongoing training.

Programme/post-checks

Programme/post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA). The
results are provided to management and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted checks

Targeted checks apply:

-   in response to business triggers or when there is a
    consistent/long-term quality issue is identified
-   to Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is completed
    every 12 months. This is to confirm the accuracy of quality checking
    results. The process involves rechecking a representative sample of
    previously checked work to determine if quality checking procedures
    have been followed correctly

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Staff have 100% of their work reviewed until deemed proficient. As a
guide, new starters are considered proficient in accordance to the
Learning and Development training and consolidation plan.

Programme/post-checks

5% of the monthly total of eServices work types are randomly selected
for quality checking.

Targeted Checks

To arrange a targeted check(s), Team Leaders send an email request to
the Services Delivery Quality and Support Team with the:

-   staff member’s details
-   reason and the length of time required for the targeted check

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a random sample of work. Quality
checks are completed within 1-2 business days to make sure timely
feedback. All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 4
calendar days of the following month. After this time, remaining work is
abandoned.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to complete quality
checks:

-   program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool
-   skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool

Error definition

An error is information processed or keyed that does not match the
documents supplied, or the supporting documents uploaded on the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

A critical error is when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

A non-critical error is when it does not impact the above criteria.
Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the QST. A system-generated email is sent in real time to the
Service Officer and their Team Leader advising them of the quality check
outcome. Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the check, the
result (including any errors identified) and the quality checking
dispute process.

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded/stored in the Quality & Support Tool.

Correcting Errors

Critical errors - Quality Checkers must correct critical errors
immediately, as they are found.

Non-critical errors - Quality Checkers give instruction in the feedback
email. Service Officer's correct non-critical errors.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers must consult their subject matter experts for questions
about eServices.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to the Services
Delivery Quality and Support Team by email.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with to the Service Delivery Quality and Support
Team. The review makes sure error codes are current and approved policy
changes are included.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page has tables listing error status codes (critical and
non-critical) for quality checking and a list of links to the intranet.

Contents

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Related links

Quality checker accreditation

Register provider for electronic funds transfer (EFT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
