
Environment Y for inactive deleted and deceased customer records 111-02030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens when there is no ongoing business
need for inactive deleted and deceased customer records.

Centrelink system Environment Y

When deleted and deceased Centrelink customer records have been inactive
for a specified period and have no on-going business need, they are
moved to the archived environment (Environment Y) under strict business
rules. This is to make the live database relevant and manageable.
Inactive records include:

-   deceased customer records
-   manually deleted records
-   records deleted as part of the automated ‘shell clean-up’

Note: a small number of records that are not deleted or deceased
customer records are also stored in Environment Y.

Records that have reached their AMR limit of 9999 activities are
transferred to Environment Y with an alphanumeric ID.

Most screens in Environment Y are 'read only' and do not allow any
updates. A screen message ‘M9999 Quarantine Environment - Records
Protected’ presents when entering a record stored in Environment Y.

To retrieve a deceased customer record from Environment Y, an
inter-environment transfer is required. This action is restricted to
staff within the Data Quality Unit (DQU). DQU will only move a deceased
customer record out of Environment Y if there is a critical business
need.

To retrieve a deleted customer record from Environment Y, the record
needs to be undeleted first. This action is restricted to staff within
the DQU.

DQU will only undelete a customer record if there is a critical business
need.

Scenarios that qualify as critical business needs for deceased customer
records in Environment Y:

-   a claim is accidentally started, submitted or finalised on a deleted
    CRN
-   data, where a ripple needs to occur for correct payments and raising
    debts
-   Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity titled ‘unsolicited refund’
-   mandatory activities that need to be completed on the deceased
    record

Scenarios that qualify as critical business needs for deleted customer
records in Environment Y:

-   a claim is accidentally started, submitted or finalised on a deleted
    CRN
-   data where a ripple needs to occur for correct payments and raising
    debts

Scenarios that are not critical business needs:

-   customer is wanting to claim a new payment such as the Covid-19
    Disaster Payment
-   customer is wanting to register for Centrelink Online services
    through myGov

If there is a critical business need to undelete the customer record,
contact the DQU to undelete the record.

If there is no critical business need to undelete the customer record,
commence a thorough search for an existing CRN, see Searching for a
customer on the system.

Service Officers do not need to contact the Data Quality Helpdesk if
Deleted and Deceased customer records in Environment Y do not meet the
critical business needs.

The Resources page contains a link to the relevant contact details and
link to the Centrelink Deceased Customer Environment Y Intra-environment
transfer form.

Related links

Inter-environment change of address (ICoA)

Deleting or undeleting a Centrelink Customer Reference Number (CRN)

Adding a customer to the system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
