
Customer details and cases 111-06045010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure outlines how to access and navigate customer details and
case information for payments delivered using Customer First SAP native
technology which is the term used globally relating to software designed
specifically for the platform on which it is running (SAP HANA).

Customer Details screen

This screen provides a snapshot of commonly accessed customer
information. It provides quick access to customer information for Proof
of Record Ownership checks.

It is separated into tabs and assignment blocks. It contains hyperlinks
to additional information. The order of the tabs and assignment blocks
can be personalised to make it faster to find relevant information.

The source of the customer information displayed will vary depending on
the customer’s circumstances. Some of the information is held in
Customer First SAP native processes, for example new claims or scans,
and some in legacy systems.

The Cases tab provides access to all cases (payments and services) the
customer has claimed and been assessed for.

Customer cases

These are created in Customer First providing access to customer
information and tasks. There are 2 main case types.

Super Case

A Super Case links the service offers to the customer, and provides
access to the customer’s claims.

When a customer makes a claim online or via an assisted customer claim
or data exchange, the information will generate a Social Application
(claim) that is linked to their Super Case. All historic claim
information remains associated to the Super Case.

A Super Case provides access via hyperlinks to:

-   Social Applications (claims)
-   current and past Benefit Cases (for information related to a
    specific benefit)

Benefit Case

Each Benefit Case links the history for a specified benefit (payment
type).

Once a Social Application is finalised a Benefit Case is created. A
Benefit Case can have a number of different status types including
current, suspended and cancelled.

A Benefit Case provides access via hyperlinks to all Social Service
Plans associated with the Benefit Case.

Related links

Social Applications

Interaction Records

Social Service Plans (SSP)

Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Status Resolution Support Services payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
