
Online Document Recording (ODR) 111-15000000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the standards that apply to recording information
not captured elsewhere on the customer's Centrelink record.

When information must be recorded

While not every interaction needs to be recorded, there are
circumstances when information received from or provided to a customer
will need to be documented. This documented information builds a history
of advice and actions taken when interacting with customers.

When a Service Officer obtains relevant information that cannot be
recorded using any other method or screen, it must be recorded in a
document or note. This includes the following circumstances:

Details of contacts

When a customer contacts there may be a need for follow up now or in the
future. If the follow up reason is not obvious from other information on
the record, the details of who, what and where must be recorded in a
document or note.

Record details of a contact after:

discussions with a customer when at least one of the following applies
to the customer:

-   vulnerable or at risk
-   unhappy with advice or the result of an assessment
-   likely to appeal a decision or make a complaint, including
    complaints to the Ombudsman's office
-   documented history of appealing decisions

payment affecting impacts, for example advice given to the customer
about income reporting

discussion about eligibility for a payment or service

a negative interaction with a customer, for example the customer said
they were unhappy about a Service Officer's attitude or behaviour

a review of the customer's circumstances

Significant decisions

When a Service Officer makes a significant decision, the details must be
recorded on the customer's record. To determine if a significant
decision has been appropriately documented, refer to the Process page in
Recording reasons for decisions under Getting it Right (GIR).

Specific instructions in Operational Blueprint

Where an Operational Blueprint procedure instructs what information is
to be recorded, these must be followed.

Callbacks and ACTDOCs

When possible, enquiries should be finalised by Service Officers at the
first point of contact.

In limited cases, more help may be needed. Record this on the customer's
record see Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note,
Callbacks, ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs).

Information not to be recorded

Customers have the right to request specific information relating to
their own record under the Freedom of Information (FOI) Act. When
recording information, consider that the customer may request to read
their information.

It is inappropriate to record:

-   judgemental statements or personal opinions about the customer or
    their situation
-   information not mindful of FOI and privacy
-   information that is not relevant to the customer/claimant, activity
    or decision
-   information of a sensitive or personal nature, for example sensitive
    information of a medical or personal nature, including medical
    abbreviations
-   abusive or offensive language - interactions deemed as customer
    aggression and counterproductive behaviour should be recorded in
    Customer Incident Management System (CIMS)

Recording information on a customer's record

Customer First and Process Direct have different workflows to record
information on customer records. Users are to record information on the
platform they are working in.

Customer First

Additional information displays as a document (DOC). Access these from
the Document List.

Process Direct

Use the Notes feature when recording information. Access via the Notes
icon.

DOCs and Notes can be viewed from either platform. See Creating,
reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks, ACTDOCs and DOA
DOCs.

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details for the ODR helpdesk
-   intranet links for Freedom of Information and privacy
-   Act/Guide references for significant decisions

Contents

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Recording reasons for decisions under Getting it Right (GIR)

Related links

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Customer password on a Display on Access DOC

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Privacy incidents

Process Direct

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
