
Quality Management Application (QMA) Sampling Override Tool 111-21051417

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the QMA Sampling Override Tool and how to apply
or remove a QMA sampling override for staff.

QMA and auto sampling

QMA is the quality checking system in Process Direct. QMA uses a
sampling algorithm to determine what work is selected for checking.

QMA sampling rates are determined at the individual level, based on:

-   what work staff are currently processing, and
-   what their actual accuracy rate is within that work

Staff will generally have a set number of work items checked in QMA
before auto sampling rate adjustments occur.

Auto sampling

Under the auto sampling model, QMA sampling rates are:

-   automatically determined, and
-   subject to continual reassessment

Sampling parameters can be configured for each work type depending on
the needs of the business area.

Once enabled, the auto sampler will increase or decrease the staff
member’s sampling rate for that work type based on their accuracy rate.
For example, at 10% increments between a maximum of 100% checking and a
minimum of 2% checking.

A person’s accuracy rate will recalculate every time a work item is
quality checked in QMA, which may then trigger a sampling movement.

Team leaders do not need to review or update a staff member’s sampling
rate.

During the initial rollout, proficient staff will transition into the
new sampling arrangements at their current sampling/accuracy level.

See QMA in Process Direct for:

-   a list of work item types under the auto sampling model
-   a comparison table listing the Variant name, description and number
    of work items to be quality checked before the auto sampler
    activates

Once ‘active’, movement between sampling rates is automated based on the
staff member’s recent accuracy rate.

Manual sampling override

There may be a business need to override the auto sampling. This can be
done using the QMA Sampling Override tool in Process Direct and only
with the appropriate access.

The QMA Sampling Override tool can:

-   apply a sampling override (100% sampling) for performance support
    reasons (e.g. Performance improvement plan); or
-   remove an existing sampling override and revert back to auto
    sampling

Line Managers must make sure they are applying a sampling override for
the appropriate reasons and removing it, when required.

The Process page explains how to use the tool.

Starting new work

A manual sampling override is not needed for:

-   new staff, or
-   existing staff starting new work (not yet proficient), or
-   staff in the consolidation phase

Note: the auto sampler has been designed to incorporate consolidation
phases and an override is not required for this purpose.

QMA sampling will start at 100% for these staff by default.

The Resources page contains a definition of terms, and links to the QMA
intranet page, the QMA Dashboard Guide and contact details for the QMA
team.

Related links

Quality Management Application (QMA) in Process Direct

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Staff

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Quality Management Officers
(QMO)

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Team Leaders

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
