
Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme (DHCAS) quality checking in QST 111-20051923

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process for the Disaster
Health Care Assistance Scheme (DHCAS), which makes sure business rules
for the Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme are followed.

For a list of current DHCAS events, see About the Disaster Health Care
Scheme.

Objectives

The Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme (DHCAS) quality checking
process aligns with Services Australia's Enterprise Quality Framework
and the 7 quality principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify DHCAS process
    improvements
-   make sure consistency in quality checking

In scope

Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme (DHCAS) in Processing and
National Demand Allocation (PaNDA).

Quality management in the DHCAS

Quality control in the Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme (DHCAS) is
paramount. All transactions must be conducted in the Disaster Health
Care Assistance environment.

Quality assurance is completed before a payment is authorised and
quality checking is completed once the payment is finalised.

The DHCAS quality checking process aligns with Services Australia's
Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles. See Resources
for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process makes sure a systematic and planned
approach to improvement:

-   analysis of complaints and issues trends
-   research of possible solutions
-   planning and prioritisation of improvement activities
-   listening to suggestions from stakeholders, customers and staff
-   monitoring and evaluation of new solutions, processes and
    improvements

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders must make sure:

-   quality checks are completed using the process for Quality Checker
    accreditation
-   quality checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality and
    Support Tool by sending an email to the Services Delivery Quality
    and Support Team
-   timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of
    the coaching conversation. This supports any learning and
    development needs
-   analysis of errors is completed, e.g. did the errors occur because
    of limited training, understanding of the business rules,
    environmental or system based issues
-   positive quality checking results are discussed with the Service
    Officer
-   analysis of data is completed to identify learning needs or process
    improvement opportunities
-   quality checks are done as specified in the sampling plan
-   they notify senior management of serious errors which places the
    agency's reputation at immediate risk
-   they escalate systemic issues
-   lodgement of quality checking outcome disputes

Quality Checkers must:

-   carry out quality checks as outlined in the sampling plan
-   update and maintain technical knowledge, procedures and policies
-   maintain a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   complete root cause analysis and identify systemic issues
-   report and escalate trends or concerns to the Team Leader
-   give constructive and non-judgemental feedback. Include reference
    materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explain the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct the
    error (where applicable) when giving feedback
-   examine system information/source documents to make sure Aged Care
    payment claims processes are in line with business rules, policies
    and procedures

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If own work is selected
it must be given to another staff member who has been trained to conduct
quality checks.

DHCAS Quality Portfolio must:

reviewing monthly quality reports and arranging further analysis of
errors as needed. In collaboration with the programme area, Team
Leaders, and/or Program Support Officers and/or Subject Matter Experts,
this may include:

-   analysis of data over a period of time, to determine prevalence
-   identifying contributing factors and possible solutions
-   escalations or implementation of change solutions

national implementation of DHCAS quality practices

monitoring the Provider Services Support mailbox for QST feedback and
providing feedback as required

analysis of national quality reports to identify learning needs or
process improvement opportunities

escalation of national quality issues to the relevant programme area

Quality team must:

-   provide support for quality checking in the Quality and Support Tool
    (QST)
-   provide relevant reports as needed
-   arrange QST training for quality checkers
-   support the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Staff performing quality checking must have:

-   subject matter expertise – the staff member completing the check has
    product knowledge, understands the guidelines, procedures, business
    rules and/or knows where to source them
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program being checked
-   completed the DHCAS Quality Checker training package. See User
    guides on Resources

Quality Checkers must complete refresher training (of the quality
checking process) annually. See Quality Checker accreditation for Health
Service Delivery Division for more information.

Quality Assurance process

All DHCAS claims and registrations are quality checked prior to
finalising DHCAS work items in the Processing and National Demand
Allocation tool (PaNDA). The following responsibilities occur during the
quality assurance process:

Service Officer:

-   processes DHCAS claim or registration

Experienced Service Officer/Subject Matter Expert:

-   performs initial quality assurance on claim or registration
-   creates the payment run

Team Leader:

-   completes quality assurance on claims
-   completes quality assurance on the payment run
-   notifies delegate that claims on the payment run are awaiting
    authorisation

Delegate:

-   conducts final quality assurance of the claims on the payment run
-   authorises payments to be released by finance

Note: quality checking completed in the Quality & Support Tool is
separate to the above quality assurance guidelines.

Once DHCAS work items are finalised in the Processing and National
Demand Allocation tool (PaNDA), they are selected for quality checking
in the Quality and Support Tool. Quality Checking is completed once a
payment run has been finalised, within approximately 5 working days.

All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 4 calendar days
of the following month. After this time, remaining work is abandoned.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks include checking documents have been verified against the
submitted claims or registrations prior to finalisation. Pre-checks are:

-   applied to work completed by Service Officers receiving initial
    training
-   completed within 5 business days of processing
-   made against applications held in the Processing and National Demand
    Allocation (PaNDA)

The results of pre-checks are captured in the Quality and Support Tool,
but are not included in any quality reports.

Post-checks

Post checks are used to determine the level of accuracy for finalised
work. All work completed the previous business day is identified in
PaNDA for checking. Post checks are completed against source
documentation in PaNDA and system records.

The results of post checks are used to measure accuracy standards, which
are captured in the Quality and Support Tool and included in quality
reports.

Targeted Checks

These apply to:

-   staff when there is a substantial new process introduced or an
    identified quality issue
-   Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is completed
    every 12 months. This confirms the accuracy of quality checking
    results. The process involves rechecking a sample of previously
    checked work to decide if quality checking procedures have been
    followed correctly

Sampling plan

The quality checking sample for DHCAS is 100%. This includes:

-   Service Officers in training and undertaking consolidation
-   processing Service Officers
-   experienced Service Officers / Subject Matter Experts
-   team leaders
-   delegates
-   all staff who undertake quality assurance

Staff in training must achieve 90%+ accuracy in order to be deemed
proficient.

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a random sample of work:

-   Pre-checks - quality checks are normally done within 1-2 business
    day of the work being completed
-   Programme checks - where possible quality checks are completed
    within 4 calendar days of being allocated in the QST. At the end of
    the month any program check not completed is automatically abandoned
    after 4 calendar days
    Note: work will not be abandoned for 100 % quality checks

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to do quality checks:

-   program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool (QST)
-   skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool
-   relevant internet and intranet sites, e.g. Operational Blueprint

Error definition

An error is information processed or keyed that does not match the
documents supplied, or the supporting documents uploaded on the system.

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

Critical errors

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   finalisation of an application assessment
-   record

the reputation of the agency

Non-critical errors

An error is defined as non-critical where it does not meet the above
criteria. Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Note: only critical errors will be used to calculate the accuracy of
processing results.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool (QST). A system-generated email
is sent to the Service Officer and their Team Leader advising them of
the outcome. Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Feedback is emailed to the Service Officer and the Team Leader. It gives
details about the"

-   check
-   result (including any errors identified)
-   quality checking dispute process

During coaching sessions, staff can:

-   contribute to collective understanding of why errors occurred
-   assist in identifying underlying causes, such as process gaps,
    system faults or limitations, or other environmental issues

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded/stored in the Quality & Support Tool. Discussion
notes about the feedback should be detailed in coaching sessions.

Correcting Errors

Critical errors - Quality Checkers must correct critical errors
immediately as they are found

Non-critical errors - Quality Checkers provide instruction in the
feedback email. Service Officer’s correct non-critical errors.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the programme in
consultation with policy area and the Services Delivery Quality and
Support Team. The review makes sure the error codes are current and the
approved changes to programme business polices are included.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

Contents

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Related links

Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme eligibility criteria and document
requirements

Assess and process claims in Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme

Quality Checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
