
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines QMA, the quality checking function in Process
Direct. It has information about QMA sampling, reporting and management.

Sampling

QMA identifies which work items need checking.

This is based on either the:

-   skill tag model, or
-   auto sampling model

Skill tag model

QMA sampling uses the skill tag to record the staff member's proficiency
level. Team leaders record and manage this in ESSentials.

Proficiency levels must reflect the staff member’s current capability.
This ensures the correct amount of checking.

See Resources page for information about the proficiency levels and
manual proficiency assessments for QMA under the skill tag model.

Auto sampling model

QMA auto sampling started in September 2019 for non-new claim work. The
QMA sampling rate is automatically calculated.

From June 2020 the auto sampling model included new claims. All new
transactions being introduced into Process Direct will use the QMA auto
sampling model.

The auto sampling model:

-   calculates and adjusts the sampling rate based on a staff member's
    accuracy
-   uses data and metrics to determine the QMA sampling rate for a staff
    member, and
-   means that managers do not need to record proficiency levels in
    ESSentials or assess annual proficiency

Note: skill tags are still required for Workload Management allocation
purposes.

A default 100% sampling rate will apply to staff members new to the
Agency or undertaking a new piece of work. A set number of work items
will be selected for QMA checking before the auto sampler is enabled.
See Resources for more details including an example.

When work moves into Process Direct, staff skilled in that work will
transition at their current sampling rate, based on their QOL
proficiency level (Proficient). This will only occur at:

-   the initial rollout, where the work type is not subject to a Pilot,
    or
-   National rollout, where the work type is subject to a Pilot

Staff who have not gained QOL proficiency (Proficient) at the time of
the rollout will automatically be sampled under the default 100%
sampling rate. These staff must gain their proficiency under the auto
sampling model.

Current proficiency level is based on the QOL proficiency assessment
criteria, outlined in Updating proficiency for QOL:

-   It is important that annual proficiency assessments are undertaken.
    This will ensure staff are transitioned at the correct sampling rate
-   If annual proficiency assessments have not been completed, staff
    will commence at 100% sampling rate by default

Checking process

QMA will display the fields the staff member has updated. High risk
(mandatory) fields are checked whether or not a staff member has updated
them.

Service Officers do not fix identified errors. The Quality Management
Officer (QMO):

-   records details of any errors and corrects them as they check the
    work
-   provides feedback to the Service Officer through the QMA, and
-   finalises the work item or undertakes any follow up action where
    applicable. For example, Request for information

Work item types

QMA is available for these work items:

Skill tag model

-   Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS)

Auto sampling model

ABSTUDY (Apprentice Incidentals Allowance, Apprentice Living Allowance,
Tertiary Student Incidentals Allowance and Tertiary Student Living
Allowance)

Address & Accommodation change of circumstance

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) claims:

-   Child Wellbeing Determinations
-   Grandparent
-   Temporary Financial Hardship
-   Transition to Work

Age Pension claims

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and New Zealand
Disaster Recovery Payment (NZ DRP)

Assurance of Support (AoS) claims

Austudy (Apprentice and Student) claims and change of circumstance

Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR)

Automation of Income Stream (AOIS) interventions

Crisis Payment (CRP) claims

Carer Allowance (CA) claims

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Carer Payment (CP) claims

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Concession cards:

-   Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)
-   Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster Children
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC), claim and renewal

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims and change of circumstance

Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims

Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) claims

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) claims and change of circumstance

Generic change of circumstance updates in Customer Summary

Home Equity Access Scheme claims and change of circumstances

High-Risk Setting Pandemic Payment Claims (HRSPP)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims and change of circumstance

Income and Assets change of circumstance

Medical Certificates updates

Mobility Allowance (MOB) claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (PLDP) claims

Participation Compliance Workflows:

-   Compliance Investigation
-   Comprehensive Compliance Assessment
-   Re-engagement
-   Review of Decision

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and change of circumstance

Parental Income Test Reviews (MOD JY)

Parenting Payment (partnered and single) claims

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) claims, excluding ABSTUDY PES and
Assistance for Isolated Children PES

Single Touch Payroll - Earnings and Reporting workflow updates

Single Touch Payroll - intervention

Single Touch Payroll - Employer Update

Special Benefit claims

Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) claims and change of circumstances

Student Payment Circumstance Updates (Student Payment Reviews)

Transfer to Age Pension claims

Travel Management Application (TMA) claims (Travel booking and
reimbursement)

Online Separation updates

Youth Allowance (YA) (Job seeker) claims and change in circumstance

Youth Allowance (YA) (Apprentice and Student) claims and change in
circumstance

Comparison table

The Resources page has a comparison table that identifies if the work
type:

-   is subject to the auto sampling model, or the skill tag model
-   is part of the Standalone QMA interface, or the Integrated QMA
    workflow
-   has the Replay functionality enabled
-   has the name and a description of each QMA Sampling Variant
-   has the number of work items completed before auto sampling applies.
    Note: this only applies to the auto sampling model

Reporting and Management data for QMA

The QMA Dashboard was introduced in April 2021.

Staff, Team Leaders, Service Support Officers (SSO)/ Quality Development
Officers (QDO) and Business/Support Teams use the dashboard to view QMA
data and to generate reports of QMA results for up to 12 months.

QMA Dashboard

The QMA Dashboard can generate reports from an individual user level to
a national level. It is accessed via Process Direct, where tiered access
will apply:

QMA Dashboard - Service Officer tile:

-   is used by staff to access their own QMA results
-   must be regularly checked to view quality checking results and
    comments from Quality Management Officers

QMA Dashboard - Team Leader tile:

-   is used by line managers to access QMA results for their direct line
    reports
-   has reports which include QMA checks performed by QMOs in their team

QMA Dashboard - Help Desk tile (Service Support Officer/Quality
Development Officer):

-   is used by SSO/QDO to access QMA results for their organisation/site
-   has reports to assist with undertaking performance analysis and
    reporting requirements

QMA Dashboard - Help Desk tile (Business/Support Teams):

-   is used by Business/Support Teams to access National QMA data
-   has reports to assist with undertaking analysis and reporting
    requirements
-   assists to identify trends and continuous improvement opportunities

QMA Dashboard - Help Desk tile: (Helpdesk Staff)

-   is used by the Quality Frameworks and Systems team to access
    national data

The Resources page contains the roles and how to request access to the
QMA Dashboard for SSO/QDO and Business/Support Teams.

Report pages

There are 3 report pages in the QMA Dashboard. Access them using
Next/Previous buttons on the right of each page.

Dashboard Overview

-   provides a high level overview of QMA results for work completed by
    process type
-   the data will default to the past month, with the option to extend
    the date range up to 12 months in the past

QMA Sampling Report

-   staff-level QMA sampling report data
-   provides a breakdown of all work items that have been sampled for
    QMA

QMA Error Report

-   provides errors and feedback resulting from completed QMA checks
-   has the details of the errors found

The Resources page contains Intranet links and useful tables on sampling
rules, proficiency levels, access to the QMA Dashboard and Status
Resolution Support Services (SRSS).

Contents

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Staff

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Quality Management Officers
(QMO)

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Team Leaders

Quality standards in service delivery

Related links

Updating proficiency for QOL

Disputing Quality On Line (QOL) and Quality Management Application (QMA)
results

Quality Management Application (QMA) Sampling Override Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
