
Announced and unannounced call transfers 111-05030010

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the protocols for announced and unannounced phone
call transfers.

Unannounced transfers

An unannounced transfer (cold) is when the call is not introduced by the
first Service Officer. The majority of all call transfers should be
transferred unannounced. Specifically non-priority transfers within the
Smart Centre network are to be transferred unannounced.

In order to reduce the ability for a caller to access a queue from a
separate line of business, Service Officers should advise callers of the
most appropriate phone number for assistance to use at their next
transaction, this should be followed, wherever possible with customer
enquiries being answered, or issues resolved at the first contact.

Where assistance is unable to be provided due to the caller contacting
the incorrect line and attempting to be transferred between queues, the
call should be quickly finalised by politely thanking them for calling
and providing the most appropriate number for assistance.

Call transfers to the Participation Solutions Team are to be
unannounced.

Announced transfers

An announced transfer (warm) is when the call is introduced by the first
Service Officer to another Service Officer or another person receiving
the call. All external transfers out of the Smart Centre network should
be announced. If the caller has not been authenticated by the
Interactive Voice Response (IVR), the first Service Officer should
complete a full authentication check before transferring the call.
Situations where calls need to be transferred externally include:

-   a service centre has not completed a callback
-   the customer insists on speaking with the service centre
-   a suitable appointment for the customer cannot be made
-   where agreed workflows within the service delivery network require
    this to be done
-   a call needs to be transferred to a specific team, or specialist
    officer (see below for Participation Solution Team requirements) for
    example, Debt Recovery, Customer Relations Team (CRT), social
    worker, International Services (CIS)

Internal transfers for priority calls network must also be announced.
For example, a customer who is clearly distressed and/or requires
immediate transfer to a social worker must always be announced.

Calls can be transferred to the relevant queue by utilising the Services
Australia Workspace Transfer Options list. If no drop down option is
available, the National Speed Dial numbers available through Office
Locator can be utilised.

Note: see further details on Priority Transfers which are announced
transfers, and non-priority transfers which are unannounced.

Authentication

Wherever possible customers should be authenticated prior to transfer
and the customer's record documented with the reason for the call prior
to the transfer. Exceptions to this are when the customer does not have
a record, or they refuse to provide details to access their record.

Related links

Conditions for transferring or referring calls

Conditions for transferring or referring calls to specialist staff and
managers

Identifying Smart Centre Call queues responsible for various payments

Transferring a non-priority call within the network

Transferring a priority call within the network

Transferring a call with Services Australia Workspace

Timeliness standards for callbacks and ACTDOCs

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
