
Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) quality checking 111-22190000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process for VAP. Services
Australia processes claims from medical, allied health, hospital,
community nursing, and pharmaceutical providers on behalf of the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Objectives

The objective of the quality checking procedure is to:

-   give checkers the tools to be able to identify strengths and
    weaknesses in the Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP) business
    process, highlighting opportunities for continuous business
    improvement, using effective quality checking processes
-   make sure quality checkers have the same understanding of the
    process
-   ensure quality checkers are completing the checks in a consistent
    manner, by documenting the quality checking process

Claims and quality checking

Claims can be submitted:

-   manually using paperwork completed by the service provider
-   online by claiming software embedded into the
    practice/patient/pharmacy management software (PMS), or
-   via DVA Webclaim accessed through Services Australia Health
    Professional Online Services (HPOS)

VAP has 3 types of claims - allied health, hospital and medical. All are
subject to quality checking.

The Report Management and Distribution System (RMDS) is used to identify
VAP claims for quality checking. All channels are subject to quality
checks.

Roles and Responsibilities

Team Leaders are responsible for making sure:

-   quality checking is performed on a daily basis for every processing
    day available on RMDS
-   checkers have completed the appropriate training
-   quality checks are undertaken as outlined in this procedure
-   results of quality checks are recorded appropriately
-   issues are addressed and corrections are made immediately (refer to
    Feedback)

Quality checkers must make sure that:

-   VAP business rules have been applied correctly
-   quality checking is performed on the specified sample size
-   feedback is given to the Programme Support Officer (PSO)
-   PSO feedback is given to the Service Officer and advice provided to
    the Service Officer’s team leader
-   quality checking results are recorded and reported using the VAP
    Quality Reporting form

The source documents must be held in the section until the quality check
is finalised. If the documents have been archived, it is the
responsibility of the team leader to recall the documents.

Quality checking of own work

Quality checkers must not quality check their own work. If their own
work is selected, it must be given to another staff member who has been
accredited to conduct quality checks.

See the Quality checking own work policy.

Accreditation of quality checkers

Staff members selected to undertake quality checking must:

-   successfully complete the VAP Quality Checker training - MPL00082 -
    VAP QC Checker, see the Training & Support page for link
-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   undergo refresher training every 12 months

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New Starters

New starters will have 100 per cent of their work checked on the day the
work is performed until considered proficient in processing.

See the Resources page for Quality – other resources

Post-checks

Post-checks (covered in this procedure) involve checking a statistically
valid, random selection of work processed the previous day. The results
are reported as accuracy of processing for VAP

Targeted checks

In addition to the pre and post-checks, targeted checks provide an
opportunity to look at other areas of the process which are not part of
pre and post-checking.

Targeted checks for VAP may be:

-   checks on staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy (separate procedure)

See the Resources page for a link to several Aim for Accuracy policies.

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Pre-checks are completed on staff new to VAP, or a work type. New
starters generally have their work reviewed and corrected with the
guidance of a mentor until they are deemed proficient.

Any errors detected by the mentor during this process are not normally
reported for quality checking purposes. Any errors identified for a new
starter in transactions selected for quality checking must be recorded
as errors.

Spreadsheets have been created and kept on site to track the pre-checks.
The results are not included in the accuracy of processing results.

Pre-checks - level of pre-checks

-   100% checked for 1 week, with the option of another week (on a case
    by case basis), then
-   50% checked for 1 week, with the option of another week (on a case
    by case basis), then
-   25% checked for 1 week, with the option of another week (on a case
    by case basis)

Post-checks

The quality checks to be completed for VAP are set at 2% of the previous
day’s processed work.

VAP post-check parameters

Quality checking must:

be conducted on 100% of Service Officer assessed services in the
selected claim

not be conducted on auto-operator assessed services, examples of
auto-operator numbers:

-   22221
-   33332
-   55554
-   77776
-   88887
-   99998

Quality checking sample count

The quality check sample count is not based on date of service. Quality
checkers must count the sample as follows:

-   The header error is counted as +1. Note: the header is not counted
    for online paperless claims or those submitted via DVA Webclaim.
-   Each patient in the claim is counted as +1 regardless of how many
    dates of service are being claimed or how many errors are found

For manual claims, count the number of patients on the VPSI screen, then
add any 376 patient rejections noted on the paperwork.

For online paperless and DVA Webclaim, the number of patients must be
determined by counting the number of patients transmitted on the VQME
screen or by keying 'f' in the 'S' field on the VQRF screen.

See the Resources page for several examples.

Process for undertaking checks

Time frames

If quality checking is not performed for a particular day, the work must
be checked within 2 working days.

Note: quality checks must be completed by close of business of the first
working day of the new month.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to:

mainframe, including the VAP systems and the Report Management and
Distribution System (RMDS) reports

drives

Operational Blueprint

source documentation

scanned paper based claim documentation including:

-   claim headers
-   vouchers
-   invoices
-   discharge advice and hospital claim forms

paperless claims (including DVA Webclaim) include:

-   text (indicated by a 'T', ‘B' or 'O' in the service line on the
    history screen)
-   VQME (raw data for VAP claims)

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Quality checks enquiries

Any enquires for quality checking should be directed to a Programme
Support Officer (PSO) in the first instance then team leader.

Escalation that cannot be resolved on site can be directed to:

-   VAP Helpdesk for procedural enquiries
-   Quality Management Section for quality checking business rules using
    the applicable Quality Checking contact on the Quality Processes
    page. See the Resources page for a link

Errors and definitions

Error categories

VAP quality checking error status codes are broken into three
categories:

-   error free status code (no error)
-   document error status codes
-   processing error status codes

Definition of critical and non-critical errors

VAP error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to the:

-   process affecting payments and/or information to Services
    Australia - Medicare Program and its customers
-   reputation of Services Australia

An error is defined as non-critical when there is no identifiable risk
to the business process (payment and/or registration) and will not
impact on the reputation of Services Australia.

Note: while non-critical errors are recorded as part of the quality
checking process, they do not impact the quality checking results
reported to stakeholders (only critical errors are used to calculate the
accuracy of processing results).

See the Resources page for lists of error codes.

Recording results

Results of quality checks for the program are recorded and reported
using the VAP Quality reporting form. This data is used to report
accuracy of processing results to the Department of Veterans' Affairs.

All post-check results for the month must be completed and submitted by
close of business of the first working day of each new month.

Feedback

After performing the quality check on selected transactions, and before
entering the results in the VAP Quality reporting form, the quality
checker is to provide feedback to the Service Officer. This includes
positive feedback for transactions identified as error free.

If claim was processed by a Service Officer in a VAP team, Quality
Control Service Officer provides feedback to:

-   the Service Officer’s VAP team leader
-   the Service Officer who made the error
-   the Services Delivery Quality and Support Team

If claim was processed by a Service Officer not in a VAP team, Quality
Control Service Officer provides feedback to:

-   the VAP team leader of the site where the error was made
-   the Services Delivery Quality and Support Team
-   do not provide feedback directly to the Service Officer

Feedback is given the same day the quality check is completed, or as
soon as possible after the quality check has been undertaken.

Information gathered in the feedback process need to be entered in the
underlying factors on the VAP Quality reporting form.

Method for managing and storing feedback

VAP Operations have a Feedback and Reporting Tools register where issues
are recorded and used for reporting.

Analysing Errors

Analysis of errors is the responsibility of the program. Underlying
factors (reasons) for errors are identified by the team leader and/or
PSO and the Service Officer at the time of quality checking, and are
reported using the online form.

Any further analysis to identify any weaknesses in processing, gaps in
relevant business rules, and/or issues relating to environmental
factors, system faults and limitations is undertaken as needed.

The program is responsible for ongoing analysis on systemic errors.

Correction of errors

If errors are identified, Service Officers must be given feedback; and
appropriate action must be taken to correct the error(s). For example,
history to be adjusted, escalation to the appropriate areas where
necessary.

The team leader and the staff member concerned must be made aware of
repeatedly occurring errors. Together, they can work out a plan of
action to make sure this does not recur. Action can be in the form of
training and must be made a priority.

Change Management

Quality checking procedures are regularly reviewed and updated by the
program, in consultation with the Quality Management Section. The review
ensures that the error codes are current and applicable, and that
approved changes to program business policies and procedures are
included.

It is the joint responsibility of Operations and the Helpdesk to ensure
that issues with the quality checking procedure or tools are escalated
to the Quality Management Section using the applicable Quality Checking
contact on the Quality Processes page. See the Resources page for a
link.

Any changes needing immediate action will be updated accordingly.
Changes that are not critical to quality will be included in the review
of the procedure.

The Resources page contains information about the various reports for
quality checking selection, the error status codes (including the
non-error code), examples of financial impact calculations and error
counts and a list of links to the intranet.

Related links

Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) - Health Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
