
Requesting a document rescan, retrieval or location 111-10010120

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how to request a rescan or retrieval of
documents lodged by post or at a service centre. This is for Centrelink
and Medicare documents.

Other documents

Separate procedures apply for:

-   Child Support documents, see Correspondence received in Child
    Support
-   uploaded documents, see Upload documents service. In most cases
    these documents cannot be rescanned or retrieved. This is because
    the customer has provided them electronically via the online service
    or app. For issues with these documents, first contact the customer.
    Exception if there is inappropriate information

Webform requests and follow-up

Webform requests are monitored daily and typically triaged within 24
hours. This excludes weekends and public holidays.

When selecting the service centre, this will go directly to the
specified service centre for action.

The automatic email issued after submitting the webform is confirmation
that the request has been received and actioned. Individual responses
will not be sent to staff.

Valid rescan or retrieval requests are generally actioned within 3
business days of the webform being submitted.

When following up a previous request, timeframes apply.

Definition of a rescan and when it may be needed

A rescan is the process of creating another digital image to replace the
current one. Documents provided by customers will be attached to their
record in the form they are received.

A rescan may be needed if the current digital image cannot be processed
due to one or more of the following reasons:

-   image is not legible, has no 'received as is' coversheet, and the
    unreadable information is needed to complete the action on the
    customer's record
-   image has no 'received as is' coversheet and includes documents that
    relate to customers other than the customer whose record they are
    attached to
-   image has no 'received as is' coversheet and is missing pages
-   inappropriate, offensive or threatening content has been included
    with other documents
-   image contains content for multiple payment types and needs to be
    rescanned to ensure each payment type is available to separate teams
    for processing
-   file cannot be opened because of file size. Note: files that cannot
    be opened due to an Adobe Acrobat Reader error (e.g. because it is
    ‘not a supported file type or because the file has been damaged’)
    cannot be rescanned as the image was not scanned by Services
    Australia. Contact the customer and ask them to submit the documents
    again in a format the agency can accept

In most cases, rescans can only be requested for documents the agency
has physically received and scanned.

Rescans cannot be conducted for documents received by:

-   fax (in most cases). Note: it may be possible to locate faxed
    documents if the customer can provide certain details. If the fax
    contains documents for more than 1 customer, a rescan can be
    requested as it may be possible to separate the image
-   scan/fax by agents, as the agent returns the original documents to
    the customer
-   web, email or Upload documents
-   staff using Document Tools to upload documents to a customer record

If there are quality issues with documents received by these channels,
contact the customer to obtain the information or, if necessary, to ask
them to provide the document again.

Although documents provided via the Upload Document Service, fax or
email cannot be rescanned or retrieved, a ‘rescan’ may be requested if
the image contains documents for multiple customers or inappropriate
material. This is because it may be possible to split the image.

A rescan may not be needed in every case

Rescans can take some time to action. The customer may be disadvantaged
as a result. Check if the information is already available or can be
gathered in another way.

It is not appropriate to request a rescan to check if more documents
were provided, or because supporting documents are generally provided
with specific forms or documents.

If expecting a digital image on a customer record, but staff cannot
locate the image, see Digital image not located on customer record.

Inappropriate rescan requests will result in feedback to the staff
member and their line manager.

Definition of document retrieval

A retrieval is the process of requesting original paper documents being
located from the scanning batch storage to either:

-   return to the customer, or
-   forward to another agency in limited cases when the original
    document is needed for processing

As it may take some time and may incur a cost, retrieval of documents
will only occur if significant original documents need to be returned or
forwarded. For example, Commencement of Identity documents, licences or
passports.

The Service Officer is to print and post documents to the customer if
they:

-   request the return of supporting documents or certified copies of
    documents (such as bank statements, utilities accounts or rates
    notices), or
-   have not kept a copy of any declarations such as the Essential
    Medical Equipment Payment User Declaration

Inappropriate retrieval requests will result in feedback to the staff
member and their line manager.

If a customer requests the retrieval of an original Services Australia
claim form, give them a copy of the original form. The original will be
retained for the relevant retention period.

Document retention period

Before requesting a rescan, retrieval or location of documents, ensure
the documents are within the document retention period:

-   70 days for Centrelink documents
-   50 days for Medicare documents
-   42 days for documents scanned by Records Management Units (RMU)

After the retention period, documents are securely destroyed. Rescan or
retrieval requests lodged outside this time will result in feedback to
the staff member and their line manager. Exception: when the image
cannot be opened, contains inappropriate material or information
relating to multiple customers. These can be referred for a ‘rescan’.
Although there are no physical documents to rescan, other processes can
be applied to resolve the issue.

If documents are outside the retention period, consider other options
such as:

-   contacting the customer
-   obtaining the information through other sources

Documents scanned at RMU

Treat rescan requests for documents scanned at the Records Management
Unit (RMU) the same way as other rescan requests.

If an RMU document requires retrieval, follow the advice outlined in
Storing Documents.

Document location

A request to locate a document may be required when:

-   there is evidence the customer has provided documents, and
-   the documents are not on their record or their partner’s record

Batches cannot be checked to confirm if a customer might have supplied
any extra documents to those scanned.

Inappropriate requests to check mail batches or retrieve documents will
result in feedback to the staff member and their line manager.

If the customer has provided these documents via the Upload document
Service but the image is not on their record, see Digital image not
located on customer record.

Image 'received as is' coversheets

When a document is scanned, a 'received as is' coversheet may be
inserted before scanning. This notifies staff of potential issues with
the image, or that content was received that could not be scanned.

A document rescan should not be requested if a coversheet has been
included with an image, unless there is reason to believe a rescan will
result in an improved outcome. For example, evidence of extra
information received such as a document misfeed.

Requesting rescans, retrievals or enquiring about receipt of paper documents

All requests must be submitted by the Request for document rescan,
retrieval or location webform. Requests will be triaged to ensure only
appropriate requests are forwarded for completion. Service Officers
should not contact sites directly to make these requests.

Inappropriate requests submitted by the webform will result in feedback
to the staff member and their line manager.

After submitting a request, staff are to monitor the customer record for
completion. The webform triage team is only responsible for triaging
rescan, retrieval and document location requests submitted by the
webform. They do not send ACTDOCs, call customers, update (including
annotate) customer records or request image deletions.

The Resources page contains links to scanning dates, the request
webform, and more information on image coversheets, when to request a
rescan, and returning documents.

Related links

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Classifying Centrelink digital images via the National Queue

Classifying escalated Centrelink digital images in the National Queue

Locating digital images

Digital image attached to incorrect Centrelink customer record

Digital image not located on customer record

Actioning inbound desktop faxes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
