
Using the Desktop Fax workflow to fax forms and modules 111-10010070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to send a fax using the
Outbound Desktop Faxing workflow. Documents able to be faxed using this
workflow are limited to those listed within the workflow including
Reporting Statements (SU19), modules, common forms and claim forms.

Outbound Desktop Faxing

Outbound Desktop Faxing aligns with the Reducing Paper Initiative (RPI)
which aims to remove Centrelink's dependency on the use of paper forms
and correspondence by removing the need to print out forms for the
purpose of faxing.

Service Officers should consider faxing personal/protected information
to customers or faxing information to third parties on a case by case
basis. Since 14 June 2005, information exchanged between the Department
of Education, Skills and Employment, Employment Services Providers and
Centrelink is in accordance with the sections 202 to 204 of the Social
Security (Administration) Act 1999 and the Privacy Act 1988. The Social
Security (Administration) Act 1999 allows for the use and/or disclosure
of protected information if it is for the purpose of social security
law.

Desktop Fax background

The Outbound Desktop Faxing solution was introduced to assist Smart
Centres in servicing the communities of the Northern Territory. With the
lifting of Remote Area Exemptions affecting the lodgement frequency of
customers from 12 weekly to 2 or 4 weekly, there was an increased demand
for replacing SU19s. The workflow was developed to remove the manual
intensive process of faxing SU19s to customers. The workflow has since
been enhanced to incorporate additional forms and minimise the manual
processing of faxing common forms to customers.

The Resources page contains an attachment of current forms available for
desktop faxing, a link to the general correspondence fax template to be
used when desktop faxing is unavailable and known common errors.

Related links

Disclosing information to third parties

Actioning inbound desktop faxes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
