
eBusiness quality checking in QST 111-20080652

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Resources

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) for the eBusiness Service Centre.

Objectives

The eBusiness Service Centre quality checking process aligns with
Services Australia's Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality
principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify eBusiness
    process improvements
-   ensures consistency in quality checking

In scope

PRODA HW080 Manual Application in Processing and National Demand
Allocation (PaNDA).

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for ensuring:

-   Quality Checkers complete the process for quality checker
    accreditation
-   Quality Checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality and
    Support Tool. Arrange by sending an email to Quality Operations &
    Technical Support
-   Timely error feedback is part of the coaching conversation to
    support learning and development opportunities
-   Reporting all privacy breaches using the Privacy Incident
    Notification Form
-   Analysis of errors. That is, if errors occurred due to factors such
    as limited training, understanding the business rules, environmental
    or system based issues
-   Positive outcomes are acknowledged with the Service Officer

Quality Checkers are responsible for:

-   Carrying out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   Updating and maintaining eBusiness Service Centre technical
    knowledge, procedures and policies
-   Maintaining a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   Identifying root cause analysis and systemic issues
-   Reporting and escalating trends or concerns to the Team Leader
-   Providing constructive and non-judgemental feedback including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   Explaining the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct
    the error (where applicable)

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If own work is selected,
it must be given to another staff member who has been trained to conduct
quality checks.

Quality Team is responsible for:

-   Providing support for quality checking in the Quality and Support
    Tool (QST)
-   Providing relevant reports as required
-   Arranging QST training for quality checkers
-   Supporting the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

eBusiness Quality Portfolio holder is responsible for:

-   National implementation of eBusiness quality practices
-   Analysis of national quality reports to identify learning needs or
    process improvement opportunities
-   Escalation of national quality issues to the relevant program area
    and teams

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

To attain accreditation, Quality Checkers must:

-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   understand the quality checking procedure
-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   undergo refresher training of the quality checking process every 12
    months
-   renew Quality Checker accreditation annually

See Quality Checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division
for more information.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks apply:

-   to new starters
-   when new processes are introduced into the program

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.
Results are used to support ongoing training.

Program/post-checks

Program/post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in PaNDA. The results are provided to management and
external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted checks

Targeted checks apply:

-   in response to business triggers or when there is a
    consistent/long-term quality issue identified
-   to Aim for Accuracy (Check the Checker), which is completed every 12
    months to confirm the accuracy of quality checking results. This
    involves rechecking a representative sample of previously checked
    work to determine if quality checking procedures have been followed
    correctly.

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Staff have 100% of their work reviewed until deemed proficient. As a
guide, new starters are considered proficient as per the training and
consolidation plan from the Learning and Development Team.

Program/post-checks

Five percent of the monthly PRODA HW080 Manual Application work types
are randomly selected for quality checking.

Targeted checks

To arrange a targeted check(s), the Team Leader sends an email request
to Quality Operations & Technical Support. Include:

-   the staff member’s details
-   the reason and length of time required for the targeted check

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a sample of work. Complete
quality checks within 1-2 business days to ensure timely feedback to
staff. All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 4
calendar days of the following month. After this time, remaining work is
abandoned.

Resources

Quality Checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   PaNDA
-   Quality and Support Tool
-   Skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool

Error definition

For the purpose of quality checking, an error is information
processed/keyed into the system which does not match the documentation
submitted or the supporting documents uploaded to the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

An error is defined as non-critical when it does not meet the above
criteria. Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording Results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool (QST). A system-generated email
is sent in real time to the Service Officer and their Team Leader
advising them of the quality check outcome. Individual results are
captured in reporting data.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the check, the
result (including any errors identified) and the quality checking
dispute process. See the Dispute a quality checking error table for more
information.

Correcting Errors

Critical errors

Quality Checkers must correct critical errors immediately, as they are
identified.

Non-critical errors

Quality Checkers provide instruction in the feedback email. Service
Officers correct non-critical errors.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers consult Program Support Officers and/or eBusiness Team
Leaders for procedural or policy related queries. Team Leaders can raise
unresolved concerns with eBusiness Policy.

Enquires about quality checking business rules or issues with checking
results that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to Quality
Operations & Technical Support by email.

Change Management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
programme in consultation with Quality Operations & Technical Support.
The review ensures error codes are current and approved policy changes
are included.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains links to the Enterprise Quality Framework
intranet pages, the Privacy Incident Notification Form, contact details
and a list of error codes.

Contents

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Related links

eBusiness Service Centre for Medicare

Medicare eBusiness and Health Provider support

Forms and templates for eBusiness Service Centre

Health Provider Support and Education (HPSE)

Quality Checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
