
Quality Call Standards 111-17080900

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Services Australia's Quality Call Standards that
apply to all staff who undertake inbound or outbound phone calls across
the agency. All staff, regardless of classification, employment status
(such as ongoing, non-ongoing, casual) or work type, will have their
call work evaluated within the framework.

Quality Call Framework

The Quality Call Framework establishes a single set of quality
expectations to ensure phone services delivered by the agency are of a
high quality and meet the expectations of customers and government. It
is an integrated approach to quality checking through the consistent
assessment of national Quality Call Standards.

Embedded in the framework is the guiding principle that the experience
of customers will be enhanced and the right outcome will be achieved for
customers and government.

The 2 key quality call measures are:

-   Quality customer experience and,
-   Quality customer and government outcomes

Focusing on these measures helps the agency understand what is working
well and identifies areas for improvement.

Quality Call Standards

These standards ensure that wherever phone services are provided, calls
are measured the same way. There are 5 standards aligned to the 2
measures that cover specific components of a call.

Within each standard, there are elements that help define that standard.
Each element is accompanied by a related question and set of criteria
that support the evaluation of a call.

Measure 1: Quality Customer Experience measures the agency's interaction
with customers.

-   Quality Call Standard 1 - Customer service: listening and
    communicating with the customer in a professional manner
-   Quality Call Standard 2 - Contact resolution: providing a complete
    and tailored solution for the customer
-   Quality Call Standard 3 - Quality information: providing consistent
    and accurate information to the customer

Measure 2: Quality Customer and Government Outcomes measures adherence
to the agency's procedures and processes.

-   Quality Call Standard 4 - Agency instructions: adhering to agency
    instructions
-   Quality Call Standard 5 - Processing accuracy: accurate processing
    of information provided to the agency

The Resources page contains a quick guide to Quality Call Standards and
a link to the Quality Call Framework Hub.

Related links

Quality Call Framework

Quality Call Framework accreditation of Quality Checkers

Quality Call Framework quality checking

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
