
Medicare Enh1ment Statement (MES) quality checking in QST 111-22112508

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) in Health Service Delivery for the Medicare
Entitlement Statement (MES) program.

Objectives

The MES quality checking process aligns Services Australia's Enterprise
Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify process
    improvements
-   ensures consistency in quality checking

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for making sure:

-   quality checkers complete the process for quality checker
    accreditation
-   quality checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the QST by sending
    an email to the Quality Operations and Technical Support team
-   timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of
    the coaching conversation to support any learning and development
    opportunities
-   errors are analysed. If errors occurred because of factors such as
    limited training, understanding the business rules, environmental or
    system based issues
-   positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with Service
    Officer
-   analysis of data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities

Quality Checkers are responsible for:

-   Carrying out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   Updating and maintaining technical knowledge, procedures and
    policies
-   Maintaining a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   Identifying root cause analysis and identifying systemic issues
-   Reporting and escalating trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   Providing constructive and non-judgemental feedback including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   Explaining the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct
    the error (where applicable) when providing feedback

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If their work is
selected, they must give it to another staff member who has been trained
to conduct quality checks.

Quality Team is responsible for:

-   Providing support for quality checking in the QST
-   Providing relevant reports as required
-   Arranging QST training for quality checkers
-   Supporting the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

To attain accreditation, Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the quality checking procedure
-   meet accreditation standards annually

Quality Checking accreditation must be renewed annually.

See Quality checker accreditation for more information.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.

Programme/Post-checks

Programme/Post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA). The
results are provided to management and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted Checks

Targeted checks apply to the following scenarios:

-   in response to business triggers or when there is a
    consistent/long-term quality issue identified
-   to Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is completed
    every 12 months. This is to confirm the accuracy of quality checking
    results. The process involves re-checking a representative sample of
    previously checked work to determine if quality checking procedures
    have been followed correctly

To arrange a targeted check(s), Team Leaders send an email to the
Services Delivery Quality and Support Team with the:

-   staff member’s details, and
-   reason and length of time needed for the targeted check

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Pre-checks proficiency requirements for new starters will be advised in
the scope of training details.

Programme/Post-checks

Between 0.1-1% of the monthly total of the below MES PaNDA work types
are randomly selected for quality checking:

-   MES
-   RHCA

Targeted Checks

Discuss Targeted Checks with the Quality Operations and Technical
Support team.

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are:

-   undertaken daily on a random sample of work
-   completed within 1-2 business days to make sure timely feedback

All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 3 calendar days
of the following month. After this time, remaining work is abandoned.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   QST
-   Skill tags added on the QST

Error definition

For the purpose of quality checking, an error is information
processed/keyed into the system which does not match:

-   the documentation submitted, or
-   the supporting documents uploaded to the systems

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

An error is defined as non-critical when it does not meet the above
criteria. Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in QST.

A system-generated email is sent in real time to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader advising them of the quality check outcome.

Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the:

-   check
-   result (including any errors identified)
-   quality checking dispute process

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is sent to individual Service Officers and Team Leaders by an
email. Feedback data is recorded/stored in QST.

Feedback is recorded/stored in the Quality & Support Tool.

Critical errors and Non-critical errors

Service Officer must correct critical errors immediately as per the
feedback email.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers must contact a Program Support Officer (PSO) for any
technical enquires.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved on site should be directed by email to the
Quality Operations and Technical Support team.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with to the Quality Operations and Technical
Support team. The review ensures error codes are current and approved
policy changes are included.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains tables listing error status codes (critical
and non-critical) for quality checking, contact details and a list of
links to the intranet.

Related links

Medicare Entitlement Statement (MES)

Quality Checker accreditation

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
