
Quality On Line (QOL) 111-23000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the national QOL standards used in Centrelink.

Introduction to QOL

QOL is a quality assurance program. It uses sampling to select
activities for checking based on the system, service reason, activity
type and proficiency levels of staff.

The QOL program has a number of components including QOL tools, QOL
checkers, a quality-sampling regime, feedback mechanisms and QOL
Standards.

National QOL principles

The 2 national QOL principles are:

-   Payment Correctness, and
-   Getting it Right Standards

These principles apply when checking activities created on a customer’s
record for accuracy.

Classification of errors

An error in QOL can be a:

-   Critical error - which fails to meet the Four Pillars of Payment
    Correctness. The activity is returned and feedback is provided to
    staff to address, or
-   Non-critical error - which does not impact payment correctness and
    feedback is provided to staff to address

Payment correctness

Payment correctness underpins the integrity of payments made by
Centrelink and is defined by The Four Pillars of Payment Correctness:

-   Right Person
-   Right Program
-   Right Rate
-   Right Date

Each of The Four Pillars has a set of rules. These define the error type
and indicate any critical risk to payment correctness. This is inbuilt
into the QOLCheck tool. When an activity does not meet one or more of
The Four Pillars, a critical error has occurred. The activity is
returned to the staff member and feedback is provided.

Getting It Right (GIR) Standards

When updating a customer record the Getting It Right (GIR) Minimum
Standards must be followed.

In QOL, this principle predominately applies to the documentation of all
significant decision activities to comply with the GIR DOC Minimum
Standards. For more details, see Recording reasons for decisions under
Getting it Right (GIR).

Failure to create a GIR DOC for a significant decision is not a critical
error. If there is no GIR DOC and the QOL checker cannot determine if
the result of the significant decision activity meets The Four Pillars,
the activity is returned with feedback.

QOL tools

There are 2 tools used to select, check and report on the outcome of the
QOL checks - QOLCheck and QOLStat. Access to the QOL tools is requested
through the ICT Security Portal.

QOLCheck

Users can replay their own work or, with the right delegation replay and
check the work of others. The QOLCheck tool has questions to identify
critical and non-critical errors. Two types of questions are used:

Step or screen questions must be answered directly and do not require
any judgement to determine if there has been a Payment Correctness
error. The QOLCheck tool will apply the right rule based on the question
answered

-   If there is a step question error, the activity will be returned
-   An incorrect date of event, date of effect or date of receipt is
    treated as a step question. They should be answered directly as Yes
    or No
-   The date of receipt option does not appear in the QOL tool for all
    payment types
-   When there is a date of receipt error, return the activity by
    selecting the Incorrect DOE/DOV option in the transaction question
    set
-   Exception: DOR errors are not critical when:
    - staff have used a guided procedure or script that does not allow
    them to change the date of receipt, or
    - an instruction is published in an Operational Message about a
    piece of work, for example Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Transaction questions are more general. The QOL checker must decide if a
critical error has occurred

-   If an error is part of the transaction questions and meets the
    definition of a critical error, the activity is returned
-   If it is a non-critical error, the activity is released with
    feedback
-   Transaction questions are identified by the Transaction Summary
    heading at the top of the QOL Tool

QOLStat

A reporting tool that stores all relevant information generated by the
QOLCheck. QOLStat is used to report outcomes of quality checking at the
individual level through to the national level.

General responsibilities

All staff using QOL have duties and responsibilities under QOL to:

-   correctly action customer information using the appropriate
    Operational Blueprint reference/s
-   check feedback reports generated by the QOLCheck or the QOLStat
    tools and action any feedback regularly during the day
-   maintain a personal QOL correctness of at least 95%

QOL Checker responsibilities

A QOL checker is responsible for undertaking QOL checks in accordance
with payment correctness and the Getting it Right minimum standards. QOL
checkers must meet accreditation criteria.

Responsibilities of a QOL checker are to:

meet the appropriate requirements as outlined on QOL accreditation and
reaccreditation form

apply the appropriate Operational Blueprint reference when completing
QOL checks

maintain a personal QOL correctness of at least 95% in the relevant
system or benefit they will be checking

engage collaboratively with other QOL checkers to ensure the application
of consistent QOL checking

provide appropriate, consistent and constructive feedback in line with
the Quality Checking Feedback Policy

report on individual staff member’s performance to Line Managers and
identify learning needs and knowledge gaps where appropriate

not look for errors outside the activity they are checking, unless:

-   an error coded in an earlier activity is found and this influences
    the outcome of the current activity being checked, and/or
-   relevant information exists that was omitted from the current
    activity

not override discretionary decisions unless the relevant legislation,
policy or procedure does not allow discretion

Discretionary decisions

All decisions must be made using the relevant legislation, policy and
Operational Blueprint procedure.

If the legislation or policy allows for discretion, the staff member can
use discretion when completing the activity.

If the staff member has used their discretion:

-   the QOL checker must not, under any circumstances change the
    decision
-   the QOL checker's personal opinion is irrelevant
-   the decision can only be overridden if the legislation, policy or
    procedure did not allow for any discretion

For this reason, staff members must document all discretionary decisions
to ensure visibility and rigour around the assessment. Documenting the
discretionary reasons will also help the QOL checker check the
correctness of the activity.

Line Manager responsibilities

Line managers are responsible for:

-   maintaining the integrity of QOL
-   monitoring quality and supporting staff to achieve QOL results
-   assessing proficiency advancement for individual staff where
    applicable
-   assessing that staff/QOL checkers have the required skills and
    knowledge and meet the QOL checker accreditation/reaccreditation
    requirements
-   assess QOL checker accreditation and reaccreditation applications
    from their staff
-   ensuring QOL checkers adhere to their roles and responsibilities
-   supporting QOL checkers to deliver quality outcomes

QOL accreditation/ reaccreditation

Accreditation

A QOL checker must meet the accreditation process to gain the required
delegation to check activities.

Reaccreditation

Once a staff member is accredited as a QOL checker, they must be
reaccredited every 12 months. This review process is to ensure QOL
checkers maintain the required knowledge and technical skills to perform
the QOL checker role.

Accreditation/reaccreditation criteria

For accreditation and reaccreditation as a QOL checker, a staff member
must meet all of the following criteria:

staff member is APS4 or above

meet or have maintained a proficiency of ‘P’ in a benefit under the
system seeking QOL access

meet the Annual review of proficiency, see Updating proficiency for QOL

achieve and maintain 95% correctness rate in the relevant system and
benefit

complete QOL Skills Verification LMS CLK01123, and achieved a 100% pass
mark

essential skills and knowledge:

-   knowledge of specific benefits and programs and the ability to
    acquire general knowledge for other programs
-   understanding of customer recording tools and systems
-   ability to interpret policy and legislation
-   knowledge of Operational Blueprint and use of on-line resources and
    other reference tools
-   knowledge of QOL systems and processes

Additional criteria

Accreditation - completed National QOL Checker Accreditation Training
LMS CLK01190

Reaccreditation - completed QOL checks in the relevant system within the
last 12 months

The ICT Security Portal (ISP) automatically issues a notice of expiry to
staff before a QOL checker’s accreditation expires.

If QOL Checker access has lapsed for more than 2 months, the QOL checker
will need to complete the full accreditation process.

The Resources page has links to contact details and QOL intranet page.

Contents

Updating proficiency for QOL

Recording reasons for decisions under Getting it Right (GIR)

Related links

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Work Optimiser

Quality in Centrelink Smart Centres

Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart Centres

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
