
Community Code framework 111-16020000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the type of information that can be obtained from
the Community Code framework.

On this Page:

Community codes and reference data

The Community Code framework consists of community codes and reference
data associated with Indigenous communities and non-Indigenous
communities with an Indigenous population.

Community codes are unique four character codes assigned to each
community. In most cases the four character code is the first four
letters of the community name. The codes are automatically applied to
customer records whenever a home, postal, temporary or term address
located within an identified community area is added or updated.

Reference Data Facility (RDF)

The Community Codes database is part of the Reference Data Facility
(RDF). This provides one source of information about communities -
guaranteeing data quality, consistency, and accuracy.

Community details available include:

-   alternate names and pronunciations
-   demographic and locality details including Local Government Areas,
    shires, electorates and population counts
-   Service Delivery Network information, for example Agents, Service
    Centres and Area information
-   government programmes, initiatives and measures
-   income management details
-   access and facilities, including permit requirements and seasonal
    considerations, and
-   servicing and management, including travel, distances, accommodation
    and community contacts

Community Code framework

The Community Code framework accurately identifies approximately 1600
Indigenous communities across Australia, including major and minor
communities, homelands, stations, and town camps. Over 1900
non-Indigenous communities are also identified, including towns,
suburbs, and regional centres with an Indigenous population.

More than 60,000 customers are residing in Indigenous communities across
Australia and over 425,000 customers are residing in non-Indigenous
communities.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
