
Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks, ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs) 111-05050020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to document a customer record by creating and
reviewing Fast Notes, Display on Access (DOA) DOCs, Callbacks and ACTDOC
work items.

Documenting Centrelink records and creating follow up requests

Documenting customer records builds a history of advice and actions
taken when interacting with customers. Documents can be created in
Process Direct or Customer First and can be closed when the document
contains information only, or open where follow up action is required.
Various methods can be used to create documents:

-   Process Direct, via Notes
-   Customer First via the Fast Note workflow and the Callback/ACTDOC
    guided procedure

All information must be recorded in line with the Online Document
Recording (ODR) standards.

Callbacks, ACTDOCs and required information

An open document can be used to request a follow up for a customer where
their enquiry cannot be resolved at the first point of contact.

Callbacks are used to request a relevant team or site to contact a
customer.

ACTDOCs request a relevant team or site to take action on a customer's
record.

A follow up must only be requested by using the appropriate
Callback/ACTDOC workflow or Fast Note template, as instructed by
Operational Blueprint. Follow ups created using any other method will
not be allocated correctly. Do not use the Callback/ACTDOC workflow if
there are instructions to use a Fast Note template.

Before sending a follow up, consult all available resources to help the
customer. Include enough information in the follow up to allow the
receiving officer to take the required action. This includes checking
that the customer's contact details are up-to-date.

Resources that should be checked include, but are not limited to:

-   Information on the customer’s record
-   Operational Blueprint relating to the enquiry
-   Operational Blueprint Message Board
-   Operational Blueprint Updates
-   Network News Update (NNU)
-   Office Locator page of the business team relating to the enquiry

If a follow up has been created inappropriately, feedback must be
provided to the original Service Officer through the Staff Feedback
Tool.

Keywords

These are used by workload management to allocate work to the correct
team, site or specialist officer.

To make sure the correct keywords auto-fill staff must:

-   use the workflow or Fast Note template as advised by Operational
    Blueprint
-   select the applicable service reason
-   never create a manual Callback/ACTDOC

Adding the 'Urgent' keyword to a Callback or ACTDOC

An urgent check box is available for customers experiencing hardship or
who meet the criteria of being at risk. The urgent check box is only
available when creating a Callback or ACTDOC in Process Direct, or when
using the Callback/ACTDOC guided procedure in Customer First.

This process is not required when using templates selected from Fast
Notes. Fast Note templates have specific keywords attached to make sure
follow ups are allocated at the correct priority.

See the Resources page for Operational Blueprints to check for hardship
criteria.

If an urgent Callback or ACTDOC is outstanding and has not been
resolved, all efforts must be made to resolve the enquiry. If the
enquiry is unable to be completed, discuss alternative contact options
where appropriate.

Display on Access documents

These are used to display an immediate alert that appears when we access
a customer’s record. These alerts help us to provide better customer
service and are used for vital information such as:

adding passwords to a customer record

Person Permitted to Enquire or Person Permitted to Update details

urgent or sensitive information, regarding:

-   customers affected by family and domestic violence at risk of harm
-   identified fraudulent activity
-   bereavement periods

A DOA DOC or DOA DOC Alert message may appear on the customer’s record
when the record is accessed. It is the responsibility of staff to go to
the Document List (DL) in Customer First/Record or access Notes icon in
Process Direct to identify whether there are DOA DOCs on the record.

Staff must read each DOA DOC and follow all included instructions.

If staff identify that previous actions taken on the record are in
contradiction to DOA doc instructions; feedback can be provided through
the Staff Feedback Tool.

Deleting DOCs and Notes

Information recorded on customer records that breach customer or staff
privacy or, information of a sensitive nature must be deleted. If
updates have been made to the wrong record, see Intertwined Centrelink
records.

Customer service staff at the APS5 level or above have access to delete
DOCs from Customer First.

Only staff in the Operations Design and Transformation team can delete
notes that appear in the Notes Summary of Process Direct. A template for
requesting note deletion is available in the Resources page.

If there has been a potential privacy breach, a privacy incident must be
raised as described in Privacy incidents.

The Resources page contains links to the Staff Feedback Tool, NNU,
Operational Blueprint links, Office Locator and the ODR Helpdesk. It
also includes lists of keywords, DOA DOC codes, examples of appropriate
and inappropriate Callback and ACTDOC work items, guidelines for using
the URGENT check box, the Delete Note Email template and what to do if
social workers assess a job seeker has a mutual obligation exemption.

Related Links

Timeliness standards for Callbacks and ACTDOCs

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Customer initiated contact with Service Officer

Appointment Based Service

Centrelink Appointment System

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
