
Rapid Addressing 111-21070000

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the features of Rapid Addressing.
Rapid Addressing is designed to increase the speed of address updates
and ensure more accurate recording of customer addresses.

On this Page:

Rapid Addressing availability for staff and customers

Rapid Addressing (also referred to as Rapid Addressing Mode), is a
feature integrated in to relevant pages and workflows within the
Centrelink system and Customer Online Services.

Rapid Addressing is available:

for staff - from the:

-   Address Details (AD) page
-   Add Person (AP) page
-   Add Organisation (AO) page
-   Organisation Contact Address Details (OCAD) page
-   Change in Contact Details workflow
-   Online and Families Claim workflow
-   Emergency Recovery Payment workflow

[] for customers - through Customer Online Services within:

-   the Update Address Details service
-   online claim workflows

Rapid Addressing assists staff and customers to record an address by
providing address suggestions from Australia Post based on the
characters entered by the user. Staff are still able to enter an address
not known to Australia Post by selecting the address suggestion under
the -Your input- heading in the list. However, staff should only select
this option if the address entered does not appear in the list provided
and they are satisfied that it is correct.

Address conflicts

Where there is a conflict in the correctness of the
suburb/postcode/state combination provided by the customer and that
suggested by Rapid Addressing, the Rapid Addressing suggestion should be
considered the correct combination. Staff should always ensure that they
have selected the correct address before completing the address update.

Information used by Rapid Addressing contains only known mail delivery
addresses. Under no circumstances should a customer be told that their
address is 'not known to Australia Post' and therefore must be 'wrong'.
Staff must not advise customers to contact Australia Post if they
believe that the address combination provided by Rapid Addressing is
incorrect. In these circumstances, staff may seek to confirm the details
provided, however once confirmed they should enter the confirmed address
and select the entry from under the -Your input- heading in the list of
suggestions provided.

Non-Australian addresses can be entered by staff using the Enter
non-Australian address button on the Address Details (AD), Add Person
(AP), Add Organisation (AO) and Organisation Contact Address Details
(OCAD) pages.

Accessing Rapid Addressing mode

The Rapid Addressing mode:

-   Is automatically switched on when the Address Details (AD), Add
    Person (AP), Add Organisation (AO) and Organisation Contact Address
    Details (OCAD) pages are accessed
-   Can be switched off by selecting the Enter non-Australian address
    button on the Address Details (AD), Add Person (AP), Add
    Organisation (AO) or Organisation Contact Address Details (OCAD)
    pages, and
-   Can be manually switched on by selecting the Use rapid address entry
    button on the Address Details (AD), Add Person (AP), Add
    Organisation (AO) or Organisation Contact Address Details (OCAD)
    pages

Update address using rapid address entry

When Rapid Addressing is switched on, the Suburb or postcode: field will
be the first field displayed. As characters are entered into the Suburb
or postcode: field, suggestions will be displayed. Once the postcode or
suburb details have been selected the user will be navigated to the
Street address: field where Rapid Addressing will again provide
suggestions based on the user input to complete the address update.

All Address types are able to be updated using Rapid Addressing.

Selecting a suggestion

A suggestion can be selected by using the mouse to navigate to the
selections and selecting the selection. Selection by keyboard is using
the arrow keys for navigation and either the [tab] or [enter] key to
select. The first item on the list is selected by default.

Suburb or postcode

The Suburb or postcode: field displays as blank when either there is no
existing address data or when the 'clear' button has been activated.
When updating an existing address, this field displays the existing
suburb of the address and must be confirmed if updating the street
number or street, otherwise it should be overtyped with the new suburb.

Suggestion format

Address suggestions provided by Rapid Addressing may differ from how
they were input by the user. The address displayed by Rapid Addressing
is the preferred format.

Street address

A list of suggested streets will display after the first letter typed in
the Street address: field, provided there are matches in the Australia
Post File. In some instances, the street may actually be in a
neighbouring suburb or in multiple suburbs. Extra care should be taken
to ensure that the correct selection is made, and further confirmation
with the customer be undertaken if required.

Updating an existing address

For existing addresses, the town/suburb is pre-populated to the Suburb
or postcode: field which can be overtyped. The user does not need to
type anything before being able to see suggestions based on the existing
town/suburb. See the Process page for more information.

Creating a new address

When creating a new address, Rapid Addressing automatically displays the
Suburb or postcode: field. Once this field is complete, the user will be
prompted to complete the Street address: field. Once the 'continue'
button is selected, the address details are saved.

Additional address information

Additional address information such as property and building names, or
'Care of' information need to be entered within double quotation marks
or round brackets in the Street address: field when in Rapid Addressing
mode. See the Process page for more information.

Related links

Updating address details

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

View/update address accommodation or contact details option online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
