
Digital image not located on Centrelink customer record 111-10020050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This page explains how to investigate when an image cannot be located on
a customer record and when a Service Officer must request the document
again.

Reasons for a missing image

An image may not appear on a customer’s record for a number of reasons,
including:

-   The document has been received but not yet scanned (for example, it
    may have been incorrectly batched or is still on a desk)
-   The document has been scanned by the agency or received by fax and
    is awaiting manual classification
-   The image was placed on the wrong customer record, for example,
    partner, family member, carer or nominee
-   The document has been scanned incorrectly and a rescan has been
    requested
-   A rescan was requested but not carried out and the original document
    was not attached to the customer record
-   The document has been scanned incorrectly but a rescan was not
    requested as needed
-   The document has been scanned but the customer could not be
    identified (image is in the orphan repository in FileNet). Note: it
    may be possible to locate these documents if enough information can
    be provided See Requesting a document rescan, retrieval or location
-   The document was not received by the agency. This includes documents
    posted to a PO Box or site address no longer used
-   The document was processed in a service centre and did not need
    scanning

Images awaiting manual classification

Documents need manual classification for a number of reasons, incuding:

-   The document is not barcoded
-   The barcode cannot be read
-   The barcoded page is not the first page of the document scanned
-   A valid Customer Reference Number (CRN) was not entered into the
    Multi-Function Device (MFD) when scanning

Manual classification takes time to complete. A specialist staff member
from the Digitisation Solutions Team (DST) needs to view each document
individually to identify and assign the correct CRN and/or form code to
the digital image.

Staff should check the DST Scanning Dates for classification timeframes
before investigating further. For example, if a document was lodged on
10 August and the DST has classified images up to 15 August, investigate
further as the image should be on the customer’s record. For scanning
dates and classification timeframes, see the Operational Planning Branch
Workload Management intranet page link of the Resources page.

Once an image has been classified, the document is attached to the
customer's record.

Locating inbound faxes

Sometimes faxed documents do not contain enough information to identify
the customer and cannot be attached to a customer’s record.

Service Officers may see that a faxed document is incomplete or missing
pages when they are:

-   Doing work in the customer or organisation record
-   Classifying images in KOFAX or the National Queue

Incomplete faxes can occur due to:

-   A fax transmission disconnecting. This is often due to an issue with
    the senders telecommunication provider
-   An image transmission issue, or
-   The sender did not include all of the pages

If there are not enough details to identify the customer or
organisation, staff cannot attach the image to the relevant record. This
means that a fax may be received, but will not show on a record.
Although it is not possible to rescan documents lodged by fax, it may be
possible to locate the document and attach it to the record, if the
customer can provide enough information.

The Resources page has a link to the Workload Management intranet page
and suggested wording for letters and phone calls when unable to locate
a document.

Related links

Requesting a document rescan, retrieval or location

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Classifying Centrelink digital images via the National Queue

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Digital image attached to incorrect Centrelink customer record

Actioning inbound desktop faxes

Moving and/or updating Centrelink digital images via Document Tools

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
