
Urgent QOL process for Smart Centre and Labour Hire staff 111-21030245

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers request urgent completion of
a Quality On Line (QOL) activity created by Smart Centre or Labour Hire
staff. Some activity types are excluded from this process.

Service Delivery Partners

Service Delivery Partners manage their own QOL as part of BAU processes.
They have escalation procedures to complete urgent QOL generated by
Smart Centre and Labour Hire staff.

If a Smart Centre or Labour Hire staff member needs urgent QOL of an
activity created by a Service Delivery Partner, refer to Office Locator.
For quality checking instructions, check details for the site that
created the item.

Service Delivery Partner staff trained in participation (PST) failures
must contact PST Virtual Support via Services Australia Workspace. Do
not seek local QOL support, including requests for urgent QOL.

Service Officers

Make sure urgent QOL requests meet the urgent QOL criteria before
escalating.

Complete activities in a way or order that reduces the need for urgent
QOL requests.

Service Officers must decide when an urgent QOL is required and make
this request. This includes requesting an Urgent QOL for an activity
submitted by another Service Officer.

Service Officers are not to contact another Service Officer with a
submitted activity on a record to ask them to action the urgent QOL.

Staff trained in participation (PST) failures must contact PST Virtual
Support via Services Australia Workspace. Do not seek local QOL support,
including requests for urgent QOL.

QOL Checkers

QOL checkers must:

-   monitor the Urgent QOL SharePoint
-   check activities in an accurate and efficient manner
-   use QOL appropriately as per the QOL guidelines. See QOL checking in
    the Smart Centre Division.

The Resources page contains links to intranet pages and contact details,
and activity types excluded from this process.

Related links

Quality Online (QOL)

Quality Online (QOL) checking in the Smart Centre Division

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
