
Faxing letters using Outlook and Customer First 111-10010090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to send a fax using Outlook and Customer
First. The EMAILME print option in Customer First lets staff fax a
letter from a customer's letter History Summary (HS) screen to the
customer.

Fax facilities

This facility is used to enable documents that are not available in the
Desktop fax workflow to be faxed to a customer. Documents listed in the
Desktop fax workflow include Reporting Statements (SU19), modules,
common forms and claim forms. The Resources page has more information on
Desktop fax.

Reducing Paper Initiative

Outbound Desktop Faxing aligns with the Reducing Paper Initiative (RPI).
This aimed to remove Centrelink's dependency on:

-   using paper forms and correspondence
-   printing claim forms for faxing

Note: the RPI concluded in 2011.

Faxing personal/protected details to customers

If a customer calls asking for a form to be faxed to a given number, ask
extra questions to authenticate them. The Service Officer must be
satisfied of the customer's identity. Take extra care to make sure the
fax number is correct.

Requests to fax documents with personal details (for example income
statements) are considered on a case by case basis. Examples of
appropriate situations include, but are not limited to:

A person (e.g. a financial planner or accountant) with permission to
enquire, requests an income and assets statement be faxed. If not faxed
it could place the customer in financial hardship (e.g. extra charges by
the accountant, delay in the customer's reassessment of income support
payment)

A customer's loan application is dependent on the financial institution
receiving details about their rate of payment

A customer:

-   Has placed an order for a prescription at the chemist
-   Is eligible for pharmaceutical concession but PBS online is unable
    to validate entitlement
-   Requires the medication urgently but does not have the money to pay
    full price (and later reclaim from Medicare)

If faxing is appropriate, it is the responsibility of the Service
Officer to make sure the fax goes to the correct recipient. There is no
excuse for misdirected faxes.

The fax cover sheet from Microsoft Word templates must be used at all
times when faxing personal details. It warns the recipient that the
information is confidential, in case the fax is sent to the wrong
number.

Any instance of a fax being sent to a customer should be detailed on a
DOC on their record. Details of the request, fax number and resulting
action must be included.

Faxing information to third parties

It is essential the contact details and identity of a third party are
verified when:

-   issuing a notice to request information from a third party about a
    customer, or
-   responding to a request from a third party agent for a customer
-   care must be taken to make sure the fax number is correct

The Service Officer must be completely satisfied the fax is sent to the
correct person or nominee in the organisation or business.

For all third party notice requests, the fax information must:

have the relevant legislation, for example:

-   the authority to request the information
-   privacy information

include the minimum amount of customer details needed to identify the
information being requested

include clear instructions about how the information can be returned to
Services Australia

If faxing is appropriate, it is the responsibility of the Service
Officer sending the fax to make sure it goes to the correct recipient.
There is no excuse for misdirected faxes.

The fax cover sheet from Microsoft Word templates must be used at all
times when faxing personal details. It warns the recipient that the
information is confidential, in case the fax is sent to the wrong
number.

Any instance of a fax being sent to a customer should be detailed on a
DOC on their record. Details of the request, fax number and resulting
action must be included.

Personal or protected information

Service Officers should consider on a case by case basis, faxing
personal/protected information to customers or faxing information to
third parties.

Since 14 June 2005 information has been exchanged between the following
groups in accordance with sections 202 to 204 of the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999 and the Privacy Act 1988:

-   Department of Education, Skills and Employment
-   Employment Service Providers
-   Services Australia

The Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 allows for the use and/or
disclosure of protected information if it is for the purpose of social
security law.

Note: this process provides instructions for faxes only to be sent to
customers using Outlook. Documents are not to be emailed directly to a
customer or third party email address.

The Resources page contains an attachment of current forms available for
desktop faxing, information on desktop faxing and known common errors.

Related links

Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982

Disclosing information to third parties

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

Using the Desktop Fax workflow to fax forms and modules

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
