
Travel Management Application (TMA) quality checking 111-20040713

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes for quality checking reimbursement,
Away from Base Change of Circumstances (CoC) activities and pre-booked
travel completed in the TMA.

Quality Management Application (QMA)

The QMA is the quality checking function within Process Direct. The QMA
identifies which work item/s need checking based on the skill tag
capability level coded in Essentials (Entry, Established or
Experienced).

Quality checking within the TMA applies to:

-   pre-booked travel, both individual and groups, and
-   reimbursement and Away from Base Change of Circumstance (CoC)
    activities

Quality checking will not apply to requests for travel that are within 4
calendar days of the date of export.

For further information see, the Resources page for a link to the
Quality Management page.

Submitted bookings

To help with identifying submitted bookings there is:

-   a banner on top of the TMA, and
-   a QMA indicator (red exclamation mark in a red circle) on the
    Bookings, Parties, Groups, and Maintenance Export tabs

All bookings in a group containing submitted bookings will be 'Locked'.
This also applies to individual bookings linked to submitted bookings.
This is to make sure Service Officers cannot edit or export until
completion of the quality check/s. Locked bookings are shown with
banners and an indicator (orange triangle containing orange exclamation
mark).

Access to QMA

A staff member's role will determine their access to the QMA. Service
Officers can access the QMA Feedback tile to view results and Quality
Management Officer's (QMO) comments. However, QMOs conduct quality
checking.

For further information, see the Resources page for a link to the
Quality Management page for:

-   Service Officers
-   Quality Management Officers (QMO), and
-   Team Leaders

The Resources page contains a link to the Quality Management page and a
list of TMA codes used in QMA.

Related links

Travel Management Application (TMA)

Workload Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
