
Compensation lump sum preclusion periods (CLK) 117-02020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to calculate and apply compensation lump sum
preclusion periods.

On this Page:

Lump sum preclusion periods

Compensation recipients cannot receive a social security Compensation
Affected Payment (CAP) during a preclusion period. Customers can test
their eligibility for a Centrelink payment once the preclusion period
ends. The Government expects customers to use their lump sum payment to
provide their income support.

For lump sums settled by consent or agreement:

-   The compensation part is 50% of the gross settlement
-   The only allowable deduction before applying the 50% rule is weekly
    compensation that has been paid

Use the specified amounts in the award to calculate the charge when the
lump sums is paid by a:

-   judgement after a contested hearing of a court
-   tribunal or
-   an independent arbitration

Calculation of preclusion periods

Calculate by dividing the economic loss by the relevant divisor
applicable at the date of settlement.

Compensation Affected Payment (CAP)

Any CAPs paid to the compensation recipient during the preclusion period
becomes a recoverable debt (compensation charge). This includes any
supplementary payments paid with the CAP.

Current CAPs may be cancelled and future CAPs precluded if the period
runs into the future.

Preclusion period start date

The preclusion period will start from the:

-   date of injury
-   date of diagnosis
-   date of economic loss or capacity to earn commenced
-   day after any periodic compensation ceased or
-   date periodic compensation payments are reduced to allow for a lump
    sum redemption of part of the future payments

A lump sum paid solely of an arrears of periodic compensation is not
treated as a lump sum and is assessed in the period it represents. These
payments may affect any partner's CAPs received or claimed in that
period.

Effect on other entitlements

Some entitlements are still available during a preclusion period if the
person qualifies otherwise. This includes:

-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Family assistance payments including Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Different rules apply to ABSTUDY for the treatment of compensation
    payments

Effect on a partner

A preclusion period does not stop the compensation recipient's partner
from receiving an income support payment. The lump sum compensation
payment may be assessed under the income or assets test. If the lump sum
compensation payment was received prior to 20 March 1997, both the
compensation recipient and their partner may be affected by the
preclusion period.

The Resources page contains examples of the determination of the start
date of the lump sum preclusion period.

Related links

Calculating a compensation debt for out of court settlements

Calculating a compensation debt for judgements

Compensation affected payments (CAP)

Calculating the compensation part of a lump sum payment

Compensation Online Estimator (CLK)

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
