-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect that periodic compensation payments
have on the compensation recipient's partner.

Compensation recipient not qualified and receiving a CAP at time of incident

Periodic compensation received will be a direct deduction for the
recipient. Any excess compensation will be deemed to be part of the
partner's own ordinary income.

Apply excess compensation amounts to the partner if the compensation
recipient:

-   is not being paid and
-   their periodic compensation exceeds the maximum basic rate for which
    they qualify

Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) compensation affected pensions are
deemed as a Compensation Affected Payment and should be assessed as
qualified for a pension. They include:

-   Invalidity Service Pension
-   Partner Service Pension
-   Veteran Payment
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)

Assess periodic compensation for recipients receiving a payment that is
not a CAP, such as ABSTUDY as ordinary income. This may affect their
partner under the relevant ordinary Income Test.

Compensation recipient receiving a CAP at time of incident

Assess the periodic compensation they receive as their ordinary income.
It may affect their partner under the combined ordinary Income Test if
the partner is a pensioner or for partners on allowance.

Assess periodic compensation under the ordinary income test if the
partner of a compensation recipient is in receipt of a saved
compensation affected payment (SCAP).

Ignore excess compensation when assessing the partner's SCAP if the
compensation recipient claims and cannot be paid due to direct
deductions.

Compensation cannot count as a person's income and direct deductions at
the same time.

Calculating the partner's rate where the compensation recipient does not claim a CAP

-   Treat the compensation as ordinary income of the compensation
    recipient, no excess compensation is calculated
-   Apply a beneficial approach when assessing the partner's rate

Do this where:

-   the date of incident occurred prior to the compensation recipient
    being on a CAP, and
-   the compensation recipient is not qualified for any CAP at the time
    of the incident and
-   the partner has lodged a claim for a CAP, or is qualified for and
    receiving a CAP

Calculating partner's rate prior to 20 September 2001

Use the Multical debt calculator if arrears of periodic compensation are
received after 20 September 2001 that back pay for periods prior to that
date. CMS calculates partner compensation rates before 20 September 2001
using rules that only apply if the compensation was actually received
before this date.

Related links

Coding and raising debts for periodic compensation payments

Australian residence requirements for payment

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
