
Signature requirements for compensation 117-22063007

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to signature requirements on
compensation forms and supporting compensation documents. Compensation
forms can be hand signed, or signed digitally or electronically,
depending on the form. Digital and electronic signatures are not the
same.

Digital Signatures

A digital signature:

-   is an encrypted copy of the person’s signature
-   is created using DocuSign software, or the inbuilt Adobe Digital ID
    function embedded in the (current) online forms
-   increases the authenticity of the signature

New versions of Compensation Recovery forms published from 2022 have a
built-in digital signature function. Digital signatures created with
‘DocuSign’ are also accepted. Other digital signature software options
are not accepted. If a digital signature does not meet the agency’s
digital signature requirements, see Resources for a table to decide if
the form can be assessed for an electronic signature.

Customers and authorised third parties are able to hand sign all forms.

Electronic signatures

An electronic signature:

-   is an identifying mark made by software that identifies the
    signatory
-   does not guarantee the authenticity of the signature

Electronic signatures can be created by:

-   word processor
-   digital draw pad, or
-   a scanned image

Not all Compensation Recovery forms accept electronic signatures, some
must have only hand written or digital signatures. See the Signature
requirements for forms table on the Resources page.

Valid Signature

A signature is a marking or name that identifies the individual who
created it. A valid signature on an agency form or document signifies
the approval and acceptance of the information in the form. Without it,
a filled in form or document is like a blank piece of paper.

A valid signature for the purpose of agency forms confirms that the
authorised signatory:

-   checked that the information provided is true and correct, and
-   agrees to the Declaration and Privacy notices

The standards of the Electronic Transactions Act 1999 requires the
signatory to use a reliable method to identify themselves and their
intention. Services Australia (the agency) requires the full name of the
person, and the intention means:

-   they have shown their agreement of the privacy note and declaration,
    and
-   approval of the contents of the form

Business names or initials are not acceptable because the identity of
the signatory cannot be determined regardless of the signature being
handwritten, digital or electronic.

The Resources page contains a table showing which signatures are
acceptable on each form.

Failure to provide a valid signature

If a customer or third party (compensation payer or customer solicitor)
fails to provide the required signature on a particular form, the agency
will send a letter advising that more information is needed.

As a general rule letters issued for this purpose must:

-   be in writing
-   be given personally or by post
-   specify how the person is to give the information
-   specify the period within which the person must give information,
    and
-   specify that the request is a notice under the social security law,
    including the relevant section of the Social Security Act 1999

Generally all of the agency standard letters include section 72 for
notice periods relating to notices issued under sections 67, 68, 69 or
70.

Inability to provide a valid signature

Customers who cannot sign their name in English can print their name in
block letters or use the script of their native language. The customer's
signature should be accepted regardless of the script and there is no
need to have it witnessed by a third party.

An interpreter should be provided to help customers from cultural and
linguistically diverse backgrounds (CALD) who experience difficulty
completing a claim form and to ensure the customer fully understands
what they are signing.

Customers who cannot write, are illiterate or use a mark (for example a
cross) to sign their name, should have a witness verifying their mark
and to confirm their identity.

Ask the customer to provide one of the following forms of
identification:

-   current drivers' licence
-   current passport
-   health care card
-   pension card, or
-   proof of age card

Customers who are unable to complete a form because of a disability may
have the form completed on their behalf by a responsible person,
preferably a relative or friend, who knows of their circumstances.

Arrangements must be made to verify the customer's existence before the
form is processed. This can be verified through contact with the third
party such as a doctor, social worker etc.

Details of the person who completed the form should be included on the
form, and both they and the customer must sign the form once it has been
completed. If the customer is unable to sign, they:

-   make a mark and the person should witness the mark, or
-   provide (or have provided on their behalf) verification from a
    medical practitioner or health professional that they are unable to
    sign

Customers in these circumstances may need more support, and may nominate
someone else to deal with the agency on their behalf. These people may
be known as payment nominees or correspondence nominees and nominee
arrangements should be considered.

Some disadvantaged customers are alone and do not have people to assist
them, that is, they do not have nominees, family, friends or community
support networks. These customers may benefit from a referral to a
social worker. See Social work service referral.

Signature requirements for supporting documents

A customer, their partner, or a third party may submit supporting
documents relevant to the compensation claim. Some examples include:

-   Agreement (complying agreement)
-   Settlement documents
-   Deed of Release
-   Consent Order (Judgement)
-   Compensation Advice of Lump Sum Payments form (SS446)
-   Compensation and Damages form (MOD C)

Mandatory requirements for agency owned forms and claims do not apply to
supporting documents provided from compensation payers, insurers and/or
the customer.

The determining officer (delegate) must decide if supporting
documents/evidence provided is acceptable and/or if more information
should be requested.

If information provided by the customer requires verification (for
example, only one signature exists), the delegate will:

-   review all details of the case, and
-   decide if the information is accurate based on supporting documents

When requesting verification, the onus is on the customer to provide
verification. Information may be requested from a third party when there
is difficulty obtaining information or documents from customers.

Mandatory checks

The 2 most important factors of any work actioned by staff within
Compensation Recovery Teams (CRT) are:

-   accuracy of information, and
-   the protection of customer’s privacy

Mandatory checks must be completed when reviewing documents and
accessing compensation claims to make sure that information is accurate
and released to the correct person at the correct time.

When correspondence is received, Compensation Recovery Officers must
decide:

-   if the information is notifiable under the Compensation provisions
    within the Social Security Act 1991, and
-   if any existing compensation claim exists, or
-   if a new compensation claim must be created in the Compensation
    Management System (CMS)

The Resources page contains links to contact details, forms, letters, a
table showing which signature is acceptable on each form and an
attachment showing examples of signatures.

Related links

Actioning compensation interest checks

Release of information for compensation interest check

Accepting and disclosing information

Requesting Information (CLK)

Implied consent regarding third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
