-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the definitions of and rules that apply to
compensation affected payments (CAP).

Payments affected by compensation

A compensation affected payment (CAP) is a social security payment that:

-   can be affected by the receipt of a compensation lump sum and/or
    periodic payment
-   may be recovered, reduced and/or precluded if a customer or their
    partner receives compensation

Preclusion refers to a period during which a CAP is not payable due to
compensation.

Most social security payments are CAPs including:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (including blind)
-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Youth Allowance
-   Carer Payment
-   Parenting Payment
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

The References page contains links to the relevant policy.

Payment rules

Payments made with a CAP are also compensation affected. These include:

-   Rent Assistance
-   Energy Supplement
-   Telephone Allowance
-   Fares Allowance
-   Bereavement Payment
-   Pension Supplement
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Education Entry Payment
-   Pension Education Supplement

Compensation payments are included in the income test for Low Income
Health Care Cards (LIC).

Payments not assessed as a CAP include:

-   Carer Allowance
-   Bereavement Allowance (BVA)
-   Mobility Allowance
-   Home Equity Access Scheme payments
-   Income Support Bonus (ISB)
-   PaTH Internship Incentive payment (closed 1 October 2022)
-   Clean Energy Advance (CEA)

Family assistance payments such as Family Tax Benefit (FTB) are not
affected under the usual compensation rules. The taxable parts of
compensation payments may be counted as part of the customer's annual
income.

Check if the customer needs to revise their current family assistance
income estimate and payment choice. This will reduce the risk of
overpayment.

Different rules apply to ABSTUDY for the treatment of compensation
payments.

A customer must take reasonable action to claim compensation. If
reasonable action is not taken, a CAP may not be paid, even if all other
eligibility criteria have been met.

A saved compensation affected payment (SCAP) is a social security
payment granted before it became affected by compensation.

Customers receiving a SCAP are not subject to:

-   compensation recovery
-   preclusion periods, or
-   the requirement to pursue a claim for compensation

The Resources page contains a link to the online version of the
Compensation and Damages form (MOD C).

Contents

Reasonable action to claim compensation

Compensation and Supplementary payments

Compensation Preclusion Period

Completing the Compensation and damages details via Mod C or verbal
lodgement

Related links

Treatment of compensation payments

Requesting information (CLK)

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
