
Actioning a compensation clearance 117-01040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if a customer or their partner
is eligible to receive an income support payment when a compensation
claim has been made or could be lodged.

Compensation clearance

The purpose of a compensation clearance is to determine the customer's
payability for an income support payment.

Compensation recipients must take reasonable action to claim or obtain
any compensation they are potentially able to receive.

The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) will check the recorded information
and where information needs to be clarified, will follow up with the
customer.

Following assessment, the CRT will record a compensation clearance
decision and transfer back to the originating location.

When a clearance has been requested as part of a new claim activity the
completion of the clearance may automatically grant or reject the new
claim depending on the compensation assessment.

Obligation to supply information

Legislation allows the agency to request information from a customer,
their partner or third parties.

Generally, all requests for information must be made in writing for the
agency to take action for non-compliance.

Requests for information must include:

-   details of the information/action required
-   the time allowed to respond
-   the consequences of non-compliance
-   the reference of the relevant Act that the request has been made
    under

Where a request for information notice has been issued, the customer has
a legal obligation to comply with the request. If the customer fails to
comply with this obligation, the customer's payments may be suspended.

Individual requests for information must be issued if the customer and
partner:

-   are both receiving a payment, and
-   information needed will impact both customer/partner entitlements

The requests for information must be sent at the same time. This is to
ensure where an adverse decision needs to be made for not responding to
the request, that is, suspension, this decision can be applied to both
records at the same time.

Note: information from third parties must be requested in writing.
Information may be requested from a third party when there is difficulty
obtaining information or documents from customers.

The Resources page contains a link to the Compensation Personal Sickness
and Accident Claim (SS485) form. It also contains details for a
Preliminary Notice and Exceptions Activity List.

Related links

Coding Compensation and damages (Mod C) to request a clearance

Reasonable action to claim compensation

Manual compensation finalisations

Suspension of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
