-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to calculate a debt when the ruling is by a
judge, tribunal or specific arbitrators after a contested hearing.

On this Page:

Economic loss components and the lump sum preclusion period

The specific amounts awarded for economic loss are taken to be the
compensation part of the lump sum. The economic loss amount is
calculated by adding any amounts awarded for:

-   past and future economic loss
-   interest awarded on past economic loss
-   interest on superannuation
-   loss of superannuation and
-   taking away any amount of periodic compensation from the judgement

Any 'Fox v Wood' component is not included as economic loss. This
component is to reimburse income tax previously paid when weekly
compensation must be repaid from the judgement.

Compensation payer intends to pay and will not be appealing

Before calculating any debt the Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) should
establish that the compensation payer intends to pay and there will be
no appeal of the decision to a higher court.

The CRT must obtain a copy of the judgement or award before calculating
a debt.

Where there is any doubt the claim does not specify the amounts for
economic loss, CRT staff should seek more information from the
compensation payer.

Where no evidence exists, it is reasonable to determine that the
compensation part is 50% of the gross.

Aggregation of a judgement and a settlement

In some situations, a judgement may leave earlier compensation lump sum
settlements in place. The decision maker must examine the combined
amount and decide the components for economic loss.

Preclusion period and appeals

Contact the compensation payer if:

-   a preclusion period has been calculated and a debt raised, and
-   the judgement will be appealed

Cancel the debt where payment is withheld. Vary the debt for part
payments.

Compensation notices

A compensation notice refers to a:

-   Preliminary notice
-   Recovery notice

See the Resources page for more information.

If a notice is issued:

-   before the death of a customer, the notice will still apply.
-   after the death of a customer, the debt is recovered against the
    estate under Chapter 5 of the Social Security Act 1991

Small debt waivers

The waiver of a debt is dependent on the recoverable amount specified in
the Recovery Notice under section 1184.

Waivers, like any other decision, can be reviewed and changed.

The Resources page contains a link to the Payment Details Download Sheet
(PS Tool) and a link to the Services Australia index for access to
calculators and tools.

Related links

Calculating the compensation part of a lump sum payment

Compensation lump sum preclusion periods (CLK)

Payment Details Download Sheet (PS Tool)

Compensation Online Advice (OLA) letters

Date of receipt

General debt raising information

Reversal of waivers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
