
Special circumstances provisions for customers receiving compensation payments 117-04020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to decide whether the special circumstance
provisions apply when a customer feels disadvantaged by normal
compensation provisions.

Special circumstances

Applying the normal compensation provisions to a particular customer's
situation may:

-   have an unintended effect
-   lead to extreme hardship or
-   create an inequitable or unjust situation

Where special circumstances exist, Section 1184k of the Social Security
Act 1991 allows the Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) to treat all or
part of a compensation payment as:

-   not having been made, or
-   not liable to be paid

A combination of factors usually apply to a customer.

Apply the provisions in situations that are unusual, unforeseen, or
exceptional.

Consider each customer’s situation as a whole. Judge each case on its
merits.

Reducing preclusion periods and debts

The CRT must decide whether special circumstances can be applied if a
customer:

-   provides new information or has a change in circumstances, and
-   requests consideration to reduce a compensation preclusion period or
    waive recovery of a debt due to special circumstances

The decision to apply special circumstances under s1184K must be made by
an APS 5 or above when reducing part or all of a preclusion period
and/or debt.

When special circumstances provisions do not apply

Do not apply special circumstances if the:

-   person or their partner's only reason for receiving a Compensation
    Affected Payment (CAP) was different from the reason the
    compensation was paid
-   person does not agree with the legislation. For example, they
    consider direct deductions for partners to be harsh. This is
    contrary to the intention of Parliament and is illegal

The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) must decide whether special
circumstances can be applied if a customer:

-   provides new information or has a change in circumstances, and
-   requests consideration to reduce a compensation preclusion period or
    waive recovery of a debt due to special circumstances

This is a new decision based on the customer’s current circumstances and
will be subject to normal review and appeal processes.

Reviews and appeals

If a person does not understand or does not agree with a compensation or
special circumstances decision, they can request an explanation or apply
for a formal review of the decision. See Initial contact about a
decision and the review of decision process.

The Resources page contains links to the Compensation Recovery Statement
of Financial Circumstances Form, Request advice from Review of Decision
Helpdesk webform, and the AustLII database.

Related links

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Special circumstance reviews of compensation payments under Section
1184K (CLK)

Changing compensation debt details for customers in special
circumstances

Changing compensation preclusion period details for customers in special
circumstances

Compensation lump sum preclusion periods (CLK)

Date of receipt

Storing documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
