
Treatment of periodic compensation payments 117-03010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the treatment and coding of periodic compensation
payments on the Compensation Management System (CMS).

On this Page:

Defined and ongoing periodic payments

Periodic payments for a defined period may be treated as:

-   a direct deduction (that is, dollar for dollar) or
-   as ordinary income.

Treat any excess over the customer's maximum basic rate as ordinary
income for the partner.

Ongoing periodic payments are paid in regular instalments over a period.
Periodic payments can be paid as a lump sum payment for a period in the
past or no specific period.

Lump sum periodic payments

Lump sum paid as redemption of periodic payments (no fixed period)

Assess an amount as a lump sum if it is paid without reference to a
fixed period.

Lump sum paid solely as arrears of periodic payment (fixed period)

Some compensation schemes allow compensation payers to convert their
liability and pay arrears of periodic payments for a fixed period.
Assess under the compensation provisions as paid during the period they
represent.

Lump sum including arrears or advances of periodic payments and other
components

Arrears or advances of periodic payments may be included in a lump sum
settlement with other compensation components such as:

-   pain and suffering
-   medical costs
-   interest

Do not separate the periodic payment components to calculate their
individual effects under the Social Security Act. Assess the entire
settlement as a lump sum.

The only exception is arrears of periodic payments with interest only.
Assess this under the compensation provisions as paid during the time it
represents.

Periodic payments from an income protection policy

Treat payments from sickness and accident insurance policies as other
ordinary income when the customer has:

-   paid or contributed to the premium and
-   there is no offset clause or an offset clause that is not invoked
    against a social security payment

Do not treat income protection policies attached to superannuation
policies as compensation. See Assessing superannuation and Recording
other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen.

Payments from a Salary Continuance Scheme can be treated as compensation
or ordinary unearned income. If the claimant opts out of the scheme and
this:

-   results in a salary/wage increase, the payment is treated as
    ordinary unearned income
-   does not result in a salary/wage increase, treat the payment as
    compensation

Pre-assessment payments from ComSuper

Injured workers who have exhausted all paid personal leave and have
submitted their invalidity retirement request can receive pre-assessment
payments.

These payments, paid by way of a lump sum or paid periodically, are
assessed under the compensation rules.

Contents

Treating periodic compensation payments as a direct deduction or income

Effect of periodic compensation on partner's income support payment

Coding and raising debts for periodic compensation payments

Related links

Periodic compensation arrears charges (CLK)

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

Superannuation

Assessing superannuation

Recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Lump sum compensation payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
