
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to be taken when changing or deleting
arrears of periodic compensation debt details.

Updating details

If there is a change in the amount of periodic compensation paid in the
arrears or ongoing period, correct the existing information and send a
new social security charge.

Where a previous charge cannot be corrected on the system delete the
debt before coding the correct information.

If the customer receives further compensation arrears for the same
period, a new charge can be sent if a periodic charge had been raised or
recovered previously.

The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) must set up arrears and new ongoing
periodic payment details. This is only when Services Australia receives
notification of the correct commencement date and rate payable.

Once completed, all other staff can update periodic compensation
payments on an existing record. Staff outside of the CRT will need to
request CMS02 access through mySupport. Earnings updates can occur if
the customer is on a gradual return to work program as part of their
compensation claim.

Charges and debts

Calculate periodic compensation charges and debts where a person
receives a compensation affected payment (CAP) and is paid either:

-   arrears of periodic compensation
-   ongoing periodic payments

When a Preliminary Notice:

-   has been sent, compensation charges for a customer and partner are
    raised to a compensation payer
-   has not been sent, compensation charges are raised to a customer and
    partner

Small debt waivers

The waiver of a debt is dependent on the recoverable amount specified in
the Recovery Notice under section 1184.

Waivers can be reviewed.

Related links

Coding and raising debts for periodic compensation payments

Treating periodic compensation payments as a direct deduction or income

Effect of periodic compensation on partner's income support payment

Role of staff outside Compensation Teams

Raising periodic compensation charges for partnered customers

Treatment of periodic compensation payments

Date of receipt

Reversal of waivers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
