-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the waiting period that may apply to customers
who get a lump sum payment. This waiting period is called a preclusion
period.

Compensation payment

Compensation is any payment made to a person to compensate them for
their personal injury in respect of economic loss. Compensation
preclusion periods apply to most social security payments.

Calculating preclusion periods

Refer all preclusion calculations to the Compensation Recovery Team
(CRT).

Compensation recipients cannot receive a social security Compensation
Affected Payment (CAP) during a preclusion period.

Any CAPs paid to the compensation recipient during the preclusion period
becomes a recoverable compensation debt. This includes any supplementary
payments paid with the CAP.

Preclusion periods can be varied if a customer has special
circumstances. The CRT will:

-   determine reasons for special circumstances, and
-   decide on any variation as a result

Payments exempt from preclusion periods

Preclusion periods do not apply to ABSTUDY.

Preclusion periods do not apply to supplementary entitlements such as:

-   Low Income Earners Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card (CSHC)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Carer Allowance (CA)

Payments can be made to care for children if the person is eligible for:

-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
-   FTB Part B

While preclusion periods do not apply to the above payments, a
compensation payment can still affect them.

Effect on a partner

A preclusion period does not stop the compensation recipient’s partner
from receiving an income support payment. The lump sum compensation
payment may be assessed under the income and assets test.

Preclusion periods still apply to both the customer and their partner
if:

-   the compensation was paid before 20 March 1997, and
-   they were partnered at the time

Related links

Interaction between waiting and preclusion periods

Special circumstance provisions for customers receiving compensation
payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
