
Coding and raising debts for periodic compensation payments 117-03010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains coding and raising debts for periodic
compensation payments in the Compensation Management System (CMS).

On this Page:

Periodic payments

Ongoing periodic payments are paid in:

-   regular instalments over a period of time, or
-   as a lump sum payment for a period in the past

Do not use Employment Income Details (EAN) screen to record periodic
compensation paid as part of a customer's wages. It is not employment
income. To do so may lead to an incorrect payment and incorrectly allow
a working credit offset.

If wages contain a component for periodic compensation, the compensation
component must be recorded separately in the Compensation Management
System (CMS).

Where the customer is receiving periodic payments and paid a dependency
allowance for their partner, these are

-   treated as one payment, and
-   assessed as compensation

The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) must set up arrears and new ongoing
periodic payment details. CRT do this when Services Australia gets
notification of the:

-   correct start date, and
-   rate payable

Raise a debt under s1223(1) of the Social Security Act when:

-   a non Compensation Affected Payment (CAP) customer has a partner,
    and
-   only the partner is receiving a CAP since the date of incident

Once complete, all other staff can update periodic payments on an
existing record. Staff outside the CRT will need CMS02 access when
making updates to periodic payments in CMS.

If the compensation payer tells the CRT they are going to start paying
periodic payments, tell them to use the Advice of Periodic Payments
(SS445) form. This is the preferred way to get these details.

International Services process foreign periodic payments for:

-   long term overseas customers, and
-   customers in region WTW

Notices and debts

Calculate periodic compensation debts if a person receives a CAP and is
paid either:

-   arrears of periodic payments
-   ongoing periodic payments

When a preliminary notice:

has been sent, compensation debts for a customer and their partner are
raised to a compensation payer

has not been sent, CRT should contact the compensation payer to
determine if the funds have been released

-   If no, CRT are to raise the debt and send the recovery notice to the
    compensation payer
-   If yes, CRT should raise the debt to the customer and/or partner

See the Resources page for business rules for compensation.

Small debt waivers

The waiver of a debt is dependent on the recoverable amount specified in
the recovery notice under section 1184.

Waivers can be reviewed.

Recording periodic compensation

Only record periodic payments that meet the Social Security Law's
definition of compensation on the Periodic Payment Details screen.

CRT decide how the periodic payment is treated for the customer. It will
either be:

-   a direct deduction, or
-   ordinary income

Centrelink payments received by the partner may also be recovered. See
Effect of periodic compensation on partner's income support payment.

Record:

Periodic payments for periods the customer and/or partner were:

-   receiving a CAP, or
-   had a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

The correct rate from the start of a new claim when a customer or their
partner reclaims a payment after a gap

Payments which are not for personal injury or do not contain economic
loss record on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

If a customer and/or partner is only claiming or has a new claim for a
low income card, record periodic payments on CMS. These cards are
assessed on the income 8 weeks before the actual claim.

The Resources page has the business rules for compensation debts and how
to request CMS02 access.

Related links

Actioning a compensation interest check

Treatment of compensation payments

Treating periodic compensation payments as a direct deduction or income

Effect of periodic compensation on partner's income support payment

Role of staff outside Compensation Teams

Raising periodic compensation charges for partnered customers

Treatment of periodic compensation payments

Recording and correcting employment income details

Coding Compensation and damages (MOD C) to request a clearance

Changing and deleting periodic compensation debt details

General debt raising information

Reversal of waivers

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
