
Accessing an Indigenous interpreter 125-17060200

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines information how to access interpreter services
for Indigenous Australians with limited English language proficiency.

Indigenous languages

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture is diverse with numerous
language groups that exist across Australia. There is not one common
language spoken by Indigenous Australians.

Indigenous Australian languages are some of the oldest surviving
languages spoken in the world. Traditionally there were over 500
different language groups and each group had their own distinctive
cultural beliefs, language and dialects.

Approximately 150 Indigenous languages are spoken in Australia today.
Indigenous Australians may speak up to 4 or more different Indigenous
languages and/or dialects, with English often the least spoken.

Indigenous interpreting

Language can be one of the many barriers multilingual Indigenous
Australians face when contacting Services Australia. Providing access to
an Indigenous interpreter improves communication, engagement, mutual
understanding and respect.

The agency is committed to using Indigenous interpreters for customers
where English is not their primary language. The use of a customer's
friend or relative as the interpreter is actively discouraged. This
avoids potential problems with language competency, impartiality,
content integrity and confidentiality.

Note: it is never appropriate to use a child as an interpreter.

Indigenous interpreting services

The agency provides customers with free access to Indigenous
interpreters. Indigenous language services are delivered through the
following arrangements:

Rostered on-site Indigenous interpreters (sessional interpreters)

On-site interpreters are available at 3 service centres in Western
Australia (Broome, Kununurra and Halls Creek). This interpreting service
is to be accessed in the first instance, if appropriate.

If a customer can attend one of these service centres, they will have
immediate access to a face to face Indigenous interpreter.

On-demand telephone interpreting service

The on-demand telephone interpreting service provides immediate access
to an Indigenous interpreter. Interpreters are available in certain
Indigenous languages that include:

-   Anmatyerr (pronounced An-mat-ear)
-   Arrernte (Eastern Central) (pronounced A-rundaurarra)
-   Burarra (pronounced Bur-rad-da)
-   Kriol (Top End) (pronounced Cre-ole)
-   Pitjantjatjara (pronounced Pit-junt-jara)
-   Pintupi-Luritja (pronounced Pin-tupee- La-rich-a)
-   Warlpiri (pronounced Wall-pree)
-   Yolngu Matha (pronounced Yol-new Ma-tha) including Djambarrpuyngu
    (pronounced Jom-ba-poyng-oo)
-   Torres Strait Creole, also known as Yumpla Tok
-   Meriam Mir
-   Kala Lagaw Ya
-   Kala Kawaw Ya

Booked Indigenous interpreting service

Booked Indigenous interpreters can be available for on-site, telephone
or remote customer appointments.

Requests for booked Indigenous interpreters are submitted in the
Interpreter Management System (IMS), accessed via the Front of House
(FOH) desktop app.

Interpreter services information

Interpreters help customers who speak a language other than English
conduct their business.

for help with how to work effectively with interpreters, see Guidelines
for using interpreters

for the benefits of using interpreters (for customer and staff), see
Interpreter Services

if a customer requires an immediate telephone interpreter, see
Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)

if a customer is deaf or hard of hearing and requires an

-   immediate interpreter, explore their nominee arrangement, or see
    Using the National Relay Service (NRS)
-   interpreter for a future appointment, see Interpreter Services for
    customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

if a customer requires an interpreter for a future appointment, see
Booking an interpreter for an appointment

The Resources page contains a table on Indigenous sites and time zones
to use for booking appointments, contact details for Language Services,
a link to the Services Australia website, a link to external websites
and intranet links.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
