
Using Child Support self service 133-19061428

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines self service options for Child Support customers.

Online services

This is the easiest way to manage child support payments and details.

Customers can use their Child Support online account or the Express Plus
Child Support mobile app to complete a range of transactions.

The Child Support online account home page displays:

-   My profile
-   Notifications
-   Payments I make
-   Payments I receive
-   My Children
-   Quick links

The Express Plus Child Support home screen displays:

-   Payments I make
-   Payments I receive
-   Payment Overview
-   Next payment
-   Assessment overview
-   Quick links
-   Menu options

Display and navigation may vary. This depends on whether the customer is
using iOS (Apple) or Android.

International customers with a disbursement option of International have
limited options. They can update personal and contact details. They can
view how to pay, assessment details, online history and payment history.
Other international customers can access the full range of services.

Customers do not need an online account to use the child support
estimator on the Services Australia website.

Automated Child Support information service - Interactive Voice Response (IVR)

The 131 107 Automated Child Support information service (IVR) phone line
allows customers to check details of their next payment and their
payment history.

To generate, reset or revoke an IVR PIN, see Related links for the (IVR)
Maintenance Cuba Process Help.

The Resources page contains a Services Australia website link to an
explanation for customers about the Automated Child Support information
service (IVR).
It also includes links to website and intranet digital support
information.

Contents

Child Support channel preferences, online letters and messages

Child Support Electronic Messaging (EM)

Related links

Access to Child Support self service - set up, checking and updates

IVR Maintenance Cuba Process Help

Online estimator options

Troubleshooting Child Support self service

Troubleshooting myGov

Using myGov accounts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
