
Medicare claims history and claims history statement online 133-10010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can view their Medicare claims
history online. They can do this using their Medicare online account or
the Express Plus Medicare mobile app.

Claims history

Customers can view the claims history or request a statement:

-   for themselves
-   for dependents under 14 years of age listed on the Medicare card

Due to privacy and security reasons, no service provider details display
for children under 14 years.

Due to legislation and agency policies, details for young people aged
14-17 years are not available online (including Medicare online account
and Express Plus Medicare mobile app).

My Health Record provides an option for a young person 14-17 years old
to access their Medicare claiming information. They can create and gain
control of their own My Health Record. Children can consent to having
claiming information in their record. How much information available
depends on whether the parents/guardians consented to include it before
the child turned 14:

-   did consent: the claiming information can include records from 2
    years prior to the My Health Record being created
-   did not consent: claiming information can only include 2 years prior
    from when the child consents.

Parents can also access this information if the child grants the
parents/guardians access. Following an amendment in December 2018 to the
My Health Records Act 2012, the My Health Record system automatically
removes parent/guardian access once the child turns 14 years.   However,
the child can grant and remove access at any time as mentioned above.

To access their claims history through Services Australia, customers
aged 14 -17 have two options:

-   Visit a service centre where COVID-19 restrictions allow
-   Submit a Request for Medicare claims information form (MS031). The
    Resources page contains a link to the MS031

See Release of claims information in Medicare.

Although the form states it can only be used for claims over 3 years, it
can also be used to release information about claims for 14-17 year olds
within 3 years.

The customer will receive their Medicare claiming information by post or
email.

The history includes events from the customer's previous and current
Medicare cards within the last 3 years. It does not include rejected or
adjusted claims. To view details for adjusted claims or claims older
than 3 years, the customer needs to request a Release of Information in
writing.

The claims history is not used for compensation. Customers will need to
complete the relevant form.

A customer may contact about incorrect or missing details in their
claims history.

Medicare claims history statements include:

Patient details

-   full name
-   Medicare card number
-   date of birth

Service details

-   date of service
-   item number and brief description
-   total cost of the service (amount charged by the provider)
-   benefit paid by the Australian Government
-   cost to claimant
-   payment method
-   reason codes and description

The Resources page contains links to information and support, relevant
forms and contact details.

Related links

Access to Medicare self service - set up, checking, cancelling and
enabling

Release of claims history in Medicare

Claims processing in Medicare

Troubleshooting Medicare self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
