
Escalating Provider Digital Access (PRODA) incidents, complaints and feedback 133-02130100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how staff are to escalate Provider Digital Access
(PRODA) complaints, feedback and incidents. It explains the protocols
for responding to Healthcare providers and administrators, and the
separate protocols for responding to National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS) providers.

PRODA staff portal access levels

There are different levels of access to the PRODA staff portal:

proda-view - view only

-   Tier 1 Service Officers

proda-amend - amend all accounts

-   For staff managing enquiries from Healthcare providers and
    administrators,
    Tier 1 identified Program Support Officer (PSO4) can complete basic
    updates
    Tier 2 ebusiness can complete more updates
-   For staff managing enquiries from NDIS providers, Tier 2 Service
    Officers

proda-admin - amend all accounts, retire accounts and approve an
unlinked change of name

-   Tier 3 PRODA Support

Healthcare providers and administrators

If the user's enquiry needs to be escalated:

-   Tier 1 Service Officer in Medicare Provider Branch to escalate to
    Tier 1 Program Support Officer (PSO4)
-   Tier 1 PSO4 to escalate to Tier 2 ebusiness
-   Tier 2 ebusiness Service Officer to escalate to Tier 2 eBusiness
    PSO4

If necessary, the PSO4 will escalate the issue to the Team Leader 5
(TL5). If a PSO4, TL5, TL6 or EL1 is unavailable and the enquiry is
urgent, escalate directly to Tier 3 PRODA Support.

NDIS providers

First check if the user's enquiry is for PRODA or NDIS Myplace. NDIS
Myplace complaints and feedback are to be referred back to the NDIS
Myplace customer enquiry line.

If the user's enquiry relates to PRODA and needs to be escalated:

-   Tier 1 Service Officer to escalate to Tier 2 Service Officer
-   If necessary, the Tier 2 Service Officer will escalate the issue to
    the Team Leader (TL5).

If a Tier 2 Service Officer, TL5, TL6 or EL1 is unavailable and the
enquiry requires urgent escalation, escalate directly to NDIS PRODA.

Escalation of incidents

For NDIS providers, first check if the user incident relates to PRODA or
NDIS Myplace. NDIS Myplace incidents are to be referred back to the NDIS
myPlace customer enquiry line.

Staff are to perform a security check before escalating a PRODA user
incident.

For PRODA users reporting:

-   privacy or security related incidents, escalate directly to Tier 3
    PRODA Support
-   other user incidents, the Subject Matter Expert (SME) will escalate
    if necessary to Tier 3 PRODA Support

If unsure how to manage the user incident, the Tier 1 Service Officer is
to communicate immediately with the SME or Team Leader 5.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for customers and
staff, and examples of escalating privacy, security and unauthorised
access incidents.

Related links

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
