
Advance payment options online 133-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer can access and use the Advance
payment options online. Customers can apply for a Family Tax Benefit
(FTB), Mobility Allowance (MOB) or social security entitlement advance
payment.

This procedure does not apply to Advance payments for Home Equity Access
Scheme loans.

Advance payment options

[] Eligible customers need to create a myGov account and link their
Centrelink online account to access the service. They can also access it
using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. This service is used to:

-   view advance payment details
-   apply for an advance payment
-   make a repayment (full or partial) on the outstanding balance of
    their advance payment
-   adjust repayments - increase or decrease (within limits) their
    fortnightly repayment amount
-   view repayments history
-   cease their regular FTB advance

The system will advise the customer if they are not eligible. It will
tell the customer:

-   why they are not eligible, and
-   if possible, the next date they may be eligible

Customers can also use phone self service to apply for an Advance
payment.

Access to apply for an advance

[] Encourage customers contacting to apply for an advance payment online
unless:

-   customer is not eligible
-   customer is not able to manage the transaction
-   self service platforms are unavailable or there is a known issue
    with the Manage advance payments (confirmed by Newsflash and Network
    News Bulletins (NNU))
-   customer declines the self service offer
-   troubleshooting is unable to rectify reason for self service drop
    out

Service Officers need to consider each customer's ability to self-manage
each transaction.

FTB customers do not need to have a current status (CUR) to access and
use the service. Customers whose FTB is cancelled can still use the
service for up to 28 days after cancellation.

Apply for an advance or view advances and advance history

Customers receiving a social security payment, MOB or FTB will see the
Manage advance payment option in their Centrelink online account.

The Advance Payments page will show:

-   current and previous advances
-   advance payment history
-   next possible advance date for each advance type
-   outstanding amount for current advances
-   amount repaid
-   final repayment date for each advance

Customers eligible to get more than one advance type must apply for each
advance payment separately.

Making advance repayments online

[] Customers receiving a current social security payment or FTB can
access the Make a payment option.

The Make a payment page shows the customer's current advances and the
outstanding balance for each advance.

Changes to regular repayments

[] Customers receiving an income support payment, MOB or FTB will see
the Adjust repayments option. This is available in the Manage advance
payments service. Customers can adjust their repayments or repay some or
their entire advance.

The customer is able to:

-   increase their repayment to a maximum of twice the minimum repayment
    amount
-   decrease to the minimum repayment amount (where the customer already
    increased the repayment amount)

The following payments are not eligible for this service:

-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advance
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA) advance
-   Special Employment Advance (SEA)

The whole advance will cancel if:

-   an FTB advance has been set up the same day (before payment strip)
    and
-   the 'discontinue' option is used

A message alerts a customer of this.

Eligible customers who cannot apply online

The following customers may be eligible to apply for an advance but
cannot apply online:

-   Customers under the age of 18 on the independent rate of Youth
    Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY. They must apply for an advance in person
    at a service centre unless they are rurally isolated
-   FTB customers under the age of 18 need to discuss their application
    for an FTB advance payment in person or over the phone
-   Customers on weekly payments unless they are rurally isolated
-   Customers with a nominee. Note: these 'second level' checks apply
    after the general eligibility checks
-   Customers applying for a Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advance,
    Farm Household Allowance advance or Special Employment Advance (SEA)

The service shows a message advising they must apply for an advance in
person or by phone.

Online help

Customers can access online help about this service by selecting the
question mark icon on any page of the service.

The Resources page contains links to Services Australia website and
Digital Support Products sub-site. There is also information on the
privacy notice and troubleshooting.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Using Centrelink self service

Using myGov accounts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
