
Online services for TFES claimants 133-17021500

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) Team only

This document outlines how to grant and update online access for
Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) claimants.

Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) access

All authorised claimant signatories on an eligible TFES claimant record
get CBOS access. A list of signatories are on the Registration and
Change of details form (TAS020).

A claimant must have registered users with access to CBOS before they
are able to view their claimant record online, or lodge any online
claims.

When to complete a Registration and Change of details form (TAS020)

A claimant completes a TAS020 when they:

-   first register to claim assistance with the TFES
-   need to update their claimant record. E.g. bank account, postal
    address
-   add new signatories (online users)
-   remove signatories and online access

Note: authorised online users can make updates to the record online,
however the TAS020 must also be completed and uploaded to the Claimant
Documents tab.

Requirements for CBOS registration

Each eligible claimant record has a unique business Customer Reference
Number (CRN) and CBOS organisation ID, specific to that organisation.

Each individual signatory from the business has that identifier in their
individual user ID.

Organisation and individual user status

When a claimant is no longer eligible to claim TFES assistance and will
not be claiming in the future, remove the organisation from CBOS. This
also removes access for any individual users.

Individual users who:

-   are no longer employed by the business must be removed as a
    signatory and have their online access removed
-   do not need access for a temporary period, e.g. long service leave,
    can have their role removed, but the User ID should remain for
    future use.

CBOS password

CBOS passwords have strict password requirements to be valid:

They must:

-   contain a minimum of five characters and a maximum of 8 characters
-   include at least one letter (a-z, A-Z) and one number (0-9)

They cannot be reused for eight generations

A minimum of 24 hours must elapse between the time changing the password
and any subsequent changes

Users need to change their password when it expires. Passwords expire
after 90 days

Passwords are not case sensitive

Passwords may contain the following special characters, !, @, #, $, %,
^, &, *

A temporary password is given to new users or users that have their
account re-activated. The user chooses a new password the next time they
login. Temporary passwords do not expire until used.

CBOS user passwords may have one of four statuses:

-   Active
-   Expired
-   Suspended, or
-   Locked.

The Resources page contains contact details, links to forms and various
websites with TFES information.

Related links

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES)

TFES claim types

Register a TFES claimant

Update TFES claimant information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
