
View/update overseas travel online 133-04150030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assist customers to report details about
their overseas travel online. Some customers can see and make certain
updates to their current and future overseas travel online

Advising intention to travel overseas

Customers who receive a Centrelink payment or service can use their
Centrelink online account to advise of travel details.

Where a customer contacts the agency directly, see Coding departures and
returns for customers leaving Australia. This includes when the customer
does not need to advise the agency. For example, an Age Pension customer
leaving Australia temporarily for less than 6 weeks.

Encourage the customer to use their Centrelink online account to advise
of future travel.

Access to the 'Travelling outside of Australia' service online

To use this service, customers must:

-   be current on a payment or card (includes suspended customers), and
-   create a myGov account that is linked to Centrelink

Individual correspondence nominees can access the service on behalf of
their principal. Staff are unable to view the service in Customer Online
View.

Viewing, updating and adding new overseas travel details

Customers can:

-   view current and future overseas travel details already recorded
-   add new details for future overseas travel including for their
    partner or dependants if travelling together
-   update future overseas travel details
-   remove future overseas travel details
-   update certain travel details while overseas

Advice to customers after providing information

Using the customer's circumstances and the answers provided about their
future travel, the online service will:

-   complete a full portability assessment. Customers will see the
    outcome and they do not need to contact
-   provide preliminary portability advice. Customers will need to
    contact to discuss their situation
-   advise the service is not able to complete a portability assessment.
    Customers must contact the agency

In most cases, the customers will see the effect on their payment. They
will also see any recommended action they should take before departure.

If the service is able to complete a portability assessment, it will:

-   update the customer's record directly with details of their
    departure
-   create a DOC

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia and myGov
websites, the Digital Support Products sub-site and system messages.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Portability of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
