
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how eligible families can claim the annual SIFS
online. Customers can claim SIFS for any period in the assessment year
they were not eligible for Family Tax Benefit (FTB). Customers who do
not want to claim FTB can claim SIFS. For eligible FTB customers, SIFS
is payable with FTB.

Contact about claiming

SIFS claims are assessed against circumstances for the assessment year
(2012-13 onwards). Families have until 30 June each year to lodge their
SIFS claim for the previous financial year. For example, by 30 June 2019
for the 2017-18 financial year. Note: from 1 July 2017, SIFS is not
payable to new customers (through FTB instalment reconciliation, FTB
lump sum claims or SIFS standalone claims) for the 2017-18 and later
financial years. Grandfathering provisions for SIFS apply for existing
families.

Claiming SIFS

Online

[] Customers with a Centrelink online account can claim SIFS online.

Customers:

need to answer questions relevant to their circumstances

can save their responses and continue with their claim at a later time
(incomplete online claims expire if not submitted within 13 weeks of
being started)

can submit an online claim after:

-   answering all mandatory questions
-   accepting a declaration
-   uploading the required documents

Customers can check the progress of their completed claim through:

-   their Centrelink online account, or
-   the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers can voluntarily withdraw or cancel their claim within 14 days
of submitting it.

ACC

Staff must complete Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for customers who
contact and are unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim.
Collect the information to submit their SIFS claim. Advise the customer
of any documents they may need to provide to finalise their claim.

The online claim process helps to ensure customers submit complete and
accurate claims. Customers can submit a claim after:

-   they answer all mandatory questions
-   accept a declaration

SIFS online claims for the 2017-18 and later financial years

From the 2017-18 financial year onwards, grandfathering provisions are
in place for eligible families. These customers are assessed for SIFS
(at a rate greater than nil) in respect of 30 June 2017. To keep their
SIFS grandfathering status, these families must maintain continuous
eligibility to SIFS payments from 1 July 2017. The grandfathering status
will reassess when:

-   a customer undergoes FTB reconciliation
-   their lump sum claim is assessed, or
-   their SIFS standalone claim is assessed

[] Customers who do not receive FTB for the full financial year must use
the stand-alone SIFS online claim to apply for SIFS.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
Digital Support Products sub-site.

Related links

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Initial contact by customers claiming Single Income Family Supplement
(SIFS)

Processing Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) claims

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

How users create a myGov account and link services

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Using myGov accounts

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
