
Search for a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account and conduct security check 133-02130060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to search for an account in the PRODA system
and then conduct a security check for a person calling Services
Australia in relation to that account.

Searching for a PRODA account

Use an Account search or a Demographic search.

-   For an Account search, ask the caller for the Username or
    Registration Authority (RA) number for their account. These details
    are in the 'PRODA account created' system email sent to the user
    when creating the account. Using an Account search will return a
    unique match
-   For a Demographic search, ask the caller for their first name and
    surname. If the search does not return a unique match, also ask for
    and enter their date of birth or gender

If unable to find the PRODA account, it may have been archived. As a
security process, the system archives an incomplete or pending account
that has not been accessed for 60 days. An archived account would be
listed on the PRODA Clean-up report.

Security check

When a unique match to a PRODA account is found, the caller will need to
give the correct answer to 1 of the 3 security questions set up by the
account holder when creating the account.

The caller will have 1 correct answer attempt for each of the 3
questions.

After providing a correct answer, if the account holder asks to pass the
call to someone else to speak on their behalf, the Service Officer can
accept to speak to that person if the account holder gives their
expressed consent.

As a security protocol, the system suspends the PRODA account if an
incorrect answer is entered for each of the 3 security questions. To
establish the caller is the account holder or to unsuspend an account,
complete the unsuspend account security check.

The Resources page contains information about PRODA error messages
relating to security questions.

Related links

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Helping users create a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Helping users self-manage their Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Processing the Manual identity verification for Provider Digital Access
(HW080) form

Evidence of Identity documents for Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Managing a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Managing account status and displaying records for Provider Digital
Access (PRODA) accounts

View history of changes and access for a Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
record

Escalating Provider Digital Access (PRODA) incidents, complaints and
feedback

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
