
Employment income options online 133-04180030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines options for customers using their Centrelink
online account. They can advise a change to their employment status and
check when they need to report, their reporting history and their
working, credit, income bank or work bonus balances. Principal carer
customers can also provide a reason if they are unable to meet their
mutual obligation requirements.

On this Page:

Commenced work

Customers with a notification or statement reporting requirement can use
the Report employment income (REI) service to confirm and report Single
Touch Payroll (STP) employment details. In some cases, the STP data may
have already changed a notification reporter to a statement reporter.

Customers with a notification reporting requirement can also use the
Report employment income (REI) service to report non-STP employment
income if they:

have been paid employment income in the last 2 weeks, and

get one of these payments:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   Austudy
-   Youth Allowance (student)
-   Age pension
-   Age pension (Blind) with Rent Assistance
-   Parenting Payment (single or partnered)
-   Carer Payment

When employment income is submitted by the REI service, the customer,
and in some cases their partner, are placed on a 2 weekly statement
reporting requirement.

Eligible customers can also update their partner's reporting
requirements when permission to enquire is confirmed.

Note: this service cannot be used if the partner is receiving one of the
following income support payments:

-   Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension (DSP) (Blind)
    without Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Stopped work

Customers who have current STP employment details can confirm they’ve
stopped work in the REI service when an STP employer advises of
cessation details.

The customer and their partner (if applicable) will revert to a
notification reporter two entitlement periods after they have confirmed
they have ceased work:

-   when they do not have any other employment income, and
-   do not have mutual obligation or participation requirements.

Customers who had been placed onto reporting due to non-STP employment
income will be changed back to a notification reporter when there are no
longer 2 instances of employment income in the last 6 entitlement
periods.

Next reporting periods

Customers who need to report can view:

-   their reporting periods for the next 12 weeks
-   the day and date they need to report for each of those reporting
    periods
-   dates of any changes to reporting periods due to holiday processing
    arrangements

Customers who report fortnightly can view up to 6 of their next
reporting dates and reporting periods. The next reporting periods are
updated in real time and always display all reports for the next 12
weeks.

Customers who need to report but are not eligible to report online can
still view their next reporting dates. Notification customers who cannot
report will not be able to see any reporting dates.

View and update employment income

Statement and notification reporting customers can update their
employment income details online. They can do this through their
Centrelink online account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. All
statement reporting customers and some notification reporting customers
can use the Report employment income service to do this.

Statement and eligible notification reporting customers can:

-   edit existing employment details. This includes hours, amount or
    frequency
-   delete existing employment income (does not apply to notification
    reporters)
-   add new employment income

They can do this for up to 6 of their past submitted reports. They can
also view and edit their partner's employment income if they have
permission to enquire. Note: confirmed Single Touch Payroll (STP)
employment income cannot be updated using this service.

The employment income for each fortnight may show as one-off or
continuing.

A message shows if the customer did not report any details for that
fortnight.

Customers who stop working, or pension customers who need to update
their monthly income, must contact Services Australia to report this.

For notification reporting customers, go to Reporting employment income
online.

Balances

Customers can also view the current balance and history of their:

-   Working Credit, for job seekers
-   Income Bank, for students and apprentices
-   Work Bonus, for pensioners of Age Pension age

Principal carer customers unable to meet mutual obligation requirements

Eligible principal carers not able to meet their mutual obligation
requirements can advise of a reasonable excuse. If none of the listed
reasons applies, they can select Other and enter a reason. If they
select Other, they are advised to contact Services Australia.

-   to be assessed for an exemption, and
-   have their report completed

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Using Centrelink self service

Reporting employment income online

View Work Bonus balance online

Income and assets options online

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Reporting requirements for students and Australian Apprentices

Working Credit

Income Bank

Work Bonus

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
