
Self service for nominees 133-02080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how nominees can use Centrelink self service on
behalf of customers they are a nominee for ('principals').

Customer and nominee registration

Different online registration processes apply for organisation nominees.

Nominees can access a range of online account options. Services
available depend on the type of nominee arrangement. For example,
Correspondence Nominees (NOC) can undertake different business to
Payment Nominees (NOP). The Resources page lists services available to
nominees.

Nominees acting on behalf of their principals cannot:

-   record a voiceprint for their principals
-   use phone self service
-   use the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

The Process page contains information for nominees of customers who may
lack sufficient understanding of their medical condition.

Registering individual nominees for self service

Service Officers can use Access Management for Self Service (AMSS) to
check a nominee's current registration status.

If the nominee:

does not have access to their own Centrelink online account and they
want to use online services, they must:

-   register online, or
-   speak to a Service Officer who can register them via the Access
    Management for Self Services (AMSS) screen

has access to their own Centrelink online account, they must register
separately for nominee online services when they start a nominee
relationship

Nominee organisations and online services

Organisation nominees can use Nominee Services in Business Hub to
conduct business online on behalf of their principals.

Nominee updates available online

Nominees who have an online account can:

-   view and update information for principals. See the Resources page
    for services available to a nominee
-   submit an online claim for principals they are a correspondence
    nominee for. The Process page contains a list of the income support
    payments and concession cards
-   view current nominee arrangements
-   view pending nominee arrangements
-   accept/decline nominee arrangements

Notes:

-   Nominees cannot cancel a nominee arrangement through their online
    account. Nominees must cancel an arrangement in writing
-   Offer an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to a correspondence nominee
    for Centrelink payments and concession cards not available to claim
    online. The Process page lists the Centrelink payments and
    concession cards a nominee can apply for on behalf of their
    principal
-   If they decline an ACC, or it is not available, issue a paper-based
    claim form

Correspondence nominee organisations can submit online claims for Age
Pension, Pension Bonus Scheme, Aged Care and Disability Support Pension
(DSP) on behalf of their principal.

Letters online

Nominee individuals who register to receive letters online, will receive
mail and publications for themselves and their principal. The principal
does not need to register for letters online. The letters will be
available in the nominee's myGov Inbox, along with their own mail.

Nominee organisations can receive their principal’s mail and their own
mail via Letters in Business Hub.

Progress of claim electronic notifications will go to the principal, not
the nominee.

myGov accounts

Individual online nominee access

Nominees can access their principal's details through their myGov linked
Centrelink online account, where the nominee:

-   has an online account and
-   there is a nominee relationship

Nominees cannot link their myGov account to their principal's Centrelink
online account. They can only link their principal's account to their
own Centrelink online account. Nominees can then access their
principal's details by selecting the option to act for them.

The Resources page contains information on which services are available
online, to each type of nominee, via a principal's record.

Related links

Nominees

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Access Management for Self Service (AMSS) - Staff-assisted access for
phone self service and nominees online

Online services for organisation nominees

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

myGov Inbox

Self Service Index

Aged care request for a nominee

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
