
Cancel or withdraw an online claim 133-03010130

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help a customer cancel a started or
withdraw a submitted online claim. Customers can use their Centrelink
online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Cancel or withdraw online claim

[] To cancel or withdraw their online claim, customers must access My
online claims page in their Centrelink online account.

The Express Plus Centrelink mobile app can be used to cancel or withdraw
claims that use the Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM). Customers can
access My Claims from the menu on the landing page.

A correspondence nominee can cancel or withdraw an online claim on
behalf of their principal for some Centrelink payments.

Cancel claim

This option is available for started claims that are not yet submitted
(incomplete status). The claim will be accessible in the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app when:

-   the customer has reviewed their claim
-   accepted the declaration, and
-   moved to the Next steps page from within the online claim

If an online claim is cancelled, the customer or correspondence nominee
will:

-   no longer be able to view the claim details, or
-   continue with the claim

Claim information will not store or transfer to the customer's
Centrelink record. There is no DOC created when the customer cancels an
unsubmitted claim.

Withdraw claim

-   For all SAP online claims, this option is available for a submitted
    claim until it has been finalised
-   For legacy online claims, this option is available if the submit
    date was within the past 14 days. If the submit date is more than 14
    days, the customer must contact to withdraw their claim

When a customer withdraws a claim, they cannot:

-   reinstate it
-   appeal the decision

If the customer wishes to apply for a payment, they must make a new
claim. The claim activity on their Centrelink record will cancel and:

-   a DOC created, or
-   an ACTDOC created for Manual Follow-up (MFU)

Staff can withdraw a claim on behalf of a customer.

The Resources page contains the text of the online warning when a
customer withdraws or cancels their claim online.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Withdrawal of claims

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Upload documents service

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
