
Reporting employment income online 133-04180000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers report employment income
and participation details online. They can do this using their
Centrelink online account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Report employment income

This service allows customers to:

confirm, reject or match a pre-filled Single Touch Payroll (STP)
employer name and Australian Business Number (ABN) or Withholding Payer
Number (WPN)

check, confirm or change pre-filled STP employment income data

report details of their (and their partner's) non-STP employment income
in their reporting period. Note: this does not include self-employment
income (go to Resources page)

answer questions about their mutual obligation requirements or
participation requirements (Centrelink managed customers only)

report changes to their employment income (Note: customer must contact
Services Australia to make changes to confirmed STP income and provide
evidence of the change)

advise if they are unable to meet their mutual obligation requirements
(principal carer customers only)

confirm they have stopped work with an STP employer

use the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to report employment income
in the following languages:

-   Arabic
-   English
-   Chinese Simplified
-   Persian (Farsi)
-   Vietnamese

When they report they will get a receipt number and the outcome:

-   next payment amount and date of deposit
-   partner's next payment, if they get a payment from Services
    Australia and they have given the customer permission to see this
    information
-   working credit balance, income bank balance or work bonus balance
-   next reporting date
-   summary of the details they reported

Principal carer customers unable to meet mutual obligation requirements

Eligible principal carers not able to meet their mutual obligation
requirements can advise of a reasonable excuse. If none of the listed
reasons apply to the customer, they can select Other and enter a reason.
They will be advised to contact the agency to be assessed for an
exemption and have their report completed.

When a customer reports using self service, they will no longer get SU19
forms.

Staff can view the information reported on the Online Interaction
Summary screen.

Eligibility

Customers need to have access to self service. They need a Centrelink
online account linked to myGov to use the service in Centrelink online
accounts and the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Before assisted reporting is completed, genuine attempts must be made to
transition customers to report via self service options, unless an
Exception applies.

If the customer is not eligible, they will need to call or go to a
service centre to discuss their reporting options. The Process page
lists ineligible reasons.

Statement and notification reporting customers can view and update their
employment income details for up to 6 of their past submitted reports
online using the Report employment income service. Note: customers are
not able to update confirmed STP income in previous reporting periods
using self service. They must contact the agency to provide evidence of
the change.

View and update employment income

Statement and notification reporting customers can view and update their
employment income details for up to 6 of their past submitted reports
online using the Report employment income service. They can do this
through their Centrelink online account or the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app. Note: confirmed Single Touch Payroll (STP) employment income
cannot be updated using this service.

Notification reporting customers can also use the Report employment
income service if they:

-   are not currently a statement reporting customer
-   are reporting income from employment

This income does not include:

-   income from employment paid under the Supported Wage System (SWS)
-   income from employment with a Disability Employment Service (DES)
    provider
-   income received for professional sporting activity
-   employment income assigned to a third party

They can:

-   add a new employer
-   edit existing recorded employer details, including hours, amount or
    frequency (except pension customers who are paid monthly)

Customers ceasing employment or pension customers who need to update
their monthly income must contact Services Australia to report this.

The Resources page contains links to online guides and support, and
frequently asked questions about reporting online.

Related links

Employment income options online

Income and assets options online

View Work Bonus balance online

Reporting using phone self service

Reporting Employment Income self service troubleshooting

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Reporting statements for job seekers

Lodgement and processing arrangements for Reporting Statements when self
service reporting is unavailable

Reporting requirements for students and Australian Apprentices

Restricted Access and eligibility

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Interaction Records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
