
Using Centrelink self service 133-19061415

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines self service options for Centrelink customers.

Online account and Express Plus mobile app

This is the easiest way to manage claims, update details, upload
documents, report income and get reminders.

Customers can use their Centrelink online account or the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app to do a wide range of Centrelink transactions.

The Express Plus Centrelink mobile app includes the ability to report
employment income in English, Arabic, Chinese Simplified, Persian
(Farsi) and Vietnamese.

Nominees can use their online account to act on behalf of a customer.

Nominees cannot access the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app on behalf
of a customer. They can select Nominee access from the More menu in the
app, which will securely redirect them to their Centrelink online
account on their mobile internet browser.

Customers do not need an online account to use some services on the
Services Australia website. These include Payment and Service Finder and
the Compensation estimator.

Phone self service

Customers can view and update details through a service that uses speech
recognition technology.

There are a range of services available using the phone self service
line 136 240.

Eligible customers can report using the phone self service reporting
line 133 276.

Nominees cannot use phone self service to act on behalf of a customer.

The Phone self service tab on the Process page provides a summary of
phone self service options.

The Resources page has links to support customers and staff.

Contents

Advance payment options online

Advising future study intentions using phone self service option

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Business and organisation search tools

Cancel my current payment online

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Check independence through work history online

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Deductions options online

Deduction Statement

Documents and Statements option online

Employment income options online

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Income and assets options online

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

Manage study details option online

Money you owe option online

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

Online estimator options

Payment and Service Finder

Payment details options online

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) authority

Reporting employment income online

Reporting using phone self service

Update address, accommodation or contact details online

Upload documents service

Urgent payment requests using self service

View Work Bonus balance online

View/Update Absence From Care online

View/Update overseas travel online

Voiceprints for phone self service

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Digital Assistants

Services Australia website

Self service for nominees

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting myGov

Using myGov accounts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
