
Provider numbers issued via Health Professional Online Services 133-02050050

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about provider numbers issued via the
Health Professional Online Services (HPOS).

Eligibility requirements for HPOS functionality

To access the ‘Create a new provider location service through HPOS’,
providers must have a current:

-   PRODA account with identifiers linked for HPOS provider level access
-   eligible specialty code at the time of processing the new practice
    location

Note: if a provider has a current specialty code 510 they are ineligible
to create a new provider location via HPOS, see Specialty code 510.

There are also system checks done to ensure there are no other
restrictions that would prohibit a provider from creating a new provider
location via HPOS. For example, overseas trained doctors.

Medical practitioners

Eligible medical practitioners fall into one of the following
categories:

-   registered prior to 1 November 1996, has a current specialty code
    104 and has had an Eligible provider record update on their provider
    record on or after 18 October 2001
-   were subject to section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973 but
    have completed their 10 year moratorium requirements and have
    postgraduate qualifications as indicated by an Eligible specialty
    code
-   Australian citizens or permanent residents first registered on or
    after 1 November 1996 with postgraduate qualifications as indicated
    by an Eligible specialty code
-   overseas trained doctors or former overseas medical students who had
    medical registration in Australia prior to 1 January 1997, and who
    are not subject to section 19AB who have a current specialty code
    198, or who have postgraduate qualifications indicated by an
    Eligible specialty code

Eligible provider record update

The level of access to HPOS functionality is determined by the
information held within the Provider Directory System record.

If the provider record has been updated on or after 18 October 2001,
HPOS assumes that an assessment has been made of the provider’s status
as an Australian citizen or permanent resident when they gained full
registration with an Australian state or territory medical registration
board prior to 1 November 1996.

If the provider record has not had an eligible update on or after 18
October 2001, HPOS assumes that an assessment of the provider’s status
has not been performed. Therefore, the provider is not eligible to add a
new practice location via HPOS until their residency status is confirmed
and an update made to their provider record.

Eligible provider record updates for assessment of providers registered
prior to 1 November 1996 (current specialty code 104) are:

-   allocation of a new practice location
-   add or modify a specialty code at stem or location level
-   any registration update
-   update registration comments
-   allocation of a prescriber number
-   update place of base qualification
-   update year of base qualifications

Eligible specialty codes

Eligible specialty codes that identify a medical practitioner with
postgraduate qualifications for the allocation of a new provider
location via HPOS are:

-   1 to 99
-   130
-   132
-   532

Other eligible providers

Dental practitioners, allied health professionals and optometrists (with
specialty code 550) are eligible to create a new provider location via
HPOS if they have current registration in the state or territory in
which they are adding the location, and do not have a current specialty
code 510.

The exception is when an audiologist is also an allied health provider.
New locations for these providers can only be added to their allied
health stem.

Ahpra Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioners
registered as an Allied Health Professional with specialty code 634 may
access the Closing the Gap PBS Co-payment register via HPOS if they are
registered as a Medicare Provider.

Note: AHS-Accredited Office of Hearing Services audiologists are
ineligible to create a new provider location online.

Specialty code 510 (new location creation restricted in HPOS)

Specialty code 510 (new location creation restricted in HPOS) has been
created to identify providers who need to be denied access to the HPOS
‘Create a new provider location’ function, but whose registration and
specialty code details normally meet the eligibility criteria. This
specialty code is added to relevant provider records by Medicare
Providers Branch staff.

For example, providers whose access to Medicare benefits is restricted
under the Professional Services Review (PSR) Scheme or providers whose
discipline is restricted to accessing Medicare benefits at certain
locations only (such as nurse practitioners and midwives).

Enquiries from providers who have attempted to access the HPOS ‘Create a
new provider location’ function and are ineligible should be directed to
Medicare Provider Eligibility, Services Australia Canberra by email:
CO.Medicare.Provider.Eligibility.

Create a new provider location via HPOS

Claims for HPOS new provider locations

Providers should wait two business days after successfully creating a
new provider location via HPOS before submitting any claims. Claims
submitted before this timeframe may be rejected due to system
constraints.

New provider stems

New locations added via HPOS may create a new provider stem, for
example, 32nd location. In these cases the message ‘Please contact
Medicare on 1800 700 199 in order to link the stem number to your PRODA
account’ is displayed to the provider.

Add a new location screen

The HPOS ‘Create a new provider location screen consists of 4 tabs:

-   Address tab
-   Contact tab
-   Organisation Details tab
-   Banking Details tab

All fields on the tabs are closely aligned to PDS intranet screens, with
the exception of the Address tab entries:

-   Building field, is called Practice name/Building field
-   Property field, is called Property/Department field

These have been changed to match the field description on the
application forms.

Capturing Organisation details

On 1 July 2018, under the Continuing Improvement of Medicare
Compliance - capturing of additional data 2017-18 Budget Measure, the
Agency requests that business structure information be provided from
health professionals, when they are applying for an initial, subsequent
or are re-opening Medicare provider/location numbers. Business structure
information includes details of the organisation of whom the health
professional is employed by, and the recipient of the Medicare benefit
for a particular location. The health professional is asked to complete
a series of questions relating to the organisation that is recorded in
HPOS and the Provider Directory System (PDS) against each active
Medicare provider/location number.

Business structure information are the details of the organisation of
whom the health professional is employed by and the recipient of the
Medicare benefit for a particular location. The health professional will
be asked to complete a series of questions relating to the organisation
that will be recorded in HPOS and the Provider Directory System (PDS)
against each active Medicare provider/location number.

Under the Health Insurance Act 1973 the individual health professional
is accountable for accurately billing Medicare services against their
Medicare provider number unless evidence to the contrary is provided.
However with the changing health industry and corporatisation of medical
practices, it is recognised that administrative functions such as
Medicare billing is being undertaken by the Practice Manager and/or
driven by the business entity.

Add an organisation

Health professionals who wish to claim a Medicare benefits will be asked
to provide the following information. This information should be related
to the business or person of whom is the recipient of the Medicare
benefit from the location where the service are rendered.

-   Employment type
-   Australian Business Number (ABN)
-   Australian Company Number (ACN)
-   Registered business name
-   Trading as
-   Business type
-   Premises type

Addressing rules and edit checks

The Resources page details the additional addressing rules that apply
for new locations submitted via HPOS.

New location confirmation to providers

On completion of a ‘create a new provider location’ a successful message
is displayed to the provider.

Note: as the confirmation message is not accessible again once the page
is closed, the provider can view their confirmation in their Mail
Centre - My mailbox.

The following information is displayed on the new location confirmation
screen:

The message:

-   The location has been successfully added. You can view and print the
    details of this new location at any time by using the view location
    facility. In order to add banking details to the new practice
    location you are required to complete a form located in the forms
    section of the Health Professional Online Services.

A letter to the provider detailing the:

-   Provider number allocated
-   Address of new location
-   Effective date of provider number
-   Additional information regarding claims, Medicare services, change
    of address, online claiming and the Practice Incentive Program.

Weekly new practice location reports via HPOS

Weekly reports containing details of practice locations allocated via
HPOS are distributed to Provider Eligibility sections in each state.

The report includes the:

-   providers name
-   provider number that has been allocated
-   address of the new practice location
-   start date of the new practice location.

The listing of new practice locations must be checked to ensure that
only eligible providers have allocated a new practice location and
ensure addresses are complete.

If errors in new practice locations are found, forward to
CO.Medicare.Provider.Eligibility.

The Resources page contains the additional addressing rules that apply
for new locations submitted via HPOS and a link to the HPOS logon screen
on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
