
Online estimator options 133-04120000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to estimate or compare payments a customer
may be eligible for based on their circumstances. Customers and staff
can use these online tools.

Online estimators

Customers and staff can use the estimators on the Services Australia
Website. An online account is not required.

Service Officers can also access the estimators in Customer First.
Select them from the Online estimators page.

-   Payment and Service Finder - estimate and compare entitlement to
    Centrelink payments, Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child care fee
    assistance
-   Compensation - check the effect compensation will have on a
    customer's Centrelink payment
-   Child support estimator - estimate the amount of child support to
    pay or receive
-   Child support care estimator - estimate the percentage of care for
    each child. Use the percentage to work out the amount of child
    support to pay or receive

The Resources page contains links to the online estimators on the
Services Australia Website.

Disclaimer

A disclaimer displays when using the estimators.

'The results provided in this service are indicative only and are not a
guarantee of payments.

The service does not take into account all of your circumstances and
should be used as a guide only.'

To receive payments, customers need to make a claim and advise their
full circumstances.

To estimate how much tax they might need to pay, customers should go to
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) website.

The Resources page contains links to the online estimators on the
Services Australia Website. It also has a link to the taxation estimate
information on the Australian Tax Office (ATO) website.

Related links

Payment and Service Finder

Using Centrelink self service

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Financial suitability test for suitable work for principal carers

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Payment rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
