
Upload documents service 133-04060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can upload forms and documents
online. This saves customers from having to bring requested documents to
the office. It also reduces processing times.

Separating safely

If the customer is using the Upload documents service due to a
relationship separation, they should consider what updates they need to
make to keep their personal information safe. The order in which the
customer updates their personal details is important and each update
needs to be completed separately with Centrelink, Medicare and Child
Support. See Separating Safely - Protecting personal details.

Access the service

To upload documents, customers need to:

-   create a myGov account and link to Centrelink
-   access their Centrelink online account through myGov or the Express
    Plus Centrelink mobile app

Eligible Centrelink customers can use the service to upload copies of
documents using their:

-   desktop computer
-   smart phone, or
-   other device with internet access

The document should link to the relevant activity on a customer's
record. Where the image does not link to the activity, the system
creates an Image Notification Activity ('SCN' activity) for action.

There are some scannable document exceptions. Staff are not to use these
documents for processing if the customer submits them using the Upload
documents service.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website and the
Digital Support Products sub-site.

Related links

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Locating digital images via Document Tools in Customer First

Digital image attached to incorrect Centrelink customer record

Requesting deletion of a digital image from Centrelink customer records

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
