
Evidence of Identity documents for Provider Digital Access (PRODA) 133-17042600

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Evidence of Identity documents required to
verify the identity of an individual for a Provider Digital Access
(PRODA) account when a Manual Identity Verification Provider Digital
Access (HW080) form has been submitted.

On this Page:

Coding of identity documents

Identity documents can only be coded by a Service Officer when the user
has submitted a HW080 form with the identity documents attached. Under
no circumstances is a Service Officer to code Evidence of Identity
documents over the telephone. The user must be directed to the HW080
form if they want Services Australia to process their Evidence of
Identity on their behalf.

Coding PRODA Evidence of Identity accepted with the HW080 form

If a name is spelt incorrectly/differently on the document do not code
it, ask the user to provide either a different document with the correct
spelling or have the document corrected with the issuing agency and
return it once it is correct. If the user is unable to provide another
document and is unable to have the document corrected, escalate to Tier
3 and advise users name either spelt incorrectly/differently on the
Evidence of Identity document (this includes given names spelt different
to the given name on the PRODA account).

Note: when escalating the HW080 form, ensure escalations to Tier 3
include the form and all Evidence of Identity documents provided by the
user. If the user has previously submitted the HW080 form and then only
provided additional Evidence of Identity, the previous form submitted
will be acceptable (there is no need to ask the user to submit the form
again).

Coding PRODA change of name with the HW080 form

If the users name differs across the documents due to a change of name,
a change of name certificate or an official marriage certificate is
required to verify the link between the different names. If a change of
name document cannot be provided, Service Officers are to follow the
escalation process.

Currently the system only caters for a female using a marriage
certificate through the PRODA Document Verification Service (DVS) for a
change of name. If an account holder is male and provides a marriage
certificate to verify a change of name, do not enter it into PRODA -
escalate to Tier 3 for investigation, see Help for staff Provider
Digital Access (PRODA).

Processes and documents accepted by Tier 3 only

If a document does not exist in the list of Evidence of Identity
documents and the user is unable to provide any further documents,
escalate the application to Tier 3 for investigation.

The Resources page contains contact details, a table of acceptable
Evidence of Identity documents for Provider Digital Access (PRODA),
tables of match requirements, Tier 3 escalation details and links to
Department of Home Affairs website.

Related links

Processing the Manual identity verification for Provider Digital Access
(HW080) form

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
