
Digital health and aged care channels upgrade to web services 133-21042119

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document has information about the Adaptors to Web Services (A2WS)
project. It includes issues health professionals may have when
submitting claims and data.

Adaptors to Web Services project

Health professionals use software with 2 types of technology that
securely transmit claims and information to Services Australia:

-   Client adaptors and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
-   Web services and Provider Digital Access (PRODA) Organisation
    accounts

Client adaptors and PKI are being phased out as the technology is not as
secure as web services.

Health professionals who:

use software to submit claims and data to the agency will need:

-   web service compatible software (patient administration system or
    practice management software), and
-   PRODA

have not had their software upgraded may need to use other channels to
submit claims and data

Health professional are not impacted by this upgrade if they:

-   do not use software, and
-   use other channels to submit claims and data to the agency

For more details, see the Resources page for a link to 'Web Services for
digital health and aged care channels' on the Services Australia
website.

See also How health professionals will be affected.

Claiming channels using web services

The following channels use web services:

-   Medicare Online, including Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
    and Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
-   Electronic Claim Lodgement and Information Processing Service
    Environment (ECLIPSE)
-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Online
-   Aged Care Online

Cut-off dates

Cut-off dates for each channel depends on the impact to the delivery of
health care.

A health professional's software will need to use web services and PRODA
to submit claims and data through Medicare Online from 4 October 2022 or
earlier if asked by their developer.

Health professionals who use adaptor technology for Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) and ECLIPSE are not impacted by this date at this
stage.

See also How health professionals will be affected.

How health professionals will be affected

Services Australia has given health professionals information about the
move to web services and PRODA and the cut off dates.

Only health professionals that have not upgraded their software to web
services and PRODA will be impacted.

From 4 October 2022, health professionals who rely on adaptor technology
will not be able to use Medicare Online to submit claims and data. They
will need to upgrade their software to web services and PRODA or use
other claiming channels. Targeted emails have been sent to health
professionals about this.

Other claiming channels are not impacted by this date at this stage.

See the Process page for help to answer enquiries from health
professionals.

How customers will be affected

Customers will only be affected if their health professional does not
have upgraded software.

The health professional may ask customers to submit their own Medicare
claims. This can be done:

-   online
-   by mail, or
-   at a service centre

See the Resources page for a link to Medicare self service on the
Services Australia website to help with customer enquiries.

What health professionals need to do

Health professionals need to make sure they:

-   have web services compatible software
-   register their organisation in PRODA and link their Minor ID to the
    PRODA account
-   link their organisation’s PRODA account to a channel (known as a
    ‘health service provider’)

Health professionals should contact their software developer to make
sure their software is upgraded and using web services and PRODA.

If they do not have a software developer, or would like a new one, they
can see 'How to find a software developer' on the Services Australia
website. See the Resources page for a link.

See the Process page for help to answer enquiries, including linking to
a health services provider and setting up a Business to Business (B2B)
device.

Escalating enquiries

Information and support is available to help telephony staff answer A2WS
enquiries.

See the Process page for help to answer enquiries from:

-   health professionals
-   software developers
-   the public

Other claiming channels

Other claiming channels for Medicare Online include HPOS.

Health professionals can also ask patients to submit their own claims
through Medicare.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the Business Continuity Web Services Escalation form
-   contact details
-   Services Australia website and external websites
-   forms

Related links

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Software vendors and Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)

Online claiming registration process for aged care providers

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) self service

Escalating organisation Provider Linking System (PLS) incidences,
complaints and feedback

Helping users self-manage their Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
