
Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) 133-02160000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to use CCM to support a customer's online
claim.

CCM purpose

CCM reduces the need for customers to contact Services Australia. It
gives information about the progress of their online claim.

CCM:

-   shows an online tracker to show a claim's progress
-   shows the estimated completion date of a claim
-   gives online messages about a claim's progress after it is submitted
-   sends SMS and email messages to customers about a claim's progress
    after it is submitted
-   if required, sends requests for more information through SMS and
    email after a claim is submitted

Claims using CCM

Claims using CCM allow customers to use their Centrelink online account
or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to:

-   give all required information before submitting their claim
-   submit or cancel their online claims
-   view and action tasks relating to their claim
-   withdraw a submitted claim
-   book their new claim or Unreasonable To Live At Home (UTLAH)
    appointment
-   submit claims without all supporting documents when they meet the
    exception criteria

Customers must complete all online claim steps and Required tasks unless
an exception applies. This will allow the customer to submit their
claim.

Customers will get online messaging telling them to submit their claim
as soon as possible. This will make sure payments start from the
earliest possible date.

Customers have 13 weeks from the claim start date to submit it. If the
customer does not submit their claim during this time, it will expire.
The Process page contains more details about claims that expire.

The following claims (submitted online or through Assisted Customer
Claim) use CCM:

-   ABSTUDY Apprentices (Living Allowance and Incidentals)
-   ABSTUDY Tertiary (Living Allowance and Incidentals)
-   Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care and Aged Care Calculation
    of your cost of care combined partner
-   Age Pension and Age Pension combined partner
-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Austudy (Students and Australian Apprentices)
-   Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS) (unless combined with FTB and/or PPL)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Crisis Payment (Extreme Circumstances Family and Domestic Violence,
    Humanitarian Entrants Release, National Health Emergency, Other
    Extreme Circumstances and Release from Prison and Psychiatric
    Confinement claim types only)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (Child) (EHC) Health Care Card
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) (unless combined with CCS)
-   Farm Household Allowance and Farm Household Allowance combined
    partner (claim submission exceptions apply)
-   Foster Child (FST) Health Care Card
-   Home Equity Access Scheme
-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Low Income (LIC) Health Care Card
-   New Zealand Disaster Recovery Allowance (NZ DRA)
-   New Zealand Disaster Recovery Payment (NZ DRP)
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (PLDP)
-   Parental Leave Pay (unless combined with CCS)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement
-   Pension Bonus Scheme
-   Special Benefit
-   Tertiary Access Payment
-   Youth Allowance (Job seeker)
-   Youth Allowance (students and Australian Apprentices)

Note: claims may create as Social Application (SOA) shells:

-   for reassessments of rejected claims
-   for partner claims
-   as a result of a customer initiated review of decision, or
-   automatically upon paper claim submission

Claims created manually via a Social Application (SOA) shell and/or for
paper claims have no link to an online claim. This means they are not
subject to the CCM process.

Other services using CCM

Services with CCM allow customers to use their Centrelink online account
or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to:

-   give all required information before submitting their update
-   submit their update
-   view and action tasks relating to their update
-   submit updates without all supporting documents when they meet the
    exception criteria

Customers must complete all online service steps and Required tasks
unless an exception applies. This will allow the customer to submit
their update. The Process page contains the exception criteria for each
service type.

The following services use CCM:

-   Add newborn child service

For the Add newborn child service, customers can only access and submit
their update if they have an assessed early claim. If the early claim
has been determined as ‘Not Effective’ because proof of birth (or entry
into care) was not supplied within the required timeframe, the customer
will not be able to access the service and any started updates or tasks
will expire.

The following CCM functionality is not available for the Add newborn
child service:

-   claim tracker
-   estimated completion date
-   tailored messaging
-   targeted notifications

The Add newborn child service does not use Assisted Customer Claims
(ACC).

The staff facing Add newborn workflow is accessed via Customer First >
Workspace > Add Newborn.

Customers who are unable or unsuitable to complete the Add newborn child
service, should be encouraged to provide requested information by mail
or in person. Service Officers can record the return of requested
documents using the Add newborn workflow in Customer First

The Process page contains details about managing tasks in Customer First
and Process Direct.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers using the app will have similar claim progress information
displayed.

However, Farm Household Allowance (FHA) combined partner task and the
Age Pension or Aged Care combined partner task will only show in the app
for a customer, not their partner.

Customers using the app can:

-   cancel an incomplete claim
-   upload documents to complete Required and Supplementary tasks
-   submit their claim when all Required tasks are complete
-   confirm the date they submit their claim
-   get messages when their claim is On Hold and needs more information
-   get advice of their claim outcome

Note: the Add newborn child service in the app does not allow the
customer to:

-   cancel an incomplete Add Newborn update
-   get messages when their Add Newborn is On Hold and needs more
    information
-   receive targeted notifications

Assisted Customer Claims (ACC)

Staff can view the Next steps page and claim tracker in ACC.

Note: it is important for Service Officers to ask customers if they have
a Centrelink online account before promoting CCM and/or requesting
information. Although Claims using CCM submitted by Service Officers in
ACC will use CCM, customers will not be able to access all options
(including the claim tracker) if they do not have a Centrelink online
account.

Customers who are unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim,
should be encouraged to provide requested information by mail or in
person. Service Officers can record the return of requested documents by
either:

-   using the Request and Manage Customer Tasks guided procedure in
    Customer First, or
-   selecting the Tasks icon in Process Direct.

The Process page contains information about managing tasks in Customer
First and Process Direct.

Customers subscribed to Electronic Messaging (EM) will get CCM
notifications whether they have a Centrelink online account or not.

Staff can view the SMS and online letters sent to customers on the
Customer Details page in Customer First.

Select:

-   CRN/BP: followed by
-   the Communication History tab at the bottom of the page

Each CCM notification has a hyperlink under History ID. Select this to
read a copy of what was sent to the customer.

Claim submission exceptions

In some circumstances, it may not be reasonable for a customer to
complete all their Required tasks before they submit their claim.
Customers will need to meet certain exception criteria to submit without
all required tasks. These include exceptions where:

-   certain vulnerabilities exist
-   claim submission dates are time critical, or
-   where only parental income details are outstanding for Youth
    Allowance claims

The Process page contains the exception criteria for each claim type.

If an exception applies and the customer submits their claim without
providing all required documents:

-   the documents will remain on Next steps with a status of Required,
    and
-   they must provide the documents by the due date for their claim to
    be processed

Claim tracker

Customers who submit claims online or via ACC with CCM functionality,
can track the progress of their claim using their Centrelink online
account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Claim tracker status includes:

-   Submitted
-   In Progress/On Hold
-   Outcome/Completed

The Process page contains more details about the claim tracker.

Targeted notifications

Customers are automatically subscribed to Electronic Messaging (EM) and
letters online when they first link their Centrelink online account. If
the customer unsubscribes, they will not receive notifications
throughout the claim process. After making a claim a customer will need
to resubscribe to Electronic Messaging (EM) through the My profile
service in order to get notifications about their claim.

The Process page contains a list of EM notifications a customer may get
during the progress of their claim.

Customers must inform the agency if their contact details change.

Claims not using CCM

CCM does not support these claims:

-   CCS claims combined with FTB or PPL
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)
-   paper claims
-   claims created through the 'SOA shell' function in Process Direct

The Resources page contains information on how letters/messages are
delivered, a CCM notifications matrix, letter-writing guides and a link
to mySupport and the Digital Support Products pages.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Upload documents service

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

Progress of claim

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Requesting information (CLK)

Information requests for FTB, PPL and DAP claims and Add Newborn
activities

Assessing suitability to issue a Q999 letter

Creating a Q999 or Q888 letter

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim

Coding identity documents

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Identity Confirmation

Commencement of Identity

Alternative Identity

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Claiming Age Pension

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Process Direct

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Helping customers provide proof of a child’s birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
