
Money you owe option online 133-04110000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers use the Money you owe
service. This service is available in Centrelink online account and the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Money you owe service

The Money you owe service allows customers to view and update details
relating to their Centrelink debts.

Customers can:

-   view outstanding debt amounts, debts that have been temporarily
    written off and repayments
-   view debts repaid in the past 2 years
-   view a current repayment arrangement
-   make changes to cash and voluntary payment arrangements
-   make a repayment via credit or debit card, BPAY® or Post Billpay
-   update bank account details for direct debit payments
-   set up a repayment arrangement
-   edit a repayment arrangement
-   view current withholdings arrangements
-   change withholding arrangements
-   view interest charge balances
-   miss an overdue repayment
-   cease some payment arrangements

Accessing the service

To access this service, customers must create a myGov account and link
their Centrelink online account to it. Payments using this service can
be made through an outstanding task, if the customer is eligible.

They can access the task from their:

-   myGov Beta homepage
-   Centrelink online account, or
-   the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers may still need to take action, even if there is no task shown.

Staff can view the outstanding task in Customer First using Customer
Online View.

Go to the Resources page for further information on eligibility rules
and debt task examples.

Centrelink online accounts

Customers can access the service from their homepage by selecting:

-   Money you owe from Favourite services, or
-   MENU, followed by Payments and Claims, then Manage payments and
    Money you owe

Go to online guide, Centrelink online account help - Manage the money
you owe online.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers can access the service from their home screen by selecting:

-   the more icon, then Money you owe

Go to online guide, Express Plus Centrelink mobile app help - Manage the
money you owe.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website, the
Digital Support Products sub site and contact details for Australia
Post. It also contains a table of eligibility rules and customer debt
task examples.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using Centrelink self service

Advance payment options online

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Income Statements and detailed income and asset statements

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
