
Processing the Manual identity verification for Provider Digital Access (HW080) form 133-02130040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process the Manual Identity Verification
Provider Digital Access (HW080) form. It outlines the evidence required
to verify the identity of an individual for a Provider Digital Access
(PRODA) account when an HW080 form has been submitted.

On this Page:

Use of form

If a PRODA user has failed to verify their identity online, they are
required to submit an HW080 form and supporting documents for manual
processing by Tier 2.

This procedure is based on the current version of the form (HW080.1705)
effective from 8 May 2017.

Processing the form

PRODA forms are to be processed within 14 business days of receipt of
all required information.

All Evidence of Identity documents to be coded must be accompanied with
the HW080 form. Evidence of Identity documents that are not accompanied
by the HW080 form cannot be processed. This includes if a user is
experiencing issues and contacts Services Australia.

If the user is contacting the agency due to having different names that
do not require a HW080 form for a change of name, for example,
Bob/Robert or Sueanne/Sue-Anne, these can be escalated to Tier 3 without
a HW080 form. Escalation must include that the user phoned or emailed
and there is no HW080 form supplied.

Processing the HW080 form includes:

checking the form has been fully completed and signed and required
Evidence of Identity documents attached (see the Resources page in
Evidence of Identity documents for Provider Digital Access (PRODA))

searching for the PRODA account

completing the identify verification or change of name verification
process

contacting the user if information is missing or to advise that the form
has been processed

escalating to Tier 3 for investigation if any of the following apply:

-   a Commencement of Identity (CoI) document will not pass the PRODA
    Document Verification Service (DVS)
-   the date of birth on identity documents is different to the date of
    birth on the PRODA account
-   the user has duplicate accounts created
-   the user has provided a foreign change of name document, foreign
    marriage certificate for a change of name
-   the user is unable to provide an official change of name or marriage
    certificate from the Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages
-   the document provided is not in the list of acceptable Evidence of
    Identity and the user advises they are unable to provide an
    alternative document from the list of acceptable Evidence of
    Identity

Documents supporting Evidence of Identity

Evidence of Identity is required to verify the identity of an individual
for a PRODA account.

A user must have at least 3 documents. One must be a Commencement of
Identity (CoI) document, and 1 must be a Primary Use in Community (PUiC)
document. (These include documents the user has already passed
themselves online).

Change of name certificates must be official from the Registry of
Births, Deaths and Marriages.

If the user's gender differs between their PRODA account and their
Evidence of Identity document, the applicant must either provide an
amended document by contacting the issuing agency to have the error
corrected or an official change of gender document. If the gender on
their PRODA account is different to both gender on the form and on their
Evidence of Identity, due to user input error, escalate to Tier 3.

A PRODA account may allow access to services that involve personal and
financial information. Services Australia requires a high level of
certainty that the person accessing and performing transactions is
correct and known to the agency. This high level of certainty is
obtained through the verification of a minimum amount of documentation a
person needs to use in order to create a PRODA account. Therefore, a
change of name needs to be verified through the required change of name
documents. These requirements are in line with the National Identity
Proofing Guidelines published by the Attorney General's Department.

All names on Evidence of Identity documents must be entered exactly as
they appear on the Evidence of Identity document.

Note: if a name is spelt incorrectly/differently on the document do not
code it. Escalate to Tier 3 and advise users name either spelt
incorrectly/different spelling on Evidence of Identity document (this
includes given names spelt different to the given name on the PRODA
account).

Ensure name/s on the document match at least 1 associated name on their
PRODA account.

If the name set on the identity document does not exist on their PRODA
account in Manage names and no change of name certificate has been
provided to support the new name, advise the user there is no name set
on their PRODA account that matches the name on their identity document.
If the user insists the document be added to their PRODA account, the
user will need to provide an official change of name (CON) document.

Do not code the document until the user advises they can provide a
change of name.

Documents supporting Evidence of Identity:

-   do not need to be certified copies
-   are only those that cannot be verified online by the user via the
    PRODA Document Verification Service (DVS) process
-   are in the list of acceptable Evidence of Identity documents

See the Resources page of Evidence of Identity documents for Provider
Digital Access (PRODA) for a table which contains a list of acceptable
change of name documents for PRODA.

Document certification

Copies of original documents must be sent with the HW080 form. They do
not require certification.

Birth extracts, ceremonial and commemorative certificates for marriage
or birth do not contain security features and cannot be accepted as an
Evidence of Identity document.

Evidence of Identity documents that are not clearly visible will need to
be provided to Services Australia again.

Some foreign nationals, such as permanent residents that migrated to
Australia before the early 1990s and have not travelled out of Australia
since, might not have a verifiable record with Department of Home
Affairs. These individuals should be referred to Department of Home
Affairs to assess their eligibility for an ImmiCard.

Adding identity to PRODA account

If the user has been unable to pass their identity documents via PRODA
online, the account identity status will be either Unknown or Pending.

See Evidence of Identity documents for Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
to ensure the document information is entered correctly.

If the date of birth on the identity documents does not match the PRODA
account date of birth, escalate to Tier 3 for investigation.

Some birth certificates do not show the child’s family name, only the
given names. In this case the surname is the father’s family name.

Manually passing Evidence of Identity documents

The following Commencement of Identity (CoI) documents cannot be
manually passed:

-   Australian passport
-   Australian birth certificate
-   Australian citizenship certificate
-   Foreign passport (with an Australian visa linked)
-   Certificate of registration by descent
-   ImmiCard

For the above documents, see Evidence of Identity documents for Provider
Digital Access (PRODA) to ensure the information is entered correctly.
If the document does not pass escalate to Tier 3 for investigation, see
Help for staff Provider Digital Access (PRODA).

For all other identity documents primary and secondary, if a document
cannot be verified through the DVS see the Process page, Peer review and
manually overriding documents table.

Documents are suspect or unable to supply

If Evidence of Identity documents are suspect or if the user cannot
supply clear copies, escalate via mail to Tier 3 for investigation.

The Resources page contains a link to the relevant form, PRODA contact
details for staff, PRODA system messages and information, and email
templates.

Related links

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Evidence of Identity documents for Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Managing a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Managing account status and displaying records for Provider Digital
Access (PRODA) accounts

Search for a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account and conduct
security check

Processing Medicare identifiers for Healthcare providers and
administrators

Escalating Provider Digital Access (PRODA) incidents, complaints and
feedback

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
