
Reconciling an overseas estimate (from 1 July 2011) 277-07060030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for reconciling an overseas estimate.
Overseas estimate reconciliations are processed on Cuba in a similar way
to domestic cases. However, some extra processes must be completed.

Overseas Estimate

An overseas resident lodging an estimate of income to use in their
Australian child support assessment is known as an overseas estimate.

All overseas estimates are lodged and reconciled in accordance with the
Australian Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989. Estimates are for income
in the Australian financial year starting 01 July and ending 30 June.

Child support authorities in other countries

Child support authorities in other countries vary in their ability to:

-   obtain/provide income information about customers
-   deduct child support payments from employers or third parties, or
-   work with Australian Child Support to manage child support cases

It is important to manage customers’ expectations with regard to their
child support case if one or both parties live overseas. While every
effort is made to manage international child support cases accurately
and efficiently, there may be limitations beyond the control of Services
Australia.

Consult with a Service Support Officer (SSO) or Program Support Manager
(PSM) for specialist advice about international cases.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer (SO3)

Only Service Officers in specialist Mainstream Estimate Reconciliation
teams can reconcile estimates

Service Officer (SO4)

To reconcile estimates

Note: the specialist Mainstream Estimate Reconciliation teams manage
estimate reconciliations. To make a referral see Estimate
reconciliations in the Customer Referral Guidelines.

The Resources page has contact details, links to websites and Estimate
tools.

Related links

Child support estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Auto reconciliation procedure for child support estimates (from 1 July
2011)

Manual reconciliation procedure for child support estimates (from 1 July
2011)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
