
Manual reconciliation procedure for child support estimates (from 1 July 2011) 277-07060020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to manually reconcile an estimate of
income (from 1 July 2011). Most reconciliations are automatically
performed by Cuba, Manual intervention is required in specific
circumstances.

This document also outlines the processes to follow in other specific
circumstances. For example, a customer disputes the reconciliation
outcome.

International customers

If the estimate is for an International customer, a 'Reconciliation
Required' or ‘Pending Auto Reconciling Inc’ intray will generate on
receipt of an ATO income. These intrays may also generate for an
estimating customer who had income as both an Australian resident and as
an overseas resident. See Reconciling an overseas estimate (from 1 July
2011) for guidance in manually processing these estimate
reconciliations.

How to determine if an estimate requires reconciliation

Generally, if the actual Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) is higher than
the estimated ATI, the estimate will be reconciled. When the
Reconciliation Calculator is populated with the estimate and reconciling
income details Cuba identifies whether the estimate requires
reconciliation by displaying a 'Y' or 'N' in the box beside
'Reconciliation Required'. However, there are some circumstances where
this indicator displays incorrectly.

Check the 'Total Reconciling Debt' to determine if the estimate requires
reconciliation.

If the 'Total Reconciling Debt' is a positive amount, for example
$127.64, and the estimating parent was a payer, the reconciliation is
raising debt as the customer underestimated their income and had been
assessed to pay too little child support. The reconciliation will result
in a change to the assessment and the estimate requires reconciliation

If the 'Total Reconciling Debt' is a negative amount (for example
-$141.46) then further investigation is required

-   If the estimating parent’s role in the case is as payee then a
    negative amount would be correct as they underestimated their
    income. Based on the estimate the customer was assessed to receive
    more child support than they were entitled. Reconciliation will
    result in a reduction to their entitlement. The estimate requires
    reconciliation
-   If the estimating parent’s role is as a payer, a negative amount can
    display if the customer was assessed to pay at the Fixed Annual Rate
    (FAR) based on their estimate and reconciliation will result in an
    assessment of less than FAR. The estimate does not require
    reconciliation as reconciliation would result in the assessment
    reducing from FAR. The decision notepad should include reference to
    this circumstance

Not reconciling an estimate where the income is higher

In cases where reconciling an estimate with a higher income would
benefit the estimating parent, the Estimate should not be reconciled.
The status of these Estimates should be set to Recon No Change.
Resources has an example. If a Service Officer identifies an Estimate
where reconciliation appears to have had an unfair outcome, they
escalate to a Service Support Officer (SSO). An error correction and
lodgement of a system incident form may be required.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) and National Redress Scheme

Payments (either ongoing or a lump sum) received by customers under the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) or the National Redress
Scheme are not considered income for Child Support purposes.

If a customer provides NDIS or National Redress Scheme payments as an
income source, or it is established the customer is receiving these
payments, document for information only.
See Documenting Child Support information.

Do not include in any income calculations.

For more information, see National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
and the National Redress Scheme.

The Resources page contains a link to Deceased Customer Management Team
contact details, submission templates for S63ae decisions, an example of
reverse case estimate reconciliation when manual intervention is
required, information about FAR and DoE and DoN, a link to UQ90.02
letter and an example of not reconciling an estimate where the income is
higher.

 

Related links

Child support estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Auto reconciliation procedure for child support estimates (from 1 July
2011)

Reconciling an overseas estimate (from 1 July 2011)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
