
Who can apply for child support? 277-51020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility requirements for child support
through the Child Support Scheme. Under this scheme, a person may apply
to Child Support for a child support assessment and ask Child Support to
collect their child support entitlement.

On this Page:

Eligibility requirements

Eligibility for child support:

-   Customers may apply for a child support assessment and/or ask Child
    Support to collect from the paying parent if they have a child
    support assessment or a registered child support agreement
-   In shared care arrangements, customers must have at least 35% actual
    care of the child to be eligible for a child support assessment
-   The person from whom child support is claimed must be a person
    liable to pay child support or spousal maintenance. If a step-parent
    claims Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for their partner's child/ren; that
    is, the customer is not the child's parent for child support
    purposes but is partnered to the child's parent, it must be the
    parent and not the step-parent who applies for a child support
    assessment for the child
-   If the paying parent is living overseas, eligibility for a child
    support assessment and Child Support collection depends on whether
    or not they are living in a country with a reciprocal child support
    agreement
-   Child support is payable up to the end of the school year in which
    the child turns 18. The parent however must apply for child support
    prior to the child's 18th birthday for child support to be extended
    past the child's 18th birthday
-   If a customer provides care for a child and they are not the parent
    (for example, legal guardians, grandparents or other family
    members), they may be able to apply for Child Support against both
    of the child’s parents

Shared care

From 1 July 2008, if parents share the care of a child or if each has
one or more children in care, Child Support registers only one child
support case instead of two. The system will only establish an
electronic link with one Centrelink customer (the child support payee)
at the time the link is established. This means that information will
not be received electronically from Child Support to show that the other
party (generally the payer) has met the MAT.

If both parents are FTB customers, manual coding is required on the
other parent's record to reflect the MAT status and prevent the paying
parent's FTB Part A rate being restricted to base rate. See Maintenance
Action Test (MAT) for customers with shared care.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information on Child Support and it also contains information on Policy.

Related links

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Child Support collection for Centrelink staff

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers with a court order or court
registered agreement

Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
