
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support objection decisions 277-09180010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process involved when a customer lodges a
request for the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) to review a Child
Support objection decision.

On this Page:

Lodging an application for an AAT review

A customer may apply to the AAT for an AAT first review of:

-   a decision to disallow, allow or part-allow an objection, or
-   a decision to refuse an application for an extension of time to
    lodge an objection (EOT refusal)

The AAT refer to this process as an application for review.

A customer may lodge an application for an AAT first review over the
phone, in writing or in person with the AAT.

If a customer calls to lodge an application encourage them to contact
the AAT.

Note: a customer may withdraw their application for review before the
AAT makes a decision. If the applicant withdraws the appeal and the
respondent wishes to proceed, the AAT appeal will proceed. For more
information See Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) review dismissed
or withdrawn.

Lodging an application for an extension of time for review (AAT EOT application)

The AAT has time limits which require a customer to make an application
for an AAT first review within a specified time after they receive
notification of the objection decision.

If the customer wants to make an application for an AAT first review
outside of the prescribed time limits, they may apply to the AAT for an
extension of time in which to make an application for review.

The AAT refer to this process as an application for extension of time
for review. In these AAT Operational Blueprint documents that process
may also be referred to as an AAT EOT application,

A customer must lodge an application for an extension of time for review
in writing with the AAT.

If a customer calls to lodge an application for an AAT first review,
encourage them to contact the AAT. The AAT will determine whether they
are making the application for an AAT first review within the prescribed
time limits, or whether they need to make an application for an
extension of time for review.

Roles and responsibilities

See the Background page in Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
applications against Child Support for information about roles and
responsibilities.

Related links

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support
decisions

Extension of time (EOT) review lodged against Child Support decisions

Management of files sent to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) submissions and requests for
additional information from Child Support

Processing Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) hearing details and
additional documents

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) review dismissed or withdrawn

Processing an Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
