
Child support debt recovery from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 277-51040040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for the recovery of a child support
debt from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) entitlement.

On this Page:

Background

Since 1 July 2002, Child Support is able to recover child support debts
from the FTB entitlement of the parent who has an outstanding child
support debt with Child Support. Child support deductions cannot
commence, vary or cease except under instruction from Child Support.

Customers affected by this measure include customers who have failed to
pay a child support debt for a child by the due date and who are
entitled to be paid FTB for that child. The child support debt must
relate to the child for whom the parent receives FTB. These children are
referred to as designated child support children.

Recovery of Child Support debts from FTB payments is at the discretion
of Child Support. This method of recovery is used as a last resort where
there is no repayment arrangement in place and it is not possible to
come to such an arrangement with the payer. It cannot be used to collect
ongoing child support liabilities - it is only for debt recovery.
Centrelink cannot start, stop or vary child support deductions. This is
only done by the appropriate updates made on Cuba by Child Support.

Section 120 notice

Child Support emails a Section 120 notice to the Child Support Unit
(CSU). The Section 120 notice requests information about the amount of
the customers FTB payment that may be deducted for a 'designated child
support child' for whom the customer owes child support.

The Child Support Unit (CSU) calculate the maximum permissible amount
that may be deducted and provides a response back to Child Support.

Section 72 Notice

A Section 72A notice requests child support deductions to occur from a
customer's Income Support payments. A Section 72B/AB notice requests
child support deductions to occur from a customer's FTB payments.

Letters

Customers will be sent an automatic letter by Centrelink when Child
Support starts, varies or ceases debt recovery from their FTB
entitlement. For starts and variations, the letter will include the
amount of the child support deductions. The letters will also include a
line advising 'your child support deductions from your Family Tax
Benefit have started/change/stopped'.

Effect on FTB

Recovery from FTB means a reduction in the customer's FTB payments to
repay the debt. This may be partly offset by a corresponding increase in
deductible child maintenance expenditure which the customer advises as
part of their income estimate for FTB.

Child Support debts are classified as a debt to the Commonwealth. If a
Child Support debt is being recovered from FTB instalment payments, the
customer is not eligible to receive an FTB advance.

Child Support debts are not recovered from other family assistance
payments.

Recovery amount

The amount of FTB that can be recovered to repay a Child Support debt is
calculated by the Child Support Unit (CSU) according to 1 of 3 formula
according to the customer's circumstances.

Recovery from FTB instalments needs to be reviewed whenever the
customer's FTB rate changes. This is to ensure that only the FTB payable
for the designated child support children is used to recover the debt,
not FTB for other children. For example, if a customer's rate is reduced
because of an increase in their income estimate, Child Support deduction
may also need to be reduced. When this review is required, an A0241FY
manual follow up (MFU) activity will display on the Activity List (AL)
screen.

When FTB payment ceases, the recovery instruction remains current for
the standard grace period of 2 weeks, should FTB recommence.

The Resources page contains examples of the recoverable amount
calculation and contact details for Child Support.

Related links

Child support deductions from income support payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
