-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes for remitting estimate and late
payment penalties (LPP) and cancelling LPP.

Child Support penalties

The purpose of these penalties is to encourage customers to comply with
their child support obligations. Penalties can be used as an effective
negotiation tool. Child Support has the discretion to remit penalties
under certain circumstances.

Child Support should also consider cancelling LPP when there has been a
reduction to a customer’s maintenance debt.

Penalties are amounts owed to the Commonwealth and are not paid to the
other party.

There are 2 penalties covered in this document:

-   LPPs - amounts raised on a customer's account if customers do not
    pay their child support on time
-   Estimate penalties - amounts raised on a customer's account if
    customers significantly underestimate their income

Applying a late payment penalty

The Registrar imposes a late payment penalty on a parent whenever the
customers fail to pay their child support debt by the due date. See
Child Support Guide - 5.1.5 and Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988, section 67. The purpose of a late payment penalty
is to encourage parents to comply voluntarily with their obligation to
pay child support and discourage late payment.

A late payment penalty is a debt due and payable to the Commonwealth
(CSRC Act section 67(2)). Any late payment penalties collected are paid
into consolidated revenue. The penalties are not paid to the receiving
parent.

The Registrar calculates late payment penalties on the unpaid balance of
a parent's child support debt after the due date for each payment
period. The rate of the penalty is the general interest charge (GIC)
rate under Taxation Administration Act 1953 subsection 8AAD(1) (CSRC Act
section 67(3)).

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer

Responsible for:

-   determining whether to remit or cancel penalties and the amount of
    penalties to be remitted or cancelled
-   escalating penalty submissions to officers with that authorisation
    level (depending on the amount that is recommended to be
    remitted/cancelled), and
-   processing the decision including updating Cuba and advising
    customers as appropriate

The authorisation for remitting penalties also applies to cancelling
penalties.

-   SO3 - $ 2,000
-   SO4 - $ 4,000
-   SO5 - $ 10,000
-   SO6 - $ 30,000
-   Executive level 1 - No limit

Related links

Bankruptcy for Child Support customers

Contact with Child Support customers

Debt repayment

Documenting Child Support information in Cuba

Income processing for Child Support customers

Letters for Child Support customers

Technical support in Child Support

Documentation Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Penalties Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
