
Mutual customer matching with Child Support 277-51150000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the mutual customer matching process between
Child Support and Centrelink.

On this Page:

New child support assessment

Data match requests are initiated by Child Support when a new child
support assessment is lodged and payer, payee and child details have
been recorded. If the data match request fails to get a Centrelink
match, a new data match request is sent on a daily basis for the first
month. After that a data match request is sent monthly (or when person
details are updated) until a match occurs.

When a successful match has occurred, data can be exchanged to ensure
that a customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A rate and child support
entitlement are correct. Child Support align care assessments and
updates to details of children in care.

Mismatch occurs

If an unclear or multiple match/matches occur(s) manual intervention is
undertaken by Child Support Unit (CSU) staff to enable a correct match.
If a mismatch occurs, CSU staff will need to try to manually match the
payee, payer or the child.

If Child Support information has failed to load onto the customer's
record, a mismatch could be preventing details from being transferred.
For example customer applied for a child support assessment 42 days ago
and no entitlement details exist.

If details for a paying parent do not match with details held by Child
Support, an activity will be created on the customer's record with 1 of
the following explanations:

-   paying parent manual matching required (a mismatch has occurred)
-   parentage recorded as cannot be proven but paying parent provided by
    Child Support
-   parentage recorded as unknown but paying parent provided by Child
    Support
-   Child Support paying parent is recorded as current partner

Contents

Linking and unlinking a child support paying parent to a Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) record

Matching a child support child between Centrelink and Child Support

Related links

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Alignment of Care processing for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
