
Application for assessment - non-parent carer 277-19061114

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speakerphone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

If there are concerns about a child’s safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

Whilst this document outlines the process for managing a non-parent
carer application for assessment, Service Support Officers (SSO) and
Team Leaders should provide case-specific advice, where necessary. This
is particularly important when managing cases involving sensitivities
such as Family and domestic violence, and parents who are separated and
still living in the same home.

Applying as a non-parent carer

From 1 July 2008, non-parent carer applicants must apply against both
parents unless:

-   the other parent is not a resident of Australia or a reciprocating
    jurisdiction, or
-   there are special circumstances, or
-   the other parent is deceased

Where a non-parent carer applies against one parent only and none of the
above apply, the application must be refused. Alternatively, the
applicant may choose to withdraw the application and reapply against
both parents.

Online application for assessment

There are 2 types of online applications:

-   Unauthenticated application for assessment submitted through the
    Services Australia website. These applications are located in the
    Manage Application For Assessment (MAFA) inbox
-   Authenticated application for assessment, submitted via the
    customers myGov account. Only existing customers with a myGov
    account can submit these applications. The applications are located
    in the Application For assessment (AFA) inbox

Unable to manage the application in Pluto

All applications for assessment begin in Pluto. There are limited
situations where the application cannot be continued in Pluto and must
be progressed in Cuba. For example, where a duplicate customer is
identified.

Where you identify the application should be managed in Cuba:

-   Seek technical support from your Service Support Officer to ensure
    proceeding in Cuba is the most appropriate option. See Technical
    Support in Child Support
-   Update the interaction status in Pluto to ‘Not Required’. See Manage
    Interactions In Pluto
-   Refer to Assessments Cuba Process Help for information on processing
    the application in Cuba

Add child to an existing application

This process does not cover adding a child to an existing case. See
Updating Child Support customer and assessment information for
information on adding a child or relevant dependant to an existing case.

Related cases

Provide general information to explain how related cases may affect the
new application.

Do not:

-   advise if the other parent or carer has another cases, or
-   provide specific details about other cases, such as names of the
    children involved

Restarting an existing case

A previously active Child Support case may restart if:

-   an application for assessment is made, and
-   the eligibility criteria is met

Consider previously provided information that has not been overturned.
See Table 2 Step 3 Previously provided PoP a shows as Proven on
Conversion in Eligibility and presumption of parentage (PoP) for child
support assessment.

Agreements

A formula assessment is used if an agreement for a child was terminated

Transfer the customer to the Agreements and Court Orders team if:

-   an initiating binding agreement is currently suspended for a child
-   a terminating event has occurred for a child and the agreement has
    not otherwise ended

Court orders

Refer court ordered section 106A declarations to the Agreements and
Court Orders team for processing. See Agreements and Court Orders table
in Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff.

Roles and responsibilities

New Customer Service Officer

Responsibilities include:

-   creating customer records
-   conducting pre assessment interviews
-   providing information, products and referrals
-   making decisions on eligibility, income and care
-   establishing payment methods2
-   processing a customer’s application for child support assessment
-   resolving/actioning customer enquiries to achieve sustainable
    outcome

Mail Handling Team Service Officer

Responsibilities include:

-   creating customer profiles for paper application
-   capturing application details for paper applications and recording
    them on the customer's record
-   creating an Application Received intray

Service Support Officer (SSO)

Responsibilities include:

-   providing advice regarding complex issues
-   assisting Service Officers

The Resources page contains links macros, templates and user guides and
a table of some third party carer application updates required for Cuba.

Related links

Application for a child support assessment

Application for assessment- contact other party

Application for assessment - record a decision and finalise

Eligibility and presumption of parentage (PoP) for a child support
assessment

Application for assessment - Conversation guide

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
