
Child Support estimates review (Pre 1 July 2010) 277-07080000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow where a parent elects to
have their assessment based on an estimate of income. Links on this page
may be unavailable to external audiences.

Estimates review

Where a parent's income varies significantly from that used in the child
support assessment the Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989 allows the
parent to elect to have their assessment based on an estimate of income
in some circumstances. Parents are required to keep their estimates of
income accurate. If the estimate is no longer accurate it may be
necessary to review it. An estimate review updates the income used in
the child support assessment to more accurately reflect the actual
income of the parent.

This document applies:

-   to WA ex nuptial customers whose first estimate of the child support
    period was lodged before 3 March 2011
-   to any child support period which has an estimate lodged before 1
    July 2010

For all other customers, see Child support estimates review (post 1 July
2010).

For more information about WA ex nuptial customers, see WA child support
ex-nuptial cases.

For details on new estimates or reconciling an estimate, see the:

-   Child support estimates (post 1 July 2010)
-   Child support estimates - Reconcile (pre 1 July 2011)

Authorisations and delegations

Services Officer 4 (SO4)

-   Reviewing of estimates, and
-   Relevant decision making

Note: this does not prevent an officer at the SO3 level who has the
support of their team leader from carrying out this type of work.
However, the final decision to review must be made by an officer at the
SO4 level or above.

For more information on Authorisations and delegations see Child Support
Services, Delegations and Authorisations.

Related links

Blueprint documents

Child Support estimates (Post 1 July 2010)

Child Support Estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Child Support's information gathering powers

Income processing for Child Support customers

Process Helps

Estimates Cuba Process Help

Income Cuba Process Help

Section 120/161 Notice Cuba Process Help

Window Helps

Client Income

Estimate Income

Income Details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
