
Solutions Gateway Team 277-09160000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for the management of customers by
the Solutions Gateway Team (SGT).

Solutions Gateway Team (SGT)

The SGT provides a real time telephone service offer to support
customers who need intensive short-term support for complex child
support matters. The SGT will also provide support to customers with
child support issues who have been unable to have them resolved at the
first point of contact.

SGT roles and Cuba naming restrictions:

-   Service Officer 5 (SO5) role is referred to as Solutions Gateway
    Team (SGT) Officer
-   Cuba processing and intrays guidelines refer to the previous name of
    Customer Review Gateway or CRG, rather than the new name of SGT

SGT referral criteria

The Resources page has a link to SGT Quick Reference Guide for more
information.

Customers are referred to SGT according to the Customer referral
guidelines for Child Support staff.

SGT phone queue

The SGT has a separate phone queue, which is managed by SO5 SGT Service
Officers who immediately work with the customer to:

-   resolve issues at the first point of contact
-   coordinate assistance for customers facing significant disadvantage
    or multiple barriers and help them to access, navigate or interpret
    services across a range of payments, programs and services
-   focus on early intervention and transitioning the customer back into
    mainstream channels
-   identify and communicate the best approach for resolving their
    issues in a way that minimises the need for further contact
-   ensure customers who need intensive support receive a prompt,
    tailored service to achieve a quality outcome

SGT and existing Child Support processes

SGT does not replace existing processes for:

-   a Team Leader referral to Personalised Services
-   the existing complaints and feedback process
-   the existing Technical Support model, or
-   escalation processes for the management of Ombudsman, MP,
    Ministerial, privacy or security incidents

Complaint issues are managed via the Level 2 complaint process. For
example if the customer is dissatisfied about service, inaction, or
staff behaviour, see Managing customer complaints and feedback.

Service recovery

Service recovery work in SGT can involve taking corrective action in
Cuba to ensure the child support case is correct.

Not all service recovery work requires customers to be locked to SGT
Service Officers but all intrays that relate to service recovery are
locked to SGT Allocation positions in Cuba.

Customers impacted by service recovery work are not always locked to SGT
Service Officers and, at times, exemptions are granted from SGT Service
Officers applying the full

Customer Management Approach (CMA) process.

SGT uses intrays to track and monitor work and are not to be deleted or
routed elsewhere. Customers with these intrays are not to be locked to
SGT PST National positions in Cuba.

The Resources page has a link to the SGT Quick Reference Guide and other
resources to assist in utilising the SGT.

Related links

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Debt repayment

Personalised Services

Child Support objections

Documenting Child Support information

Contact with Child Support customers

Customer aggression – Reporting and recording incidents

Customer aggression - escalating incidents

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

Solutions Gateway Team (SGT) Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
