
Checking reasonable action has been taken to obtain child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) past period claims 277-51070140

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for checking the Maintenance Action
Test (MAT) is satisfied when a customer claims Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
for a past period in the same financial year.

Claiming FTB

When claiming FTB for a previous year, details of the action taken to
obtain child support must be provided at the time of claim. There are
special rules for FTB mixed delivery customers. An FTB mixed delivery
customer is a customer who was in receipt of FTB via instalments for
part of the financial year and claimed as a lump sum for the remainder
of the same financial year.

Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Where the customer is required to satisfy the MAT for a past period, the
customer must have sought child support or be granted an exemption from
seeking child support for that period, to be paid more than the base
rate of FTB Part A.

From 2011-12 onwards, all claims are assessed using information provided
by Child Support. Customers can no longer self-assess their child
support. If the customer indicates on the claim t they have not taken
action for their child/ren, and they have not supplied a reason which
may indicate an exemption may be applicable, for example other parent
overseas, family and domestic violence, parentage unknown etc., the
customer fails the MAT for the relevant child/ren for the relevant
financial year.

Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

Before 1 July 2012, if a customer elected to privately collect their
child support, Centrelink assumed the customer received their full child
support entitlement. If a customer privately collected less than their
full child support entitlement, they would fail the MAT and their FTB
Part A would be restricted to the base rate for the child/ren, unless
the customer was granted an exemption or changed to Child Support
collection.

If the customer advised they had privately collected more than the full
child support entitlement, the amount actually received in the financial
year would be applied in the Maintenance Income Test.

From 1 July 2012, unless they are eligible for an exemption, private
collect customers will be deemed to receive their full child support
entitlement for Maintenance Income Test purposes, regardless of the
amount actually received. Customers who collect less than the full
amount as assessed by Child Support will no longer be restricted to the
base rate of FTB Part A due to failing the MAT. They will continue to be
deemed as receiving their full child support entitlement.

Exemptions from seeking child support may be backdated where the
circumstances existed during the past period (e.g. fear of family and
domestic violence, identity of parent unknown, cultural reasons).

If the customer has not taken action to obtain child support, the
Service Officer will need to tell them of the appropriate action to take
when they claim FTB so they can be paid more than the base rate of FTB
Part A from that date.

Related links

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Mutual customer matching with Child Support

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support
entitlement privately

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for customers with shared care

Child Support collection information for Centrelink staff

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer has a court order or a court
registered agreement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
