-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Child Support Scheme, Child Support Scheme
Reforms between 2006 and 2008, and the role of Child Support and
Centrelink.

On this Page:

The Child Support Scheme

The Child Support Scheme ensures that:

-   parents share in the cost of supporting their children, according to
    their capacity
-   adequate support is available for all children not living with both
    parents
-   commonwealth involvement and expenditure is limited to the minimum
    necessary to ensure children's needs are met
-   incentives for both parents to participate in the labour force are
    not impaired
-   the overall arrangements are simple, flexible and efficient.

The Child Support Scheme was developed in 2 stages, to coincide with the
different action to obtain child support requirements for a Stage 1
child and a Stage 2 child.

Stage 1

The Child Support (Collection and Registration) Act 1988 commenced on 1
June 1988.

For a Stage 1 child, a person caring for the child can:

-   seek a court order or register an agreement for child support with
    the Family Court if unable to make a private arrangement with the
    child's parent
-   ask Child Support to collect child support payments if they are
    unable to privately collect the full amount of a court order or
    court registered agreement for child support.

Stage 2

The Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989 commenced on 1 October 1989. It
covers parents who separated on or after 1 October 1989 or who have at
least 1 child born on or after that date. Instead of each case being a
matter for the courts, Child Support is determined administratively
according to a predetermined formula applied to the income of both
parents and the care they have of the child/ren.

For a Stage 2 child, a person caring for the child can:

-   apply for a child support assessment
-   register a child support agreement with Child Support
-   ask Child Support to collect child support payments if they are
    unable to privately collect their full child support entitlement
-   appeal to the Family Court if not satisfied with a review of child
    support assessment by Child Support.

Child Support Scheme Reforms

Reforms were implemented in 3 stages between July 2006 and July 2008.
Under the new Scheme:

-   child support payments are calculated based on the actual costs of
    raising children
-   combined income of both parents is used to calculate child support
    payments, treating the incomes of both parents in the same way
-   recognition of the contributions of both parents to the cost of
    their children through care and contact
-   children of first and second families are treated more equally.

Administrative roles

While Child Support has the main role in the administration of the Child
Support Scheme, the Family Law Court of Australia and Centrelink also
play an important role.

Centrelink administers the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) which ensures
that FTB customers claiming more than base rate FTB Part A for a child
from a previous relationship do what they can to obtain child support
for the child.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website.

Contents

Who can apply for child support?

Child support deductions from income support payments

Related links

Child Support collection for Centrelink staff

Child support debt recovery from Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Private collection information for Centrelink staff

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
