
Agreements between Child Support customers 277-02010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to interpret a child support agreement,
decide whether an agreement is properly made and administrable, how to
administer clauses, how to suspend or terminate an agreement following a
relevant care change and how to terminate or end an agreement that is
not due to care changes.

On this Page:

Agreements between Child Support customers

Child support agreements are legally binding and allow child support
customers to mutually decide on the amount of child support payable. An
agreement can include specific clauses, inflation factors and
instructions to address periods of unemployment or when the care
arrangements for a child change. Customers can apply for their agreement
to be administered with, or in place of, a child support assessment.

Note: for agreements and court orders for overseas maintenance
liabilities see the International New Customers section on the process
page of Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff and
Registration of overseas maintenance liabilities (excluding New Zealand)
(CS).

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer (SO3)

Staff who require authorisation by a Service Officer (SO4) must use the
Agreement acceptance/refusal submission macro when sending requests to
an SO4.

Service Officer (SO4)4

To accept or refuse to accept a child support agreement.

Note: acceptance or refusal of domestic agreements is managed within the
Agreements and Court Orders Team. See the Agreements and Court Orders
section in the Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff.

The Resources page contains links to the documentation macro, forms and
examples.

Contents

Administering agreements and court varied assessments (CVA) lodged post
1 July 2008 that include pre and post 1 July 2008 periods

Assessing a new Child Support agreement

Ending a Child Support agreement

Interpreting and making a decision on a Child Support agreement

Managing a change affecting a Child Support agreement

Recording a Child Support agreement

Suspending or ending a Child Support agreement due to care

HYPERLINK
"https://ourblueprint.internal.dept.local/Pages/separated-parents/277-19061108-01.html"

Change of assessment in special circumstances (CS)

Contact with Child Support customers

Court varied assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders (CS)

Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff

Documenting Child Support information

Lump sum child support

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Notional assessment relating to child support agreements

Registration of overseas maintenance liabilities (excluding New Zealand)
(CS)

Technical support in Child Support

Agreements Cuba Process Help

Child Support Period Management Cuba Process Help

Documentation Cuba Process Help

Eligibility Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
