-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to deemed and default income
processing for Child Support customers. Using the most up to date income
for customers is essential to ensure accurate assessments and
compliance.

Return not Necessary (RNN) deemed income

From 1 July 2023 a RNN Deemed income is manually loaded when a customer
has:

-   notified the ATO that they are not required to lodge a tax return
    (non-lodgement advice), and
-   have a lodgement status of Return not necessary recorded on their
    ATO Income Tax records

The date of effect will be recorded when the income is loaded and saved
in Cuba.

Cuba automatically calculates the RNN deemed income amount, which is
equal to the Child Support basic values self-support amount (1/3 MTAWE).
Unlike most basic values used in an assessment the self-support amount
for a RNN Deemed income is linked to the last for the relevant year of
income, rather than to the start date of the child support period (CSP).
For example, an RNN income 2022/2023 will be based on the 2023 basic
values.

For example, if a child support period began on 1 February 2024, the
last relevant year of income used in the CSP is 2022/2023. Even though
all other basic values will be determined by the start of the CSP (e.g.
the values used for the 2024 calendar year), since the last relevant
year of income ended in 2023, the RNN deemed income will be used based
on the 2023 basic values.

Note: record a RNN deemed income whether it will be used in the
assessment or not. The system will recognise this income as reliable for
the purposes of the COI (client of interest) indicator, and deem for
child support purposes that the customer has met ATO lodgement
compliance.

Deemed income

When a customer has:

-   not lodged an income tax return, or supplied an income tax
    declaration (ITD), for the Last Relevant Year of Income (LRYI)
-   lodged an income tax return for the year prior to the last relevant
    year

Cuba automatically calculates a deemed income by applying an indexation
factor to the taxable income of the year prior to the LRYI, see Child
Support (Assessment) Act 1989 subsection 58(3) and section 58AA.

Note: if a derived income is recorded in Cuba, a deemed income will not
be calculated.

An income cannot be deemed manually. Cuba will automatically perform the
indexation of an income.

A deemed income is also known as a provisional income.

Default incomes

There are two types of default incomes:

-   Indexed default, and
-   2/3 MTAWE

Indexed default

An indexed default income is calculated by indexing the most recent
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) assessed income by the ATI indexation
factor.

Note: an indexed default is only created where the ATO income is from
earlier than the financial year immediately prior to the Last Relevant
Year of Income (LRYI). An ATO income for the immediately prior year
would result in Cuba calculating a deemed income.

2/3 MTAWE (Male Total Average Weekly Earning)

An amount that is at least 2/3 of the annualised Male Total Average
Weekly Earnings (MTAWE) figure for the relevant June quarter.

Note: due to a change in the frequency of the average weekly earnings
series from quarterly to biannual, the annualised MTAWE figure will be
based on the relevant June quarter from 2013. Prior to 2013 the
annualised MTAWE figure was based on the relevant September quarter, see
the Child Support Guide 2.4.2: Formula tables and values.

Related links

Australian Tax Office (ATO) income for Child Support customers

Cuba rules for Child Support customers

Derived income for Child Support customers

Effect of income changes for Child Support customers

Income processing for Child Support customers

Income processing for incarcerated Child Support customers

Lodgement rules for incomes in Cuba

Notify Child Support customers of income changes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
