
Australian Tax Office (ATO) income for Child Support customers 277-07010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to Australian Tax Office
(ATO) income processing for Child Support customers.

On this Page:

ATO issued income

An ATO issued income is a customer’s taxable income for a relevant year
of income. It is the most reliable income information to use in child
support assessments. If an ATO issued income is used in the assessment,
action is not required to correct the income. However, customers may
have options regarding the income to be used in their assessment.

Once the tax assessment for a Last Relevant Year of Income (LRYI) has
been received, no new provisional income can be created for that LRYI.
The system may incorrectly create new provisional incomes after the tax
assessment has been received for that year, particularly when multiple
tax assessments are received on the same day.

These incomes need to be investigated and any incorrect provisional
incomes removed. See Cuba rules for Child Support customers and
Lodgement rules for income in Cuba.

When an ATO issued income becomes available

Cuba will automatically create a new child support assessment and child
support period based on the new ATO income or update or replace an
existing income where the relevant child support period has already
commenced if any of the following apply:

-   the case is active
-   the case was active for the relevant year of income
-   the income applies to multiple cases and all cases are active, or
-   the case is based on an Agreement, Court Order or Change of
    Assessment decision with reference to the actual taxable income

Separate procedures cover Cuba rules for ended cases, date of effect
rules and deceased customer management.

Cuba will not apply a new ATO income if any of the following apply:

-   the new income will not affect the annual rate of child support
    payable
-   the case is based on an Agreement, Court Order or Change of
    Assessment decision with reference to the actual taxable income that
    requires manual processing
-   the case is based on an Agreement, Court Order or Change of
    Assessment decision without reference to the actual taxable income,
    or
-   there is an eligibility error that requires manual processing

In some cases, a Service Officer may notice that the ATO Integrated Core
Processing (ICP) system has an income recorded for the customer that is
missing from the customer's income records in Cuba. If the missing
income is for 1 or more of the last 3 financial years, the Service
Officer must load the missing income/s utilising the TRDB functionality.
TDRB functionality will only load ATO incomes for the prior 3 years.

If the missing income is from more than 3 financial years ago, the
Service Officer must manually add the income recorded in ICP to the
customer's income records in Cuba.

To add an income manually, see Income processing for Child Support
customers.

Authorisations and delegations

SO2

To determine an income where taxable income is not readily
ascertainable.

SO4

To amend an assessment when a taxable income has been amended.

Service Support Officer (SSO)

To authorise retrospective application of an amended taxable income
where special circumstances apply, or in circumstances beyond a
customer’s knowledge or control.

To correct a simple factual error. SO3s and SO4s are expected to
implement these decisions. See Correcting errors on Child Support cases.

EL2

To have an income deleted from Cuba. Authorisation must be sought prior
to deleting an income.

For authorisations and delegations see Child Support Services,
Delegations and Authorisations.

The Resources page contains links to relevant contact details, macros,
the ATO website and examples of dates of effect used for incomes.

Related links

Cuba rules for Child Support customers

Deemed and default income for Child Support Customers

Derived income for Child Support customers

Effect of income changes for Child Support customers

Exceptions to the income date of effect rules in certain circumstances

Income processing for Child Support customers

Income processing for incarcerated Child Support customers

Lodgement rules for incomes in Cuba

Notify Child Support customers of income changes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
