
Child Support's information gathering powers 277-04210000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process on information gathering as an
essential part of ensuring that Child Support customers' assessments are
accurate and child support is paid.

Child Support's powers to seek information from third parties

Child Support has broad powers to seek information and require third
parties to provide information. This does not allow Child Support to
seek information casually or for just any purpose. Information may only
be sought to administer the child support legislation.

Child Support can also require a person to attend a location, for
example a Child Support office, to provide information in person.

Child Support's proactive information gathering powers whether exercised
formally or informally relies on 2 sections of legislation:

-   s120 of the Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988,
    and
-   s161 of the Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989

Each section (120 and 161) allows information to be sought for the
purposes of the Act in which it appears. For example:

-   section 120 is used to seek information about collection to help
    collection action. It cannot be used to seek information about
    incomes to amend a formula assessment because formula assessments
    fall under the Assessment Act
-   section 161 is used to seek information about incomes to amend a
    formula assessment. It cannot be used to seek information to help
    collection action because collection action falls under the
    Registration and Collection Act

Other sections do not provide proactive information gathering powers,
but require customers to advise of certain changes, such as s160 of the
Assessment Act and s111 of the Registration and Collection Act.

Information gathering must comply with the Australian Privacy
Principles.

Note: the AAT can ask Child Support to use information gathering powers
under s120 and s161 on their behalf.

In proceedings involving the recovery of child support debts by payees
or overpayments by payers, the Court can issue notices under s120 in its
own right.

International cases

s120 or s161 notices cannot be issued in relation to a customer who is a
resident in a reciprocating jurisdiction and in respect of whom an
international maintenance arrangement applies.

Section 121A of the Registration and Collection Act and s162A of the
Assessment Act provide the same types of powers as s120 and 161
respectively, but they apply to the obtaining of information and
evidence in relation to residents of reciprocating jurisdictions. If a
s121A notice is required, contact a Service Support Officer (SSO) for
support. See Technical support in Child Support. For information on
issuing a s162A notice, see Income Processing for Child Support
customers (International Parents).

Incarcerated customers

S120 and s161 notices can be issued in relation to a customer who is
incarcerated.

Remove prisoner identification from the  About customer  and  Customer
address  sections to maintain the customer’s privacy. See Step 14 in
Table 1 of Section 120/161 notice Cuba Process Help  to action this in
Cuba.

If the third party requires an address to identify the correct customer,
in  Customer address manually add the previous address (address prior to
incarceration).

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer

-   Seek information through service of a notice or informally
-   Document information gathered

Service Support Officer (SSO)

-   Provide advice in the event of complex issues.

The Resources page contains related links to privacy information, manual
schedules, external searches information and a template attachment.

Related links

Collection of child support debts through third parties (s72A and s72AC)

Contact with Child Support customers

Customer location (Tracing)

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support

Direct requests for Information from Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA)

Documenting Child Support information

Income Processing for Child Support customers (International Parents)

Letters for Child Support customers

National Redress Scheme overview

Technical support in Child Support

Status Resolution Support Services payment

Section 120/161 notice Cuba Process Help

Incarcerated customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
