
Application for Child Support to be collected 277-04030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speakerphone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information about applications for collection of
child support.

Application for collection

At the time a payee registers their case they can elect to collect child
support privately (private collect). The payee can later ask Child
Support to collect child support on their behalf (collect) - this is
generally referred to as 'opting in' for collection.

When a payee opts in they can also request the collection of unpaid
child support (opt in arrears) up to a maximum of 3 months before the
day the application was lodged or 9 months in exceptional circumstances.

Throughout the life of a case, a payee may apply to change the
collection arrangement from private collect to collect or vice versa.
Since 1 July 1999, Child Support can also make a case private collect in
some circumstances.

The Resources page contains a table of frequently asked questions in
relation to considering a request for collection of child support and
tools that will assist Service Officer's process such requests.

Related links

Agreements between Child Support customers

Applications for a child support assessment

Contact with Child Support customers

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support

Debt repayment

Disbursements of child support

Documenting Child Support information

Employer Withholding (EW) - Election for EW not to apply

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Excess cash on a Child Support customer's account

Family and domestic violence

Letters for Child Support customers

Non Agency Payments (NAPs)

Child support overpayments and other payee debt

Payment options for customers

Registrar Initiated Private Collect (RIPC)

Reverse child support cases

Stage 1 - Low Income non-enforcement periods

Stage 1 - registrations

Technical support in Child Support

Application for Collection Cuba Process Help

CSAOnline secure message Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Non Agency Payments (NAP) Cuba Process Help

Transfer or lock a customer Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
