
Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 277-51100000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for assessing the value of a non-cash
benefit received as child support or spousal maintenance for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB). It contains separate procedures on how to assess the
value of some benefits.

On this Page:

Non-cash benefit as maintenance income

There is a wide range of non-cash benefits that can be assessed as
maintenance income. The paying parent can purchase items or pay expenses
that would benefit the child, directly or indirectly, for example,
spousal maintenance. Not all non-cash benefits received can be assessed
as maintenance income.

Things to consider before assessing or recording the value of non-cash
benefit as maintenance income:

-   Is it exempt maintenance income?
-   Does it actually benefit the child or person, improving their lives
    in some way?
-   Is there a need to assess or record the maintenance income?

Maintenance over $1,500 value received as a one-off lump sum or as a
transfer of an asset is treated separately. This is known as capitalised
maintenance.

Child Support Agreements

Child Support Agreements with a start date of 1 July 2008 or later are
no longer manually assessed or coded by Centrelink staff. They are
assessed by Child Support.

For agreements with a start date before 1 July 2008, any non-cash
maintenance must be manually recorded on the Centrelink system for the
period up to and including 30 June 2008. For agreements that were in
place before 1 July 2008 that have been accepted by Child Support and
transitioned under the Child Support Scheme Reforms from 1 July 2008,
non-cash maintenance previously coded on the Centrelink system is
maintained by Centrelink.

The Resources page contains contact details for Child Support.

Contents

Maintenance income: accommodation expenses

Maintenance income: motor vehicle expenses

Maintenance income: health expenses

Maintenance income: loan repayments

Maintenance income: trusts

Related links

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing child support received for child disability expenses for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child support agreements and Family Tax Benefit

Determining if a payment is child support/ maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
