
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support for children born as a result of a surrogacy arrangement or via artificial conception procedure (including children of same-sex couples) 277-51070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about child support and the correct
application of the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for children born as a
result of a surrogacy arrangement or artificial conception procedure
(ACP), including children of same-sex couples. It explains how details
are assessed and recorded for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers.

On this Page:

Separating Safely

If the customer advises of separation, there are key steps they should
consider in order to protect their personal details. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details.

Surrogacy

If a child was born as a result of a surrogacy arrangement and the
parents were in a relationship and later separate, MAT requirements will
be dependent on whether or not the surrogacy arrangement is recognised
under the Family Law Act.

-   The parent(s) of a child born under a surrogacy arrangement are
    recognised (under the Family Law Act) where parentage has been
    transferred by a court order under a prescribed State/Territory law.
    In the circumstance where these parents separate they are not exempt
    from the MAT
-   An exemption should be granted where a child is born as a result of
    a surrogacy arrangement which is not recognised under the Family Law
    Act. This includes both single parents and couples

Artificial conception procedures (ACP)

For children conceived via an ACP, a number of factors/scenarios will be
considered when determining whether the customer is required to obtain
child support to meet the requirements of the MAT.

A child is recognised as a child of the birth parent and partner if:

-   the child is born as a result of an ACP
-   the birth parent and partner were in a de facto relationship at the
    time, and
-   both partners consented to the procedure at the time of conception

In these cases, generally, the partner is presumed to be the other
parent of the child. If the parent and the other parent later separate,
the customer may be required to obtain child support. These customers
should be referred to Child Support to make an application for an
assessment. Child Support will make a decision on whether the
application can be accepted.

Generally, donors of semen used in artificial insemination by single
women have no rights and incur no liabilities in respect of the child
born as a result of that pregnancy. Customers may not need to take
action to obtain child support from the donor.

The Process page contains further information and the Resources page
contains a table to clarify the MAT requirements for a number of ACP
scenarios.

Adoption

When a person adopts a child they become a parent for all legal
purposes. Therefore, if another person adopts the child, obtaining child
support from the biological parent is not required to meet the MAT.
However, if any couple adopt a child and later separate, child support
is required to be sought from the other parent listed on the birth
certificate or adoption papers.

Same-sex relationships

Same-sex couples are recognised by the Department of Human Services as
parents as at 1 July 2009.

Before 1 July 2009, if a customer has a child with their same-sex
partner conceived via an ACP, and they later separated, they were not
required to obtain child support for the child. The non-biological
parent MAT code IVF was applied until 30 June 2009.

Under the changes recognising same-sex parentage, an FTB customer's
current or previous same-sex partner is likely to be recognised as the
other parent of the child.

From 1 July 2009, where the previous partner is recognised as the
child's other parent, the customer is required to meet the MAT to
continue to receive more than base rate FTB Part A for the child. To
meet the MAT, the customer is required to take reasonable action to
obtain child support within 13 weeks of the date of separation.

There will be situations in which an FTB customer may still not be
required to take action to obtain child support to meet the MAT (for
example, where the other person did not consent to the procedure at the
time of conception of the child).

Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

An FTB customer may be required to take action to obtain child support
to meet the MAT (to be eligible to receive more than the base rate of
FTB Part A). Information provided verbally.is used to assess whether:

-   the child is a child of the current relationship
-   a MAT exemption applies, or
-   the FTB customer is required to take reasonable action to obtain
    child support from the child's other parent

All FTB customers obtaining child support need to provide evidence that
the person from whom they are claiming child support is a parent of the
child.

The decision, and evidence of parentage, is based on the family
circumstances of the child from the same-sex relationship.

The Resources page contains scenarios and approved Q999 letter text.

Related links

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers with court order or a court
registered agreement

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support
entitlement privately

Customer cannot make a private arrangement for Stage 1 child -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for customers with shared care

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Backdating a Maintenance Action Test (MAT) exemption to take action to
receive child support prior to 1 July of the previous financial year

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Increasing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A after action has been taken
to obtain child support

Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas and
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Checking reasonable action has been taken to obtain child support for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) past period claims

How to group children on a customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) record

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or surrogacy

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
