
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support enh1ment privately 277-51070060

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for when a customer advises they are
not receiving their full child support entitlement privately.

Customer cannot collect full ongoing entitlement privately

When a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer advises they cannot privately
collect their full ongoing child support entitlement as assessed by
Child Support (including through a child support agreement or court
order) they should be advised of their options and the effect of child
support on their FTB Part A rate.

Expectation of full amount being received and possible FTB implications

From 1 July 2012, if it is reasonable for a customer to privately
collect their full entitlement, that is, they are not eligible for an
exemption from seeking child support, the customer will be deemed to
receive their full child support entitlement for Maintenance Income Test
(MIT) purposes, regardless of the amount actually received.

From 1 July 2012, customers who collect less than the full child support
entitlement will no longer be restricted to the base rate of FTB Part A
due to failing the Maintenance Action Test (MAT). If the customer has a
current child support assessment, they will pass the MAT, and will be
deemed as receiving their full child support entitlement.

Deemed amount

The customer's deemed amount will:

-   apply regardless of whether the amount actually collected under
    private arrangement is more or less than the full child support
    entitlement
-   be equal to the amount as assessed by Child Support

Customers who privately collect their child support will be deemed to be
receiving their full child support entitlement and will have their
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A assessed on that amount, regardless of
the actual amount collected, unless they:

-   have a partial exemption in place and they are collecting a lesser
    amount
-   transfer from Child Support collection to private collection and
    discharge any arrears owing for the Child Support collect period
-   transfer from private collection to Child Support collection and are
    owed arrears of child support for the private collect period, or
-   privately collect child support arrears relating to a private
    collection period prior to 1 July 2012

Private collect customer having difficulty collecting full entitlement

If a private collect customer advises they are having difficulty
collecting their full child support entitlement, they have a choice of:

discussing with Child Support the option to collect child support
payments from the paying parent

-   Note: if the customer changes to Child Support collect, they can
    then choose to have their child support assessed under the
    Disbursement Method

speaking with a social worker regarding a full or partial exemption

continue to privately collect a lesser amount, however for FTB purposes
they will be deemed as receiving their full child support assessment
amount

When customers need to take other action

Customers may need to take other action if they have a:

-   court order or court registered agreement, or
-   child support agreement

Child support arrears

Customers should apply for Child Support collection within 3 months (up
to nine months in special circumstances) of not receiving their full
child support entitlement. The 3 month period allows the customer time
to decide if the shortfall in their child support payments will continue
and is also the period of arrears that Child Support is able to collect.
Child Support will automatically advise Centrelink of any change in
collection method, reporting the date the customer requested Child
Support collection.

If a customer asks Child Support to collect any unpaid arrears owed for
a private collect period, the arrears date is not automatically reported
to Centrelink.

If Child Support advises the customer that they will collect arrears for
a private collect period, the customer should contact Centrelink so the
arrears period can be manually updated to show it is a Child Support
collect period. This will prevent child support from being 'double
counted' for the arrears period. See Centrelink action when a Child
Support collection customer is owed or receives child support arrears.

Retrospective child support assessments for private collect customers

Where a retrospective assessment is received from Child Support for
private collect customers, the customer will have their FTB reassessed
based on the new assessment details.

If the customer is owed child support arrears as a result of an
increased retrospective child support assessment, they are not obliged
to apply for Child Support collection if they are privately collecting
their full ongoing entitlement amount. The customer may wish to register
for Child Support collection (including collection of unpaid arrears) if
they are experiencing difficulties privately collecting their child
support.

If the retrospective assessment applies to 2012/2013 or a later
financial year and that year has already been reconciled, the
retrospective change may result in re-reconciliation occurring. If the
child support assessment has:

-   decreased, this may result in a top-up of FTB
-   increased, this may result in a reconciliation overpayment. In this
    scenario, the customer can appeal the FTB reconciliation debt with
    Centrelink

If the customer wants to discuss or appeal the retrospective change to
their child support assessment, refer them to Child Support.

Either the paying or receiving parent can ask Child Support to reassess
the amount of child support payable if their income has reduced. If a
parent's income has reduced, Child Support may use an estimate of their
current income to reassess their child support liability. Centrelink
will use the current child support assessment until new assessment
details are reported via the data exchange.

Discharged child support arrears

A Child Support collect customer may elect to change to private
collection, even if they have arrears outstanding from the child support
collect period. If a Child Support collect customer changes to private
collection and at the same time, or at a later date, discharges Child
Support from the responsibility of collecting some or all of the
outstanding arrears, the customer is taking responsibility for
collecting the arrears themselves.

When a customer contacts to discuss the implications of changing their
collection method, the customer should be advised that if they ask Child
Support not to pursue collections of outstanding amounts (that is, they
choose to discharge them), the amount/s may impact on the rate of FTB
Part A they will receive.

Unless the customer is granted an exemption, the non-paid arrears
amounts will be included in the MIT in addition to the customer's
ongoing child support entitlement from the date of the decision until
the end of the financial year, regardless of the period to which the
amount relates.

Note: discharged child support arrears relating to a child who is no
longer an FTB child, should not be included in the MIT. This is because
the child support is not for the maintenance of an FTB child. If there
are other remaining FTB children, only the portion of the discharged
arrears relating to the current FTB children should be included in the
MIT.

The non-paid amount is not automatically reported to Centrelink via the
data exchange. The customer will need to self-identify and advise any
non-paid arrears amounts.

From 1 July 2012, customers will continue to pass the MAT regardless of
whether they are successful in privately collecting the arrears amount.

Prior to 1 July 2012, customers who asked Child Support not to pursue
collection of outstanding arrears would continue to pass the Maintenance
Action Test (MAT) as long as they attempted to collect the outstanding
amount privately. If the customer advised that they intended to
privately collect the arrears but were then unsuccessful in collecting
some or all of the arrears, the non-paid amounts would not be included
in the maintenance income assessment. If after asking Child Support not
to pursue collection of outstanding arrears, the customer advised that
they did not intend to attempt to collect the arrears, they would fail
the MAT from the date of the decision and for the remainder of the
financial year unless they were granted an exemption from seeking child
support.

The Resources page contains contact details for Child Support.

Related links

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Family Tax Benefit and child support for children born as a result of a
surrogacy arrangement or via artificial conception procedure (including
children born of same-sex couples)

Family Tax Benefit customer has a court order or a court order
registered agreement

Customer cannot make a private arrangement for a Stage 1 child -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for customers with shared care

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Backdating a Maintenance Action Test (MAT) exemption from seeking child
support prior to 1 July of the previous year

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Increasing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A after action has been taken
to obtain child support

Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas and
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Checking reasonable action has been taken to obtain child support for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) past period claims

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Exemptions from seeking child support from Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Amending maintenance income details on the Override Maintenance Income
(MNOI) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
