
Changing from Child Support collection to private collection: effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 277-51130080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can change from Child Support
collection to private collection and how it affects their Family Tax
Benefit (FTB).

On this Page:

Private collect Child Support

Customers can ask Child Support to change their collection method at any
time.

By changing the collection method, the customer is not changing the
payer's liability to pay child support, but instead is electing to
privately collect their child support entitlement.

Before 1 July 2012, unless granted an exemption (full or partial) from
seeking child support, FTB customers who elected to privately collect
their child support were required to collect their full child support
entitlement to be paid more than the base rate of FTB Part A for the
child.

From 1 July 2012, private collect customers will be deemed as receiving
their full child support entitlement, regardless of the amount actually
received, unless an exemption (full or partial) from seeking child
support has been granted.

To change to private collection, refer the customer to Child Support.
For contact details, see Child Support.

Child Support may also ask customers to change to private collection if:

-   the paying parent has a satisfactory payment record for the past 6
    months
-   Child Support is satisfied that the paying parent is likely to
    continue to pay their child support on time, and
-   Child Support is satisfied that private payment arrangements are
    appropriate for the parties involved

Customers may ask Child Support to start collecting again if the private
arrangement breaks down.

Discharged child support arrears

A customer may elect to change from Child Support to private collect
even if they have arrears outstanding from the Child Support collect
period.

If a Child Support collect customer elects to change to private
collection and at the same time, or at a later date, discharges Child
Support from the responsibility of collecting some or all of the
outstanding arrears, the customer is taking responsibility for
collecting the arrears themselves.

When a customer contacts Child Support to discuss the implications of
changing their collection method, the customer should be advised that if
they ask Child Support not to pursue collection of the outstanding
amounts, the amount/s may impact on the rate of FTB Part A they will
receive.

Unless the customer is granted an exemption, the non paid arrears
amounts will be included in the Maintenance Income Test (MIT) in
addition to the customer's ongoing child support entitlement, from the
date of the decision for the remainder of the financial year, regardless
of the period to which the amount relates, and regardless of whether the
customer:

-   takes no action to collect the arrears
-   is successful in collecting the arrears, or
-   is unsuccessful in collecting the arrears

If the customer advises they are unsuccessful in collecting the arrears,
they should be advised it would be in their best interests to seek legal
advice to obtain the arrears.

For the subsequent period of private collection, the customer will be
deemed as receiving the amount of outstanding arrears as well as their
normal child support entitlement for Maintenance Income Test purposes.

The non paid amounts are not automatically reported to Centrelink via
the data exchange. The customer needs to self-identify and advise any
non paid arrears amounts so they can be manually coded.

From 1 July 2012, customers will continue to pass the Maintenance Action
Test (MAT) regardless of whether they are successful in privately
collecting the arrears amount.

Discharged child support arrears prior to 1 July 2012

Before 1 July 2012, customers who asked Child Support not to pursue
collection of outstanding arrears would continue to pass the MAT as long
as they attempted to collect the outstanding amount privately.

If the customer advised that they intended to privately collect the
arrears but were then unsuccessful in collecting some or all of the
arrears, the non-paid amounts would not be included in the Maintenance
Income Test.

After asking Child Support not to pursue collection of outstanding
arrears, if the customer advised that they did not intend to attempt to
collect the arrears, they would fail the MAT from the date of the
decision for the remainder of the financial year unless they were
granted an exemption from seeking child support.

The Resources page contains contact details for Child Support.

Related links

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Maintenance reconciliation

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
