
Child support deductions from income support payments 277-51020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for child support deductions from
income support payments.

On this page:

Child Support deductions

From 1 July 2008, Child Support is able to recover up to three times the
minimum child support liability amount from a customer's income support
payments. Child Support may instruct Centrelink to apply the deduction
in relation to the customer's current child support liability, child
support arrears, or both.

Income support payments include Austudy but do not include exceptional
circumstance payments.

Child Support deductions display on a customer's Payment Details (PD)
screen as CSSLIA. A total figure is shown for the full amount deducted
for child support and does not identify whether it is current liability,
arrears or both.

Customer queries child support deduction

If a customer does not agree with the amount deducted for child support
or the payments that child support is deducted from, they must discuss
or appeal this decision with Child Support.

The customer may need to contact Child Support to clarify the breakdown
of the deductions; which children it is for and whether it is for
current liability, arrears or both.

In general, the minimum and maximum amounts are legislatively set and
not generally overturned. Hardship provisions do exist and the customer
must discuss any request for consideration of hardship or change to
deductions with Child Support.

Customer cares for child

Income support customers who have a Shared Care Child in their care will
not have a current child support liability for that child as the costs
are being met through the care they provide.

It is possible though for the customer to have child support deductions
for arrears of child support for this child and/or current
liability/arrears for other children.

Where there is a change of care, the rate deducted for child support may
not change, as the customer may still need to pay arrears of child
support.

Customers can request child support deductions

The child support payer can ask Child Support to arrange deductions from
their income support payments to cover their child support liability.

Centrelink cannot process a payer's request to have deductions taken
from their income support or for deductions to be increased, reduced or
ceased. The payer must contact Child Support to ask for this to be
arranged.

Parents in prison

Customers with child support payment commitments who are imprisoned or
entering detention must contact Child Support to advise their change of
circumstances either prior to entering prison or as soon as possible
after entering. This can assist imprisoned payers to avoid possible
child support debts.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website,
which provides customers with information about child support
liabilities when a person enters prison and contact details for Child
Support.

Related links

Child support debt recovery from Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
