
Employer/Organisation debt repayment (CS) 277-04180000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process used by Employer Service Officers
(ESO) to negotiate debt repayment with employers, including outstanding
consolidated revenue and top up debt

Employer Services

Employer Services are responsible for setting up and overseeing child
support payments via deductions from a parent's salary or wage. The
employer is notified to commence deductions and remitted payments are
sent to Child Support to be disbursed to the receiving parent.

Where an employer fails to remit as scheduled and a debt arises, ESOs
negotiate a payment arrangement with the employer. If the employer fails
to negotiate or comply with the arrangement, litigation or prosecution
action may occur.

Comprehensively document all debt repayment activities undertaken with
employers because if litigation/prosecution action occurs these
documents will be evidence.

Roles and responsibilities

ESO

Negotiate an acceptable payment arrangement, or when negotiations fail,
determine the appropriate course of action.

Service Support Officer (SSO)

Provide advice on complex issues or when ESOs need help.

This can be an SSO or a Program Support Manager.

Payment Services Team

If an employer advises that a payment is not showing on their account,
this team can help locate missing payments.

Intelligence and Investigations Branch

Review all referrals of fraud allegations and other allegations of
serious non-compliance offences potentially committed by employers.

The Resources page contains resources related to organisation/employer
debt repayment in Child Support.

Related links

Contact with Child Support customers

Documenting Child Support information

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Employer withholding reconciliation and top up

Employers that have gone into liquidation

Fraud

Letters for Child Support customers

Non-pursuit of employer child support debts

Suspense account management

Employer Reconciliation Reports (ERRs) for non STP employers Cuba
Process Help

Employer withholding (linking) Cuba Process Help

Organisation payment arrangements Cuba Process Help

Penalties Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
