
Lump Sum child support 277-02030000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The information in this document should be read in conjunction with the
Agreements between Child support customers, Court varied Child Support
assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders and the Notional Assessment
relating to child support agreements.

This document outlines the differences between the various arrangements
for lump sum payment of child support, and how to action them
appropriately. From 1 July 2008 Service Officers must be aware of the
difference between lump sum payment provisions and non-periodic payment
provisions.

On this Page:

Lump sum binding agreements

A lump sum binding agreement is a unique type of agreement where the
parties can agree to a lump sum payment amount being credited against
the amount payable under the administrative assessment. It is a way of
formalising the payment of large sums of child support. The lump sum is
credited against the amount payable each year at 100% (unless the
agreement specifies a lower percentage), and any remaining lump sum
credit is indexed at the Consumer Price Index (CPI) on 1 July each year.
See the Child Support Guide 5.3.3: Crediting lump sum payments.

Section 123A court orders for lump sum crediting

From 1 July 2008 parents (or a non-parent carer) with a child support
assessment in force can apply to a court for an order that requires the
payer to provide child support in the form of a lump sum to be credited
against the liability payable. The court can make a section 123A court
order if it would be just, equitable and otherwise proper to do so.

See the Child Support Guide 4.3.2: Applications and orders about
decisions under the Assessment Act.

The crediting of the lump sum against the liability payable under a
section 123A order works the same as the crediting of a lump sum under a
lump sum binding agreement. The payments are credited once a year, and
any remaining lump sum is indexed annually by a CPI factor.

Non-periodic payment provisions

A court order (sections 124 and 125) or child support agreement (section
84(1)(d)) can provide for a parent to pay child support in the form of
payments to third parties. These are non-periodic payment provisions.
The Assessment Act does not limit the types of payments that can be
included in these provisions, but the most common forms are school fees,
mortgage payments, health insurance and the costs of orthodontic
treatment.

A non-periodic payment provision works by specifying how the
non-periodic payment will affect the annual rate payable under the
administrative assessment. For example, the one-off payment of $5,000 in
private school fees by the paying parent may be specified to reduce the
annual rate under the administrative assessment by 50%. If the annual
rate of the administrative assessment was $12,000, then the annual rate
of the administrative assessment would be reduced by 50% to $6,000. The
paying parent would still need to pay $6,000 for child support.

Non-periodic payment provisions can be contained in:

-   a limited child support agreement
-   a binding child support agreement, or
-   a court order made under section 124

A court order (section 124) or child support agreement (section
84(1)(f)) can also provide for non-periodic payments that do not affect
the annual rate payable under the administrative assessment. These
payments are paid in addition to the assessed annual rate.

Lump sum payment provision and non-periodic payment provision

It is important to recognise the difference between a lump sum payment
provision and a non-periodic payment provision. The difference is:

-   a non-periodic payment provision can be in either a binding or
    limited agreement, or in a court order made under section 124 and
    must reduce the annual rate of the assessment by an agreed amount or
    percentage (except where the court finds that special circumstances
    exist), whereas
-   a lump sum payment credit does not reduce the annual rate under the
    assessment but creates a credit against the amount payable under the
    assessment

Note: an agreement that includes a lump sum payment provision could also
include other provisions that may alter the assessment.

For more information on the differences between the 2 see the Child
Support Guide 2.7.1: What is a child support agreement? If more
information is required, seek help from a Service Support Officer (SSO).

Related links

Agreements between Child support customers

Court varied Child Support assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders

Documenting Child Support information

Notional Assessment relating to child support agreements

Agreements Cuba Process Help

Additional Registration Information Window Help

Agreement Lump sum Window Help

Payer Account Summary Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
