
Letters for Child Support customers 277-01060000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the process for writing to Child Support
customers.

Use of written correspondence

The phone is the primary tool for communicating with Child Support
customers. Child Support will try to speak to customers first unless the
customer prefers Child Support to respond to their enquiry another way.

If a customer has a restricted customer service option limiting them to
written correspondence only, see Personalised Services.

Child Support uses letters as a means of contact only when there is a
legislative or administrative requirement to provide a written notice.
This includes when:

-   making a decision
-   confirming a step in a process
-   sending a formal notice

Most Child Support letters do not include a signature image. These
letters are lawful because Child Support legislation does not require a
signature on correspondence. See References.

This document provides information about:

-   the different types of letters
-   when approval is required
-   letter writing principles
-   printing letters

Roles

A Service Officer 3 (SO3) and above is authorised to:

-   send an MX1-1 Request for client to contact CSA
-   send an MX0-1 Unique letter or MX0-2 Unique letter with assessment
    with pre-approved text
-   create a manually generated system letter with free text. SO6
    approval to send the letter is required

A Service Officer 4 (SO4) and above is authorised to:

-   send an MX14-1 Advise Outcome of Objection (Non NAP) letter for a
    general objection. See Child Support objections for more information
    about how to use this letter

A Service Officer 6 (SO6) and above is authorised to:

-   Approve a manually generated system letter with pre-approved text
    that has been updated
-   Approve a manually generated system letter with free text
-   Approve an MX14-1 Advise Outcome of Objection (Non NAP) letter for
    an objection to a COA decision if recommending consideration by an
    authorised decision maker). See Child Support objections for more
    information about how to use this letter

Contents

Letters Cuba Process Help

Manual letters in Pluto

Related links

Change of assessment in special circumstances (CS)

Child Support channel preferences, letters online and messages

Contact with Child Support customers

Documenting Child Support information

Correspondence received in Child Support

Identity checks and confirmation for Child Support

Child Support objections

Obsolete Child Support entries

Open Exchange of Information for Child Support customers

Responding to requests from overseas authorities (excluding New Zealand)

Technical support in Child support

CSAOnline Secure Message Cuba Process Help

Customer Record Cuba Process Help

Customer Representative Cuba Process Help

Documentation Cuba Process Help

Intray management Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
