
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for escalation of child support
related policy matters from operational areas to the Child Support
Program Advice Team. It includes the processes for referring Child
Support Guide feedback and requests for legal advice about child support
legislation.

Overview

Service Support Officers (SSOs) and Program Support Managers (PSMs)
should independently resolve the majority of routine technical and
policy issues for operational staff delivering child support services.
SSOs and PSMs follow the technical support procedure and use available
resources, for example the Child Support Guide, Operational Blueprint
and expertise within the technical support network.

Support from the Child Support Program Advice Team may be required
where:

-   an issue is not covered in the Child Support Guide
-   information in the Child Support Guide appears to be ambiguous or
    unclear
-   the Child Support Guide is clear but assistance is needed to
    determine the proper policy outcome in a particular case
-   a policy issue is especially complex (the case may be very sensitive
    due to multiple customer escalations or pending/likely litigation)
-   a decision of a tribunal or a court is, or appears to be,
    inconsistent with the policy as stated in the Child Support Guide
-   a particular decision requires authorisation by Program Advice

Role of the Child Support Program Advice Team

Policy advice can be sought in relation to a systemic issue or issues
affecting many cases, or in relation to an individual case with unique
facts. While the policy stated in the Child Support Guide is designed to
support decision makers in the majority of cases, it does not anticipate
every circumstance that arises.

Advice will be provided with consideration of the fundamental principles
(legislative, policy including the object and intent of the legislation,
guidelines for the use of discretion and administrative law, etc.) to
enable a decision to be made which adheres to the policy intent.

For example, policy advice may include, but is not limited to, advice
about:

-   what to take into account and what to disregard in the making of a
    particular decision
-   which aspects of the policy are legislated requirements and which
    are discretionary
-   where there is discretion, what the intended outcome of the policy
    is so that decisions can be made that are consistent with the
    preferred policy direction

The Child Support Program Advice Team will assist in determining what
the appropriate policy is and where necessary provide guidance about how
to properly apply the policy.

The Child Support Program Advice Team does not manage customer cases.
The team will not make the actual decision in a particular case as this
is the responsibility of operational staff. Exceptions are 'review and
alter' decisions or decisions to declare a decision ‘invalid’. There is
no simple distinction between technical and policy issues and when the
distinction is blurred, the team will assist with the enquiry. For
example, it is the responsibility of Program Support Managers to perform
calculations about the effect on the annual rate of a proposed decision.

Child Support Program Advice also coordinates:

-   feedback and updates for the Child Support Guide
-   requests for legal advice about child support legislation

The Resources page contains links to contact details, the request for
advice template, response timeframes and requests for legal advice.

Related links

Technical Support in Child Support

Documenting Child Support information in Cuba

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
