-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the Customer Management Approach (CMA) which sets
out the expectations for managing all customers in Child Support. The
CMA applies to customer service staff in all business areas, unless
noted by exception.

Customer Management Approach (CMA) focus

Customer management is all about the customer

Child Support is required to work with customers in a way that resolves
presenting issues and ensures the right amount of child support is paid
in full and on time. The approach is clearly focused on the customer
experience and their journey through Child Support. It is about
achieving better customer outcomes and improving the collection of child
support, no matter what part of the business a Service Officer is in.

The service in Child Support is collection

The CMA helps Service Officers bring to life the goal of making
'collection is everyone's responsibility.' A nationally consistent
approach ensures collection is a core part of all of Child Support's
interactions with customers.

This section outlines the principles and features that guide Child
Support's approach to managing all customer interactions. The steps in
the instructions are aligned to these principles.

Customer management principles

This information below describes the 4 key principles that underpin the
Customer Management Approach. Each of these principles drives Child
Support's approach with customers, so that the service Child Support
provides supports quality customer outcomes.

1. Collection focus

All areas working towards achieving payment and collection outcomes,
ensuring that collection is everyone's responsibility.

2. Customers

Maximising customer interactions by:

-   aiming to resolve the customer enquiry at the point of entry
-   addressing all outstanding issues
-   interacting in a manner that suits the customer's needs, providing
    easy access and utilising available channels, and
-   appropriately connecting customers to more specialised areas, or
    external referrals for assistance. See Service referrals for Child
    Support customers

3. Quality

Taking responsibility for delivering quality outcomes, working with
parents and explaining decisions to get it right the first time.

4. People

Making sure the process supports staff by reducing duplication, being
simple, easy to use, well implemented and well supported

Features of the Customer Management Approach

The information below describes the 5 key features of the CMA.

1. Collection is everyone's responsibility

Child Support's core service is collection. In all interactions with
parents, Child Support shows that it cares about collection by working
to ensure that child support is paid in full and on time. Wherever
possible, payment, care, and incomes will be addressed up front and
during every customer interaction.

Different parts of the business have different roles in collecting child
support. However, staff in all business areas will undertake at least
Minimum Collection Activity.

Minimum Collection Activity will generally be achieved at the point of
customer contact or through simple follow-up action. More complex
follow-up or collection action will be undertaken by the appropriate
business area.

2. A consistent approach to locking and unlocking

Locking and unlocking is based on achieving key outcomes that will help
improve the customer experience in line with Child Support's customer
management principles. These are:

-   to deliver customers to the right business line so that anyone in
    that area can assist
-   to clearly identify who is responsible for any outbound work or
    follow-up action, and
-   to ensure the Service Officer verbally explains decisions before
    finalising

Service Officers should make every effort to contact customers verbally
to explain decisions, as per Contact with Child Support Customers.

Verbally explaining decisions gives customers an opportunity to raise
issues, identify opportunities to offer external referrals and helps
them to understand reasons for the decisions made. Where a Service
Officer is unable to make contact, auto-unlocking allows customers to
contact Child Support after receiving written advice and to have their
call answered by the appropriate area.

3. Common and specialised work activities

It is important that Child Support maximises the customer experience by
addressing all customer issues at the point of entry wherever possible.
This provides a holistic service, reduces duplication and minimises
customer transfers between business areas.

To do this the department provides a core service offer through a set of
'common' work activities. These are completed by all staff, with more
specialised activities undertaken by the appropriate specialist areas.

See Common and specialised activities for Child Support staff for more
details.

4. Managing multiple issues - a collaborative approach

Sometimes customers present with multiple issues. It's important that
Child Support manages these in a way that is easy for customers and
connects them to specialist assistance, or external referrals where
required. The approach varies depending on the combination of common and
specialised activities.

Often customers will present with both child support and non-child
support related issues. It is important that Child Support manages the
child support issues and also provides external referrals to connect
customers with available help from other organisations.

5. Working with payees to improve collection outcomes

Collection is Child Support's core service and the Service Officer needs
to work with both parents to improve collection outcomes. Payees can be
a valuable source of collection information and should be kept informed
of the action taken.

Gathering collection information from payees is a critical step in
determining if new collection information is available.

If there is no new collection information, Child Support needs to
explain this to payees and tell them any new collection information that
becomes available will be followed up.

The Resources page contains links and tools to support the CMA. These
resources will assist Service Officers to make quality decisions in line
with the CMA principles and processes.

Contents

Customer Management Approach (CMA) process

Common and Specialised Activities for Child Support staff

Customer referral guidelines

Finalisation guidelines for Child Support staff

Related links

Agreements between Child Support customers

Authenticating a Child Support customer

Change in Child Support Care levels from 1 July 2018 (15 May 2019 for WA
Ex-nuptial cases)

Change of assessment in special circumstances

Child Support Estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Child Support estimates (Post 1 July 2010)

Child Support estimates review (Post 1 July 2010)

Child support overpayments and payee debt

Collecting Child Support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Contact with Child Support customers

Correcting a duplicate Child Support customer record

Correcting errors on Child Support cases

Court varied Child Support assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders

Debt offset

Debt repayment

Deceased Child Support customer management

Departure Prohibition Orders (DPO) for Child Support customers

Disbursements of child support

Documenting Child Support information

Eighteen year old children extending a Child Support assessment

Ending a Child Support assessment

Excess cash on a Child Support customer's account

Fixed annual rate not to apply applications

Income processing for Child Support customers

Integrated Care- Disagreed and disputed Care

Debt Enforcement referrals

Managing Child Support customer debt enforcement referrals

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Minimum Annual Rate to nil - Reducing Child Support assessments

New Zealand 'In' case management – Withdrawals and returns to NZIRCS
from Child Support

Non-agency payment (NAP)

Non pursuit of individual Child Support debts

Penalties for Child Support debts

Personalised Services

Post Separation Income for Child Support customers

Registration of overseas maintenance liabilities (excluding NZ) in Child
Support

Solutions Gateway Team

Tax Refund Intercept Process (TRIP) exceptions

Transmittal of Child Support information (excluding NZ)

Assessments Cuba Process Help

Intray Management Cuba Process Help

Transfer or lock a customer Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
