
Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) 277-51070110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when it is appropriate to refer a customer to
seek legal advice so that they can satisfy the Maintenance Action Test
(MAT) to be paid more than base rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for
a child.

On this Page:

Referring FTB customers for legal advice

FTB customers who need to take action to obtain child support for a
child must be referred to seek legal advice if:

-   they know the parent's identity but are unable to obtain evidence of
    parentage, unless the liable parent is living overseas. Note: in
    these cases, the customer must first apply for a child support
    assessment and have the application rejected by Child Support
-   they cannot privately collect the full amount of a court order or
    formal agreement which includes non-cash maintenance. In this case
    they need to apply to have the existing arrangement changed or ended

If a customer has been referred to seek legal advice and the Maintenance
Action Test (MAT) code 'PRP' (seeking proof of parentage) has already
been coded, PRP can only be recorded a subsequent time once the customer
provides evidence that they have taken action (such as a letter from a
legal service or evidence of a court date).

Customers may receive advice that legal action is unlikely to be
successful or that a legal service is unable to assist the individual
due to remoteness. In these cases, the customer satisfies the MAT if
they provide evidence of that legal advice. If a customer is unable to
provide evidence or is reluctant to take legal action, they should be
referred to a Social Worker or Indigenous Specialist Officer for an
assessment for an exemption.

Legal costs

Services Australia is not able to pay legal costs for customers.
Community legal centres run free weekly advice sessions - no appointment
is needed. The Legal Aid Commission caters for people on low income,
although customers may need to contribute towards the cost. Customers
are required to show that they are taking legal action before their
maintenance action can be updated to 'PRP' a second or subsequent time.

Legal Aid

Legal Aid and other community legal centres can provide general
information about various child support issues through legal advice,
information sessions, self-help kits and in some cases, casework
assistance.

For contact details, see Legal Aid Commissions for phone numbers for
customers.

Manual follow-ups

Where a customer is referred to, or provides evidence showing that they
are pursuing proof of parentage with a legal service, the customer's
Maintenance Action Test code may be updated to 'PRP'. 85 days after the
'PRP' date of event, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) matures to follow-up what
action is being taken. If no further updates are made to the MAT code,
the customer will fail the MAT and their FTB will be reduced to base
rate after a total of 99 days. The Resources page contains the approved
text to be used for Q999/Q888 letters.

Direct advice from Legal Aid

Since 8 April 2013, Legal Aid practitioners can fax directly to
Centrelink via the National scanning fax number 1300 786 102 to advise
they are assisting customers. The fax will be scanned to the customer's
record and the relevant child/ren's Maintenance Action Test indicator
will be updated accordingly. Customers can still choose to provide this
evidence themselves, it does not have to come from Legal Aid.

The Resources page contains contact details for Legal Aid Commissions
and examples of the assistance customers can receive from Legal Aid in
relation to child support issues, text to be used in a Q999Q888 when a
customer is seeking proof of parentage and scenarios where legal advice
has been provided.

Related links

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer with a court order or a court
registered agreement

Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Family Tax benefit (FTB) customer wants to register a child support
agreement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
