-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to support Deceased Customer
Management (DCM) Service Officers to manage cases when a child support
parent, carer or child is deceased.

It provides information on how to process the death in Cuba, work
effectively with customers to address any outstanding child support and
appropriately refer executors or family member to support services.

Managing child support issues for deceased customers

The DCM service offer ensures a sensitive and supportive approach is
delivered to customers when someone associated to their child support
case is deceased. This offer extends until all child support matters
relating to a notification of death have been finalised.

Following a notification of death DCM manages:

-   contact with next of kin, third parties or the associated
    parent/carer of deceased customers
-   enquiries related to deceased parents, carers or children
-   system processing to ensure accuracy of assessment
-   activities associated with Estate follow up and debt collection

International cases

If the customer died, or resides overseas at the time of their death,
the case must be referred to the DCM team for management. The team will
liaise with the International Central Authority Team for issues
affecting processing or finalisation.

Letters

Customers may continue to receive letters or statements associated with
the case. These letters may name a deceased person. Although this may be
upsetting; child support needs to tell customers of any retrospective
changes to their assessment. DCM Service Officers must explain this to
customers when a death is notified.

The Resources page contains resources for the management of deceased
customer cases.

Contents

Notification of death - Child support

Confirmation of death for Child Support customers

Customer contact following a death notification

Testacy Searches and collection options when someone has died

Deceased customer management Cuba Process help

Child support notification of death - Customer First processing (LPD
Coding)

Related links

Child support overpayments and other payee debt

Customer contact

Debt repayment

Documenting Child Support information in Cuba

Initial notification of death (CLK)

Manual reconciliation procedure for child support estimates (from 1 July
2011)

Obsolete Child Support entries

Social worker and other service referrals for Child Support customers

Tax Refund Intercept Process (TRIP) exceptions

Waivers for Child Support customers

Customer representative Cuba Process Help

Discharge arrears Cuba Process Help

Eligibility Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Penalties Cuba Process Help

Sensitive issue management Cuba Process Help

Waiver Cuba Process Help

Deceased Client Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
