
UNCRAM applications for establishment of an overseas maintenance liability 277-19061048

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage a United Nations Convention on the
Recovery Abroad of Maintenance (UNCRAM) application for establishment of
an overseas maintenance liability.

On this Page:

UNCRAM

UNCRAM was signed in New York on 20 June 1956. It aimed to overcome the
legal and practical difficulties involved in establishing claims for
maintenance abroad where other reciprocal arrangements did not exist.
Australia is a contracting party to the convention.

UNCRAM countries are listed in United Nations Treaty Collection. The
Resources page has a link to the United Nations Treaty Collection.

A payee in an UNCRAM country can make an application to an UNCRAM
country where the payer resides, via the relevant overseas authority.
That country would then establish a maintenance liability on the payee’s
behalf. See References for a link to The Child Support Guide -
International Agreements & Conventions.

Application for establishment of an overseas maintenance liability

Where the payer lives in an overseas country that is both a
reciprocating jurisdiction and an UNCRAM country, a payee living in
Australia may apply for:

-   an Australian child support assessment, or
-   apply directly to the overseas jurisdiction to seek establishment of
    a child support or maintenance liability in that jurisdiction

Generally in these circumstances the payee chooses to apply for an
Australian child support assessment. Child Support asks the
reciprocating jurisdiction to collect the liability (transmits the
assessment) if:

-   the payee applies for the assessment to be transmitted, or
-   Child Support determines it is appropriate to do so

However, a payee in Australia may choose to apply directly to an
overseas jurisdiction to seek establishment of a child support or
maintenance liability in that jurisdiction. This may be because:

-   the jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to recognise and enforce an
    Australian administrative child support assessment, or
-   the payee is not eligible for an Australian child support assessment
    because for example, the child is over 18, or
-   the payer lives in a non-reciprocating jurisdiction

If the payer lives in an UNCRAM country, a payee can ask Child Support
to forward their application for establishment of a liability to the
country in which the payer resides. The relevant authorities (usually
courts) in that country will decide the level of maintenance payable
under the relevant law in that jurisdiction.

Child Support’s role in the application process is to:

-   check the payee’s application is complete
-   forward the application to the relevant overseas authority, and
-   provide advice whether an application for assessment may be an
    alternative option for the parent

Child Support can register an overseas maintenance order made in
response to an UNCRAM application for collection.

Parents should seek legal advice before making an UNCRAM application.
Child Support cannot provide advice about overseas maintenance laws and
court procedures. UNCRAM applications received by Child Support are
usually prepared by the payee’s lawyer.

The Resources page contains links to the United Nations Treaty
Collection website, the Central Authority Address Listing and the Guide
to Reciprocating Jurisdictions.

Related links

Central Authority Address Listing for Child Support International
customers

Contact with Child Support customers

Transmittal of Child Support information (excluding NZ)

Letters Cuba Process Help

Applications for a child support assessment

Registration of overseas maintenance liabilities (excluding New Zealand)

Documenting Child Support information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
