-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for managing a Level 1 complaint.

Level 1 complaints

A Level 1 complaint is the response to customers managed at first point
of contact. This includes complaints received via:

-   the Services Australia Feedback and Complaints line
-   a general business queue
-   an outbound call
-   face to face contact, or
-   from a customer writing a letter or communicating online

The Service Officer who receives the complaint takes ownership of the
complaint and attempts to resolve. They may need support from a Service
Support Officer (SSO) or Team Leader. Record a Level 1 complaint when a
customer advises a Service Officer they are not satisfied with:

-   a Child Support process
-   a decision, or
-   the behaviour of an individual staff member

Level 1 complaints may indicate areas for future business improvements.

The way the agency answer calls on the Feedback and Complaints line
needs to be consistent across each service brand. The Service Officer
needs to reference to the service the customer called. For example,
‘Welcome to the Child Support Feedback and Complaints line, this is…’

The Complaints Escalation Reasons provides support and guidance for
escalating a customer complaint as a Level 2 complaint for
investigation.

When allocated a Level 1 complaint the Service Officer must:

-   review the case and consider referrals and options available
-   seek Service Support Officer (SSO) advice if required
-   contact the customer and provide an introduction
-   confirm the customer’s issues, be prepared to discuss them and give
    the relevant referrals and options
-   give an outcome to the customer

Note: ensure customer contact occurs in accordance with their
preferences.

A Level 1 complaint must be finalised within 10 business days of
receipt.

Difference between a general enquiry and a complaint

Consider the following criteria to assess if a customer is making a
general enquiry or a complaint:

-   the way in which the customer communicates or expresses the issues
-   the urgency of the issues raised
-   the potential or actual impact of the identified issues on the
    customer
-   prior or ongoing attempts at resolution, through regular business
    processes

General enquiries are contacts from customers for information or advice.
Their intention is not to make a complaint, compliment or suggestion.
Some examples of general enquiries include, when a customer:

-   is not happy with a decision and wants to know their review rights
-   wants to know about a payment date or amount
-   needs help to complete a transaction online
-   seeks advice about collection options or the progress of an
    objection or Change of Assessment decision

Difference between an objection and a complaint

A complaint is not a review of the correctness of a decision. Customers
must pursue their review rights through the relevant channels such as
objection or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

Contents

Written complaint received - Child Support

Related links

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Recording Child Support complaints and compliments in Cuba

Level 1 - Managing customer complaints and feedback

Level 2 complaints

Level 2 complaints - Child Support

Solutions Gateway Team

Parent Support Team

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
