
Child Support collection customer advises Centrelink of direct payments from paying parent (non-agency payments) 277-51130100

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a child support customer
receives direct payments from the paying parent.

On this Page:

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

FTB customers who have asked Child Support to collect their ongoing
child support payments, or who are private collect and have arrears
owing for a previous Child Support collect period, may need to advise
Child Support when they receive a direct payment from the same paying
parent. These are known as non-agency payments (NAPs).

FTB customers need to advise details of any NAPs to Child Support. Child
Support encourages customers to make their own arrangements for
receiving child support and a NAP may be assessed as part of the paying
parent's child support liability.

Recording and assessing NAPs

Child Support will decide whether or not to record the child support
separately to the customer's existing child support entitlement. Any
amount recorded by Child Support will be transferred to Centrelink
electronically and assessed as part of the customer’s annual maintenance
income.

For FTB purposes, maintenance income is assessed in the financial year
it is received.

For ongoing FTB payments, a NAP is included as maintenance income under
the Disbursement Method for a Child Support collection customer. It is
included in the year to date amount and in the amount for the current/
previous month to estimate annual maintenance income for the rest of the
financial year. At FTB reconciliation, the NAP is included as annual
maintenance income.

Generally, the NAP amount should not be recorded manually by Service
Officers. However, if the value of the NAP is greater than $1,500 and it
is to be credited towards future child support liability, it may be
treated as capitalised maintenance. Capitalised maintenance (a lump sum
payment or transfer of asset over $1,500 in value) must be assessed and
recorded by Centrelink.

What can be assessed as a NAP?

NAPs can be described as direct payments or prescribed payments. FTB
customers need to advise both of these to Child Support. For FTB, they
are both treated the same.

Direct payments

These can only be credited if both parents agree that the payment was
made in lieu of child support. They can be either:

-   a direct payment such as cash, clothes, transfer of property rights,
    or providing a service such as lawn mowing or bookkeeping
-   third party payments made to parties on behalf of the other parent.
    Examples include payments for a holiday, sports and recreation,
    music and dance lessons

Prescribed payments

-   These are certain payments that can be credited as child support
    even if the parent receiving child support doesn’t agree that the
    payment was in lieu of child support
-   As long as the paying parent pays 70% of their normal monthly child
    support payment on time, a maximum of 30% of the monthly payment can
    be credited in this way
-   Child Support will only credit prescribed payments if the paying
    parent has less than 14% care (Regular Care Child)
-   They can be for child care costs, school fees, school uniform and
    book fees, essential medical and dental items, and other parent’s
    share of rent, mortgage, utilities and rates, or some motor vehicle
    costs

Customer advises that NAP information on the Centrelink system is incorrect

NAPs are assessed in the financial year they are received based on the
information received from Child Support via the data exchange.
Occasionally, a NAP may show on the Centrelink system as a lump sum when
it was actually received over several financial years. As the Centrelink
system reflects what has been recorded by Child Support, the NAP will be
assessed based on the received date as advised by Child Support.

If a customer advises that a non-agency payment was actually received
over more than 1 financial year, or the customer adivises that a NAP has
been cancelled by Child Support, a Fast Note should be sent to the Child
Support Unit (region 'CSJ') for follow-up.

The Resources page contains examples of the assessment of NAPs, a link
to the Services Australia website and contact details for Child Support.

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Disbursement Method

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
