
Claims for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for recently separated customers 277-50040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how a separated individual may claim Family Tax
Benefit (FTB).

On this Page:

Eligibility for FTB

An individual is eligible for FTB if they:

-   Satisfy
    Australian residence requirements
-   Have an FTB child in their care. If care of a child is shared
    between two or more individuals, the child must be in the
    individual's actual care for at least 35% of the time. Individuals
    with a Regular Care Child in their care can claim FTB to receive
    ancillary benefits for the child
-   Are entitled to a rate of FTB greater than nil

Separate income tests apply for the three parts of FTB: Part A, Part B,
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS). Note: FTB Part A and Part B
supplement and SIFS is payable to eligible recipients at the end of the
financial year during reconciliation or lump sum claim assessment.

[] Claimants can use the online estimators to estimate their potential
FTB entitlement.

Only one member of a couple may be eligible for FTB, except for members
of a blended family and separated individuals claiming for a past period
when they were a couple.

Claim requirements

To be eligible for FTB, individuals need to make an effective claim by:

submitting an [] online claim or lodging a paper claim by the end of the
lodgement year

providing all information and documentation required to assess their
claim:

-   their (and their partner's) tax file number
-   child's proof of birth if this has not previously been provided for
    the child

Care of a child

A person is considered to have care of a child if they are responsible
for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child. This
includes physical care (health, transport, accommodation etc.), making
daily decisions about their schooling and religion etc., financial
costs, and mental, moral and emotional support. The References page has
a more detailed definition.

Contents

Initial contact for claiming family assistance for children in their
care

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording ex-partner details

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
