
Child Support data has not loaded onto or is incorrectly affecting customer's record 277-51130120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Service Officers when Child
Support data does not load onto, or is incorrectly affecting, a
customer's Centrelink record.

Child Support data loading errors or mismatch of information

A customer may advise that they have a child support assessment but the
data is not present or is incorrect on their record.

Staff need to complete initial checks to:

-   make sure child support data is showing on the customer’s record, or
-   help the customer to apply for child support where appropriate

No Child Support data is present

Information transferred from Child Support via the data exchange may not
be present on the customer's record if the customer or child matching
process has not completed. This may not have occurred due to a mismatch
between the information held by Centrelink and Child Support.

The following details, if recorded incorrectly, may cause a mismatch:

-   spelling of the name of the customer or child
-   date of birth of the customer or child
-   address details of the customer or child

If personal details are incorrectly recorded by either Centrelink or
Child Support, the Service Officer must correct the customer record and
advise the Child Support Unit (CSU) via a Fast Note. CSU will then
complete the matching process and request that Child Support retransmit
the data. See the Process page for more information.

Child Support data is present but is incorrect and has resulted in an
incorrect debt

If an FTB debt is raised due to a known system error, it may be suitable
for a temporary write-off of the debt(s), pending the system error being
corrected. This should only occur if the details of the system problem
or issue has been published in Operational Messaging within the
Operational Blueprint or in a Network News Update (NNU) bulletin.

Error corrections/cancellations by Child Support not updated in the Centrelink system

Some updates made in the Child Support system will not automatically
update the Centrelink system. These include:

-   a child being incorrectly duplicated in the Child Support system.
    Child Support will cancel the duplicated record, but this will not
    remove the duplicated record from the maintenance group on MNGS
-   when a non-agency payment (NAP) is coded by Child Support and later
    cancelled in the Child Support system, the NAP will not
    automatically be removed from the MNGP screen.

For all scenarios where something has been cancelled in the Child
Support system, the record needs to be referred to ICT to have the
cancelled information removed from the Centrelink system.

Related links

Action required when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer no longer
entitled to child support

Amending maintenance income details on the Override Maintenance Income
(MNOI) screen

Changing from Child Support collection to private collection: effect on
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support collection customer advises Centrelink of direct payments
from paying parent (non-agency payments)

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Mutual customer matching with Child Support

Ongoing contact and child support assessment for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

What to check when your Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate has changed

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
