
Care objections 277-09170010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Objections Officers taking care
objections. It includes taking objections to care percentage decisions
by phone, and when a customer disagrees with the date of event of a care
change. The procedure is for Child Support Objections Officers at all
levels (APS4 – APS6).

Care Objections by phone

Objections to care decisions can be taken over the phone.

Objection to care percentage decision

Customers can object to a decision to apply a certain level of care in a
child support case. They may claim they have a higher level of care than
that recorded or the other party has a lower level of care than what
they claim.

Objection to change of care date

Customers can object to the date recorded for a change of care. They may
agree that a change in care has occurred but not with the date recorded
for the change.

Care suspension period

From 1 July 2018, a care suspension period may apply if a customer
advises a change in care:

-   outside of 28 days, but
-   within 26 weeks of the care change.

For more information see Care suspension period.

Roles and responsibilities

See Child Support objections for information about roles and
responsibilities.

Authorisations and delegations

See Child Support objections for information about authorisations and
delegations.

Related links

Child Support objections

Review objection

Gather evidence relating to Child Support objection

Make decision and finalise Child Support objection

Child Support objection received out of time - Extension of time and
Special Circumstance application

Summary disallow of Child Support Part 6A objections

The Resources page of Child Support objections contains examples, forms,
macros and many other resources relevant to processing Child Support
objections.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
