
Collecting child support payments privately and/or discharging arrears 277-04090000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speakerphone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information about elections to opt-out (collect
child support payments privately) and discharge child support arrears.

Opt-out definition

When a payee registers a child support case, unless the payee chooses to
privately collect child support, the case should be made collectable.
Where the collection method of a case is child support collect,
customers can choose to switch to private collection. This is referred
to as ‘opting out’. Payees who opt-out, have the option to discharge
child support arrears that are outstanding from a collect period.

Discharge arrears definition

Customers, courts and Child Support all use the term ‘discharge arrears’
to mean slightly different things. When the discharge function is used
in Cuba the arrears are removed from the account and are no longer
collectable by Child Support. The payee becomes responsible for
collecting the arrears and can make payment arrangements directly with
the payer. The payee can also enforce the arrears privately in court.
Once arrears have been discharged, the payee cannot later ask Child
Support to enforce them.

Customers and the court will sometimes use the term ‘discharge’ with no
intention that the arrears will ever be paid. This could have unforeseen
Centrelink consequences because Centrelink will deem that the child
support arrears have been received by the payee. It is therefore
essential that payees are referred to Centrelink for advice about the
effect of their decision to discharge arrears on any Family Tax Benefit
being paid.

Benefits of private collection

Child Support encourages private collection arrangements between parents
where possible. The benefits of private collection are:

-   greater customer control and responsibility over their child support
-   greater flexibility in payment type, method and frequency
-   less cost to the community
-   encouraging greater co-operation and communication between parents

Help both parents manage the change to private collect. Discuss with
each parent their requirements and explain their options.

Related links

Child Support estimates – Reconcile (pre 1 July 2011)

Child Support estimates review (Post 1 July 2010)

Contact with Child Support customers

Documenting Child Support information in Cuba

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Application for assessment - record a decision and finalise

Income processing for Child Support customers

Letters for Child Support customers

New Zealand Case management – Exchange of Information from NZIR to Child
Support

Non Agency Payments (NAPS)

Registrar Initiated Private Collect (RIPC)

Stage 1 cases – Low Income Non-Enforcement periods

Family and domestic violence

Child support overpayments and other payee debt

Intray management Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Reverse cases Cubs Process Help

Discharge arrears Cuba Process Help

Case Collection Details Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
