
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the External Complaints - Child Support
(ExCCS) team manages externally escalated complaints to Child Support.

Function of the ExCCS team

The ExCCS team is responsible for managing all externally escalated
complaints relating to Child Support service delivery. This includes
complaints via:

-   The Minister, CEO and Senior Executive Staff of Child Support Smart
    Centres
-   The Prime Minister and Members of Parliament, state and federal
-   The Commonwealth Ombudsman

The ExCCS team is also responsible for the investigation of media briefs
and executive minutes involving highly escalated and sensitive issues
and the identification and resolution of systemic issues that affect
quality outcomes for customers.

Apolitical interaction

The Australian Public Service (APS) is apolitical, performing its
function in an impartial and professional manner. Child Support staff
must remember that when dealing with Parliamentarians, Senators, the
Ombudsman or their staff they are an apolitical public servant
representing the agency. Any conflict of interest, real or apparent,
should be avoided. Staff must be aware of the APS Code of Conduct at all
times.

Note: any concerns about potential conflict of interest should be
discussed with the ExCCS Service Support Manager.

The Resources page contains links to the APS Code of Conduct and
conflict of interest information for staff.

Recording the correspondence

Correspondence is received by the ExCCS team in various ways. The ExCCS
Program Support Officer (PSO) scrutinises, records and allocates the
communication as per the ExCCS allocation principles.

All correspondence received by the Minister’s office is emailed to:

-   Ministerial Services Team (MST), or
-   APH mailbox
-   The MST receives correspondence from the
-   Prime Minister’s office
-   CEO
-   Parliamentarians who write directly to the Minister, or
-   other agencies/departments, such as the Department of Social
    Services

MST registers the correspondence onto the Parliamentary Document
Management System (PDMS) with the exception of Executive Correspondence
which is registered by the ExCCS PSO. This process generates a
Parliamentary Document Record (PDR). PDMS is used to create, store and
manage the workflow of parliamentary documents between the agency and
the Minister’s office.

Customers sometimes email their complaint directly to Services Australia
SES Officer. These complaints are managed as Executive correspondence
and responses are signed by the Multicultural and Tailored Services
Branch National Manager. All Executive correspondence is also recorded
on PDMS.

Enquiries from the Commonwealth Ombudsman

Ombudsman Relationship Management Services (ORMS) is responsible for
coordinating timely responses to the Ombudsman’s office. All enquiries
from the Ombudsman containing Child Support-related issues are received
by ORMS and forwarded to either:

-   ExCCS team - only Child Support related issues, ORMS sends section
    7A (preliminary investigation), section 8 enquiries (initial and
    further requests for information), section 12(4) Finalisation Notice
    with comments and clearance requests to the APH mailbox for
    allocation
-   External Complaints Resolution (ECR) team - both Centrelink and
    Child Support related issues, ORMS sends the Child Support component
    to the ECR mailbox and they forward to the APH mailbox for
    allocation

The ExCCS team also manages Ombudsman complaint transfers (OCT). OCTs
are sent from the Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman when the
Ombudsman's Investigation Officer (IO) identifies they will not proceed
with an investigation but would like the agency to assist the customer.
OCTs are received and forwarded to the ExCCS APH mailbox for allocation.

Requests from Waiver Team

The Child Support Programme Advice team sends email requests to the
ExCCS mailbox when ExCCS are required to prepare a Waiver Brief for a
customer. The email will include a copy of the Waiver Application and
outline the actions required by the ExCCS Service Officer, for example,
specific investigations required, identify any systemic issues, outline
any avenues for redress.

ExCCS PSO will allocate the Waiver Brief to an ExCCS Service Officer as
per the allocation principles. The email will outline the due date.

ExCCS Service Officer - Complete Waiver Investigation Brief Macro

See the table titled Customer Review - Investigate case in Waivers for
Child Support customers.

Media alerts and briefs

These are received via the APH mailbox. Any Child Support matters are
referred to the ExCCS Service Support Manager (SSM) in WA team, or in
the absence of this officer to an ExCCS SSM in another team.

The ExCCS SSM will determine how to manage the correspondence. They will
communicate with the ExCCS PSO about further action required.

Scrutinising the correspondence

ExCCS correspondence is scrutinised by the ExCCS Program Support Officer
before allocation to the appropriate ExCCS Service Officer for the
following reasons:

-   To ensure the correspondence is best responded to by ExCCS
-   To identify if the complainant is a customer and obtain details from
    Cuba for allocation, for example their child support reference
    number, case manager details and complaint history
-   To identify and escalate risk of self-harm and harm to others
-   To identify and refer media threats for investigation

Escalations within ExCCS management

Risk of harm and/or threats to escalate to the media

The ExCCS Program Support Officer supported by the ExCCS Program Manager
if required, identifies any threats contained in the complaint
correspondence. Any threats received during subsequent conversations
between complainant and the ExCCS Service Officer are managed by the
ExCCS Service Officer allocated to manage the complaint.

Privacy incidents and allegations of staff fraud

If any part of the complaint relates to an alleged privacy incident and
the incident has not been reported the ExCCS Service Officer will notify
the Privacy team. The Privacy team will liaise with the business area
where the privacy incident originated to investigate and manage the
incident. However, if the originating area cannot be identified the
ExCCS Service Officer will manage the privacy incident to conclusion

Failure to report a privacy incident in a timely manner can result in
serious consequences. Timely action can reduce the risk of physical harm
to customers or other negative consequences.

Allegations of staff fraud are discussed between the ExCCS Service
Officer and their Service Support Manager to determine how they will be
managed.

Allocation of the correspondence

Allocation is performed by ExCCS PSO. The ExCCS PSO allocates nationally
in accordance with individual Service Officer's and ExCCS team’s current
workload.

It is the ExCCS SSM's responsibility to review outstanding activity
required when ExCCS Service Officers are absent and ensure that
commitments and timeframes are still met. ExCCS SSMs notify the ExCCS
mailbox when allocations should cease for a particular officer, due to
leave, full workload etc.

The Resources page contains links to Services Australia Intranet, the
Document upload request macro, allocation email template for Ombudsman
complaints, a table outlining work allocation considering staff leave
and Social Work Services contact details.

Contents

Ministerial complaints regarding Child Support customers

Ombudsman complaints regarding Child Support customers

Parliamentarian complaints regarding Child Support customers

Executive complaints regarding Child Support customers

Related links

Social Work Services

Referring customers to and handling customer enquiries and
correspondence for Personalised Services

Level 2 complaints - Child Support

Waivers for Child Support customers

Intray Management Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
