-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for suspending child support
liabilities for reconciled parents.

Suspension of child support liability on reconciliation

The suspension of child support liabilities provides flexibility to
parents who reconcile. When Child Support becomes aware that parents
have reconciled, the child support liability can be suspended for a 6
month period. If the parents separate again within that period, the
assessment will be reinstated without the need for a new application for
assessment. If the parents remain reconciled after 6 months, this will
be a terminating event and the case will be ended.

If a non-parent carer has at least 35% care of a child, and the parents
of that child reconcile, the child support liability will not be
suspended. The parents will still be required to pay child support to
the non-parent carer.

This process only applies when parents reconcile on or after 1 July
2008.

For customers who reconciled prior to 1 July 2008, and who are still
reconciled, the receiving parent can make an election to end the
assessment by following the process in Ending a Child Support
assessment. Prior to 1 July 2008, reconciliation was not a terminating
event and the case will therefore remain active if the receiving parent
does not make an election to end. Where a reconciliation occurred prior
to 1 July 2008, there will be no suspension period. Resources has
examples of pre 1 July 2008 reconciliations.

The Resources page contains links to letters and a form relating to the
suspension of child support liability on reconciliation. It also
contains examples of how to manage reconciliations that occurred prior
to 1 July 2008.

Related links

Applications for a child support assessment

Centrelink deductions used to collect child support debts

Change in child support care levels from 1 July 2018 (15 May 2019 for WA
Ex-nuptial cases)

Collecting child support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Collection of child support debts through third parties (s72A and s72AC)

Contact with Child Support customers

Customer location (Tracing)

Debt offset

Debt repayment

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Ending a Child Support assessment

Information for payers about child support overpayments

Terminating events (Stage 2)

Application for assessment - non-parent carer

Assessments Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
