
Maintenance income: accommodation expenses 277-51100010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process whereby accommodation expenses may be
assessed as maintenance income which can affect the rate of Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) Part A.

On this Page:

Accommodation expenses

Accommodation expenses that may count as child support are:

-   mortgage payments
-   rent
-   free (or less than market rental value) accommodation
-   board
-   lodging

Accommodation provided as child support or spousal maintenance as part
of a property settlement should be assessed differently. This is
assessed as Capitalised maintenance.

Establishing value

Things to consider when working out the value to the receiving parent:

-   Who provides the assistance? It must be a person liable to pay child
    support or spousal maintenance
-   Who owns the accommodation? Unless there has been a formal property
    settlement, a property owned by either parent at separation is taken
    to be jointly owned (50% each)
-   Who lives in the accommodation? If a customer is not living in the
    accommodation being paid for or subsidised, it should not be
    assessed as child support unless it is stated as such in a court
    order or an agreement registered with a court or Child Support. If
    the paying parent also lives in the house, do not assess the first
    50% of the full amount payable

Child Support agreements

Child Support agreements with a start date of 1 July 2008 or later are
no longer manually assessed or coded by Centrelink staff, they are
assessed by Child Support.

For agreements with a start date before 1 July 2008, any non-cash
maintenance must be manually recorded on the Centrelink system for the
period up to and including 30 June 2008. For agreements in place before
1 July 2008 that have been accepted by Child Support and transitioned
under the Child Support Scheme Reforms from 1 July 2008, non-cash
maintenance previously coded on the Centrelink system is maintained by
Centrelink.

The Resources page contains examples of how to assess housing assistance
provided as child support.

Related links

Determining if a payment is child support/ maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Assessing capitalised maintenance income Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
