
Non Agency Payments (NAPs) 277-04230000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures for processing Child Support Non
Agency Payments.

On this page:

Non Agency Payments (NAPs)

When overpayments or child support are collectible, payments can be made
either:

-   directly to the person owed the debt, or
-   to a third party to satisfy the debts

These are called Non Agency Payments (NAPs). Child Support will credit
NAPs in certain circumstances.

NAPs are categorised as either prescribed or non-prescribed.

Prescribed Non Agency Payments (NAP)

Prescribed NAPs are only available for child support debt, not
overpayments.
They only apply to a limited range of payments paid to a third party.
For example:

-   School costs
-   Child care
-   Essential medical, or
-   Specific payee expenses

Prescribed NAPs can be credited against up to 30% of a child support
liability.

Prescribed NAPs can be only claimed if at the time the payment was made,
the payer had less than regular care (less than 14% care) of any of the
children to whom the relevant administrative assessment relates.

Child support legislation does not require both parties to agree that
these types of payments were made in lieu of child support.

Non-prescribed Non Agency Payments (NAPs)

Non-prescribed payments refer to all other types of NAPs. The
legislation requires both parents to agree that these payments were made
to satisfy overpayment or debt.

Non-prescribed NAPs include:

-   direct payments to the person owed the debt
-   payments made to a third party
-   non-cash payments or payments 'in-kind'

Note: some third party payments can fall under either NAP category.
Customers must choose which NAP category should be considered in the
decision.

If the person:

-   owing the debt reported the NAP, both parties must be contacted at
    various points of the decision making process
-   who is owed the debt reports the payment, the other party does not
    need to be contacted

The Resources page contains questions and answers relating to NAPs and
links to a macro, letters, a form and external websites.

Related links

Application for child support to be collected

Child Support's information gathering powers

Collecting child support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Contact with Child Support customers

Correcting errors on Child Support cases

Documenting Child Support information

Family and domestic violence

Objections to Child Support decisions

Registration of overseas maintenance liabilities (excluding New Zealand)
(CS)

Section 107 and section 143 orders for Child Support customers

Stage 1 - registrations (CS)

Documentation Cuba Process Help

Non Agency Payments (NAP) Cuba Process Help

Collecting child support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Suspension of child support liability on reconciliation

Managing reverse child support cases

Terminating events (Stage 2) (CS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
