
Debt offset (CS) 277-04110000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how child support debts are
offset.

On this Page:

Debt offset

Child Support is able to offset debts between 2 customers. This usually
occurs when the customers’ roles have changed (often due to a care
change) and each owes a debt to the other. A debt created by a parentage
overpayment order can also be offset.

Debt offsetting can be an effective way for customers to manage their
debt.

A debt that has been offset is treated as if it has been paid to the
customer. That is:

-   instead of collecting an amount from the first customer and paying
    it to the second customer, then
-   collecting an amount from the second customer and paying it to the
    first customer

This reduces each customer’s debt to the other by the offset amount.

Debt offsetting is available to customers who have had or currently have
the role of payee, usually because of changes in care arrangements. For
example, where a payer becomes entitled to receive child support
payments because there has been a change in a level of care for a child.

When there is no longer a credit to be offset, or if the debt offset
will not reduce a debt in a reasonable timeframe and capacity to pay is
identified, collection action may be required for ongoing payments
and/or remaining debt. This is particularly relevant for the customer
with the larger debt.

Debt offset is not available for overseas maintenance liabilities or
spousal maintenance liabilities.

Types of debt offset

Debt offsets can be in the form of:

-   One-off (or Lump Sum) Offset – is a ‘one off’ offset of amounts.
    Each customer must owe child support arrears to the other to offset
    1 amount against the other. Usually the debts are not equal amounts
    – any remaining amount of the larger debt is still owed by the
    customer who had the larger debt.
-   Ongoing Offset – is offsetting part or all of the ongoing liability
    owed by 1 customer against a maintenance debt owed to that customer
    by the other. An ongoing offset is used when 1 customer has a
    maintenance debt and the other customer has an ongoing liability.

See Debt Offset Cuba Process Help.

Offsetting debt between customers may be possible when:

-   both customers have a maintenance debt or an overpayment debt
-   one customer has a maintenance debt and the other has an ongoing
    liability, or
-   both customers have a maintenance debt and 1 has an ongoing
    liability

If both customers owe a maintenance debt to the other and 1 of the
customers has an ongoing liability to the other it may be appropriate to
apply both types of offset. See Debt Offset Cuba Process Help.

Note: where a debt offset will not reduce a debt in a reasonable
timeframe other collection actions may be considered in addition to the
offset. However, if the current payer is in financial hardship, further
collection action may not be appropriate. For more information see
Financial Hardship (CS).

The Resources page contains examples of different debt offset scenarios.

Identifying opportunities for debt offset

It is possible to identify opportunities for a debt offset from:

-   payer becomes a payee - when the customer's role changes and there
    is an existing liability between the parties a DEBTOFFS intray is
    created to alert the case manager that debt offsetting may be
    possible
-   general customer contact - other opportunities for debt offsetting
    may be found through customer contact or debt recovery processes

Discretion to implement debt offset

Agreement of both customers will be sought where debt offset is an
option. However, Child Support can decide to offset debts without having
agreement from the customers. For example, there may be no other
collection avenues and an offset is appropriate.

There are important issues to consider when making this decision:

-   the individual circumstances of the case must support a decision to
    offset a debt without the customers’ agreement
-   if possible, staff should seek a compromise where neither customer
    is disadvantaged by the offset
-   the child support needs of the payee must be recognised, and
-   the agreement of the customers should be sought

Note: there are no objection rights to a decision to offset debts.
Customers should be advised they may apply to a court under the
Administrative Decision (Judicial Review) Act 1977 for a review of the
decision if they are unhappy with the outcome.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer

-   Identifying debt offset opportunities
-   Discussing debt offsets with customers
-   Processing debt offsets

Service Support Officer (SSO)

-   To provide advice regarding complex issues or when Service Officers
    require assistance

Authorisations and delegations

Service Officer 3 (SO3)

-   Offset debts including relevant decision making and system
    processing

For more information about authorisations and delegations see Child
Support Services, Delegations and Authorisations.

Related links

Capacity to Pay (CTP) Child Support

Change in Child Support care levels (Post 1 July 2010)

Change of assessment in special circumstances (CS)

Child Support estimates (Post 1 July 2010)

Contact with Child Support customers

Debt repayment (CS)

Financial hardship (CS)

Income processing for Child Support customers

Non Agency Payments (NAPS) (CS)

Child Support objections

Debt Offset Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Sensitive Issue Management Cuba Process Help

Case/Registration Window Help

Customer Window Help

Debt Offset Window Help

Letter Details Window Help

Recovery Conditions Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
