
Gather evidence relating to Child Support objection 277-09170040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for gathering evidence to assist in
making an objection decision. It includes gathering evidence from the
parties to the original decision, gathering evidence from third parties
and exchanging information between the parties to let them respond. The
procedure is for Child Support Objections Officers at all levels (APS4 –
APS6).

Roles and responsibilities

See the Background page in Objection to Child Support decisions for
information about roles and responsibilities.

Open exchange of information for Objections

Child Support is legally required to give customers information and
copies of documents supplied by an applicant when lodging their
objection.

There is no legislative requirement to provide a copy of the response
(and/or accompanying documents) to the objector. However, there is an
obligation to discuss the information with the other party/parties to:

-   fulfil the requirements of procedural fairness, and
-   ensure a transparent, fair and reasonable decision making process.

See Open exchange of information for Child Support customers.

Authority to gather information from third parties

Child Support has broad powers to seek information and require third
parties to provide information. Information may only be sought to
administer the child support legislation.

See Child Support's information gathering powers.

Authorisations and delegations

See the Background page in Objection to Child Support decisions for
information about authorisations and delegations.

The Resources page of Child Support objections contains examples, forms,
macros and many other resources relevant to processing Child Support
objections.

Related links

Child Support objections

Care objections

Review objection

Make decision and finalise Child Support objection

Child Support objection received out of time - Extension of time and
Special Circumstance application

Summary disallow of Child Support Part 6A objections

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
