
Alignment of Care Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities 277-51170000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the MFU activities that can be created as a
result of information transferred electronically between Child Support
and Centrelink in relation to care assessments.

Alignment of care MFUs

Under Alignment of Care, mutual customers can advise care arrangements
to either Centrelink or Child Support. A data exchange ensures a
complete and accurate match for correct family assistance and child
support assessments. Records that do not match may result in an MFU
activity on the customer's record or a Child Support intray email.

MFUs processed by Alignment of Care staff occur where:

-   the child's care information cannot be applied automatically due to
    current system limitations
-   adequate care information for a child is not available to complete
    the customer's FTB lump sum claim
-   a Child Support care assessment has been received and the percentage
    of care has changed for an income support customer, which may affect
    their eligibility or rate
-   the Internal Review/Explanation script has been used to record a
    request for an explanation or application for a formal review of a
    care decision (FAO REA activity is created)

For alignment of care determinations between Child Support and
Centrelink mutual customers, see Transfer of information between
Centrelink and Child Support.

Processing MFU activities

When processing these activities, action can include:

-   contacting the customer to confirm details
-   explaining or reviewing a care decision
-   updating care assessment details on the customer's record
-   accessing the Child Support system to confirm care details

Applying care updates as a result of an MFU

Make the updates within the MFU. If the DOR is more than 12 months in
the past, update the source code to CSSAL to allow the correct DOR to be
used.

Update the !CADDS screen to reflect the accepted care decision (!CADDS
is only automatically updated to show ‘accepted’ if the care is not
included in an MFU).

If a step-parent is claiming FTB for the child, the step-parent
workaround may need to be applied. See Notification and assessment of
shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

The Agency field on the FTB Shared Care Screen (FSC) must display Child
Support Agency.

Check the Maintenance Entitlement Group Summary (MNGS) screen and update
if required.

The Resources page contains MFU reasons and keywords, and information
about the letters produced with the Change in Care Arrangements script.

Related links

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Mutual customer matching with Child Support

Review of care decisions

Shared care for social security payments

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Matching a child support child between Centrelink and Child Support

Principal carer of a dependent child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
