
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines how to process incoming correspondence and mail
received by Child Support, including scanning, indexing, storage and
retrieval processes.

Electronic Document Classification Team

The Electronic Document Classification Team (EDC) is responsible for the
timely and accurate classifying, storage and retrieval of inbound
correspondence for Child Support. EDC mainly processes incoming
correspondence, however all staff across Services Australia may be
required to open or receive incoming correspondence and packages.

EDC Service Officers can refer to useful contact information to process
all incoming child support correspondence, mail and packages.

Customer correspondence

Child Support receives customer correspondence in many ways:

secure messaging with document upload via:

-   myGov, or
-   the Express Plus Child Support mobile app

unsecured messaging via:

-   Services Australia portals (for contact and complaints/feedback)
-   email (from domestic and overseas customers)

fax (from domestic and overseas customers)

post/courier to site address

hand delivered correspondence to Services Australia sites including:

-   service centres (metro and regional), or
-   outreach services

Services Australia staff must send all correspondence received for Child
Support customers immediately to the Child Support postal address. This
includes correspondence that is hand delivered to a site or received via
local fax.

Requesting EDC to split or edit correspondence

There are very specific circumstance where customer correspondence can
be split or edited.

If non-EDC Service Officers receive a document that contains multiple
customer information within the same document, or a document contains
information that needs to be actioned across two or more different
service areas (such as an objection to a care decision and a Change of
Assessment (COA) application in same document), this correspondence
should be split. If unsure, check with a SSO or contact EDC.

In limited circumstances, EDC will edit correspondence received from a
customer if the document contains:

-   more than one customer’s information on a single page/s and it is
    not reconciliation information from an employer,
-   incorrect CSID and/or customer name, however the rest of the
    correspondence is correct
-   information provided by a child under 18 of the case and is not part
    of a COA, Objection or Part 6a Objection process, and
-   offensive or inappropriate content

COA, Objection and Part 6a staff should refer to Open Exchange of
information for Child Support customers for more information on editing
customer correspondence.

To have correspondence split or edited by EDC, authorised non-EDC
Service Officers can follow the instructions as outlined in
Correspondence Cuba Process Help.

Once EDC have actioned the request, the new edited/split document will
be reattached to the customer’s record. In some cases EDC may request
additional information before editing or splitting a document.

See View Correspondence Window Help for more information on detaching a
document.

Correspondence is on the incorrect customer or incorrect category

Correspondence that has been attached to the incorrect customer may be
rectified by non-EDC Service Officers with the correct Cuba
authorisation (otherwise escalate to an SSO, Team Leader or EDC).

Where the correct customer is:

-   identifiable, reassign the correspondence to the correct customer
    from the View correspondence screen. This process will reassign the
    document to the correct customer, create an intray on their record
    and will also remove the intray created on the incorrect customer’s
    record
-   not identifiable, detach the correspondence from the incorrect
    customer’s record, see Correspondence Cuba Process Help

Where the correspondence is on the correct customer, but is categorised
incorrectly, update the category of the document. Once actioned, the
original intray will be deleted and replaced with a new one based on the
new category chosen.

Correspondence received via online lodgement or Child Support Business Online services (CSBOS)

Correspondence received either via Online Document Lodgement (secure
messaging) from a customer, or CSBOS uploads directly to the customer or
organisation record and is not managed by EDC. This correspondence is
categorised by the customer/organisation who provided it. From time to
time, there may be categorisation issues with the correspondence
received via one of these channels.

Correspondence received via:

-   online document lodgement flows directly into the View
    Correspondence window, Service Officers can action these documents
    in the same way as any document that has been received via EDC
    (correspondence can be reassigned, detached or re-categorised)
-   financial institutions through CSBOS is uploaded directly to the
    Payer Collection window. If the information contained in the
    response is incorrect, missing or has any issues, contact a SSO for
    this issue to be rectified, as EDC are unable to action this

Correspondence with missing pages or poor image quality

If the correspondence on the customer record appears to have missing
pages, or there is an image quality issue (which includes not being able
to view (open) the image), EDC may be able to rectify the issue.

Non-EDC staff can use the Document retrieval/image review request macro
for:

-   postal mail correspondence where non-EDC staff identify there may be
    missing pages during the EDC scanning process. For correspondence
    received by fax, the document on the customer record is the
    original, as faxes are received electronically.
-   correspondence that cannot be viewed due to poor image quality or
    errors in uploading an image
-   correspondence received by EDC that was manually receipted

Only documents received in Child Support since June 2010 are viewable in
the View Correspondence window.

Requests received by EDC via the macro will be actioned accordingly and
depends on whether the original document is still retained on site
offsite in a document storage facility. If the document is being kept
off-site, then a EDC RMU officer will forward a request to have a copy
of the document retrieved.

Once the original documents are obtained by EDC, they will be:

scanned and uploaded to Cuba, or

uploaded to Cuba as an email PDF document, and:

-   attached to the customer’s record, and
-   a copy of the PDF is also forwarded to the requesting Service
    Officer

The EDC Service Officer will place an annotation in Cuba noting the
request has been finalised and where the document can be found in the
View Correspondence window.

Customer email correspondence has been quarantined

If the correspondence is a notification that an email the customer has
attempted to send to the agency has been quarantined:

-   contact the customer to advise an email has been received from them
    that cannot be opened, and
-   ask the customer to resend their information without any encrypted
    or media content. In some cases resending information via a
    different channel may be appropriate. Authenticated online document
    lodgement is preferred, however the customer may also elect to send
    via fax or post

If non-EDC staff consider the email should be released from quarantine,
consider the appropriateness of the release and seek support from a Team
Leader, keeping in mind the Agency’s Cyber Security policy.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   processing times
-   a macro
-   contacts
-   templates and cover sheets
-   action reason codes
-   records management toolkit and guides

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Correspondence Cuba Process Help

Customer record Cuba Process Help

Customer representative Cuba Process Help

Disbursement Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
