
Suspending or ending a Child Support agreement due to care 277-18061455

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Agreement and Court Order team only.

This document outlines how to suspend or end an agreement where the
payee ceases to be eligible carer of a child and a terminating event has
not occurred.

On this Page:

Payee ceases to be an eligible carer of a child and no terminating event

Commencing from 1 July 2018 (15 May 2019 for WA Ex-nuptial cases), an
agreement will end for a child if, the payee under an agreement ceases
to be an eligible carer of the child (that is, their care percentage in
the assessment is less than 35%), there has not been a terminating
event, and the agreement does not provide for the parties’ roles to swap
when there is a care change.

Before the agreement is ended, it may be suspended for the first 28 days
after the payee ceases to be an eligible carer or 26 weeks in some
circumstances. A suspension period is provided so that if the care of
the child changes again in that period and the original payee again has
at least 35% care of the child, the agreement can restart for the child.

The agreement may end without a suspension period if Child Support is
notified of the care change more than 28 days (but less than 26 weeks)
after the event and a longer 26 week suspension period does not apply.
In these cases, the agreement termination will be pended to allow
contact with the customers to discuss if they want a longer suspension
period. If Child Support is notified of the care change more than 26
weeks after the event, the agreement will end.

The agreement end will always take effect from the day the payee under
the agreement ceased to be an eligible carer, that is the date when the
care percentage was applied in the assessment.

Note: references to the payee under an agreement ceasing to be an
eligible carer means the dates the payee’s care percentage of less than
35% applies in the child support assessment, according to the relevant
date of effect rules for changes in care.

If the care change happened before 1 July 2018 and was notified:

-   before 30 December 2018, the pre 1 July 2018 date of effect rules
    will apply
-   after 30 December 2018, the new 1 July 2018 date of effect rules
    will apply

For WA Ex-nuptial cases, if a care change occurred or is reported on or
after 15 May 2019, the new care date of effect rules apply.

Longer agreement suspension periods

An agreement suspension period can be for up to 26 weeks in the
following circumstances:

the agreement includes a clause for a longer suspension, see
Interpreting and making a decision on a Child Support agreement

all parties to the agreement request a longer suspension period:

-   requests must be made on a day after the payee ceased to be an
    eligible carer up to 26 weeks after the day the payee ceased to be
    an eligible carer
-   requests can be made on the phone or in writing

Child Support determines that there are special circumstances concerning
the care change – see Child Support Guide Chapter 2.7.6 Suspending a
Child Support Agreement for more information, a link is located on the
References page

Note: legislation allows for a suspension period of 28 days or 26 weeks
only. If an agreement includes a clause for a suspension longer than 28
days but less than 26 weeks (for example 12 weeks), the agreement will
be suspended for 26 weeks. However if the agreement includes a clause
that it will terminate at the end of the 12 week period, this will be
administered like any other type of agreement termination clause, see
Managing changes affecting a Child Support agreement.

Lump sum provisions

If an agreement includes provisions for a lump sum payment to be
credited against the child support liability, the agreement will be
suspended or terminated due to a care change.

If there is any credit remaining on the lump sum payment after the
agreement is suspended or ends and the original paying parent continues
to have an ongoing child support liability or they have an ongoing
liability in the future, the remaining credit will continue to be drawn
down.

Manual processing will be required to make sure the credit continues to
be drawn down. Service Officers in the Agreements and Court Order team
should escalate to a Service Support Officer (SSO) for assistance.

See Assessing a new Child Support agreement for more information about
agreements with different types of provisions.

The Resources page contains manual processing instructions and examples
to help process agreement suspensions and terminations when the payee
under the agreement ceases to be an eligible carer of a child and a
terminating event has not occurred.

Related links

Agreements between Child Support customers

Administering agreements and court varied assessments (CVA) lodged post
1 July 2008 that includes pre and post 1 July 2008 periods

Assessing a new Child Support agreement

Ending a Child Support agreement

Interpreting and making a decision on a Child Support agreement

Managing changes affecting a Child Support agreement

Recording a Child support agreement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
