
Completing the Ending a child support assessment (CS1671) 277-51140030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for completing the Ending a child
support assessment (CS1671) form.

Customer requests end of assessment

When a customer ends an assessment, they are asking Child Support to
stop calculating how much child support the paying parent should pay
them. Customers can make the request by calling Child Support or by
completing the Ending a child support assessment (CS1671).

If customers want to change from Child Support collection to private
collection but still want Child Support to calculate their child support
entitlement, they do not use this form. Instead, they need to contact
Child Support.

By ending an assessment, the paying parent no longer has a requirement
under child support legislation to pay child support from a certain
date. Only customers with a current child support assessment for a stage
two child can end an assessment.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Customers receiving more than the base rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
Part A for the child (including customers who would receive more than
base rate but for a payment choice) may voluntarily end a child support
assessment in certain circumstances only.

If the customer elects to discharge their child support arrears they
should be advised that they have effectively elected to collect
privately any arrears of child support owing to them. This needs to be
recorded as child support income. The discharged arrears amount is not
included in the entitlement data from Child Support therefore the
discharged amount will need to be added to the Child Support assessed
amount and manually coded as the actual amount.

End an assessment when child leaves care or dies

Child Support can end an assessment without a request from the payee if
child support terminating event occurs, for example, the child leaves
their care or the child or the payer dies.

The customer needs to sign and date the form after checking it and
reading the Declaration.

Returning form

Customers can lodge the form with the Centrelink or send it directly to
Child Support (address of nearest office on back of form). [] Customers
can also complete and print the form online.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website and
contact details for Child Support.

Related links

Completing Child Support forms with Centrelink assistance

Completing the details of your child support (FA003)

Completing the Child Support Statutory Declarations (CS4649 and CS4648)

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Changing from Child Support collection to private collection: effect on
Family Tax benefit (FTB)

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
