
Updating Child Support customer and assessment information 277-01080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information about updating Child Support customer
and assessment information.

Requirement to update Register

Section 13 of the Child Support Registration and Collection Act 1988
requires the Registrar to keep a register of information - known as the
Child Support Register. Section 26 specifies which particulars are
required and are able to be entered into the Register.

A range of events make it necessary to change entries in the Register.
These include personal information covered in this document.

This document will help ensure that:

-   an accurate decision is made on the information received and
    particulars entered into or varied in the Register (parents have
    objection rights)
-   both parents are fully informed of any changes
-   both parents understand the changes to their registered maintenance
    liability (if any)

WA ex-nuptial cases - before and after 15 May 2019

The Western Australian parliament referred its law making powers to the
Commonwealth for WA ex-nuptial children on 15 May 2019.

This means that legislatively from 15 May 2019, there is no longer a
distinction between WA ex-nuptial children and all other child support
children.

Before 15 May 2019, where a payee moved from WA to another state, the
case would no longer be WA ex-nuptial from the date they became a
resident in the new state. Similarly, when a payee with ex-nuptial
children moved to WA, the case became WA ex-nuptial from the date the
payee became a WA resident.

The rules for WA ex-nuptial children were different depending on when
the Western Australian parliament adopted legislation and any reforms
throughout the history of the scheme. See WA child support ex-nuptial
cases for more information about actions required on these cases for WA
ex-nuptial periods.

The WA ex-nuptial indicator on Cuba is only updated at the start of each
child support period. If a payee moved to Western Australia or out of
Western Australia during a child support period, the indicator may be
incorrect. If this is the case, seek help from a Service Support Officer
(SSO).

System enhancements on 18 June 2022

The system was enhanced on 18 June 2022 to automatically treat WA
ex-nuptial customers correctly prospectively where:

-   Child Support Periods (CSPs) are automatically raised on or after 18
    June 2022
-   New cases are registered or cases are restarted with a Start date of
    liability (SDOL) on or after 18 June 2022

As this enhancement was prospective, continue to refer WA ex-nuptial
customers that need workarounds where:

-   care is notified outside of 28 days - late notified care change
-   disputed care - possible interim period - is notified
-   an amended tax assessment is lodged
-   a payee is entitled to child support under an agreement. The care
    they have of the child in the agreement falls below 35%

The Resources page contains links to information about updating customer
and assessment information, Australian Tax Office (ATO) contact details,
letters and a checklist.

Related links

Applications for a Child Support assessment

About initial contact and identity confirmation

Centrelink deductions used to collect child support debts

Changing sex and/or gender details on customer records

Child Support estimates (Post 1 July 2010)

Child Support authorised agent

Child Support representative with ordinary authority

Correcting a duplicate Child Support customer record

Correcting errors on Child support cases

Customer location (Tracing)

Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff

Documenting Child Support information

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Family and domestic violence

Possible tax evasion by Child Support customers (individuals and
business)

Using Child Support self service

WA child support ex-nuptial cases

Assessments Cuba Process Help

CSAonline secure message Cuba Process Help

Customer records Cuba Process Help

Eligibility Cuba Process Help

Transfer or lock a customer Cuba Process Help

Update customer details in Pluto

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
