
Administering the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) and Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 277-51000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of Services Australia in administering
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) and Maintenance Income Test (MIT) to
support child support policy and to determine a customer’s entitlement
to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and some student payments.

On this Page:

Role of Services Australia Centrelink

Services Australia Centrelink administers the:

-   MAT to ensure that customers receiving more than the base Family Tax
    Benefit (FTB) Part A rate for a child do what they can to receive
    financial support from the parent of a child from a previous
    relationship
-   MIT to determine a customer's FTB Part A rate, taking into account
    the child support income they and their partner receive
-   MIT to determine a customer’s rate of ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance

Child support/ maintenance

The terms maintenance and child support are often used interchangeably
and generally have the same meaning. Maintenance is a term used by the
agency and includes child support as well as support for a partner from
a previous relationship (spousal maintenance).

For the MAT, only action for child support for an FTB child is relevant.
Action for spousal maintenance is not required, but spousal maintenance
is assessable under the MIT.

Any maintenance income received by a customer or their partner is
assessed under the MIT. A person who receives maintenance income has
more available income, even if their rate of FTB Part A is reduced by
the MIT.

A person may continue to receive child support until their child turns
18 years, or upon application until their child finishes secondary
school in the year they turn 18. This is regardless of whether or not
they continue to receive FTB.

MAT - action to obtain child support

The MAT is applied to customers who claim or receive FTB Part A for a
child from a previous relationship. If a customer or their partner is
required to take action to obtain child support for a child and they
fail to do so, their Part A rate is limited to the base rate for the
relevant child/ren.

Reasonable action to obtain child support depends on the person’s
circumstances. FTB customers must be advised of what action they need to
take and the timeframe for taking action. Reasonable action may include,
for example:

-   Applying for a child support assessment
-   Applying for Child Support collection if unable to make a private
    arrangement to receive their full child support entitlement
-   Seeking legal advice
-   Seeking an exemption from taking action to obtain child support. A
    social worker assessment may be needed, for example exemptions due
    to fear of family and domestic violence

Specific processes apply when:

-   the customer has a child support agreement
-   the customer has a court order or court registered agreement
-   the paying parent is overseas
-   the child was born as a result of a surrogacy arrangement or via
    artificial conception

MAT codes are used to record what action the customer needs to take or
has taken, and whether or not more than base rate FTB Part A can be paid
for a child.

Children must be grouped correctly on a customer’s Centrelink record so
that the MAT can be correctly applied.

If a customer loses entitlement to child support or chooses to suspend
or end their child support assessment, their FTB rate may be affected.

Collection method

To satisfy the MAT, FTB customers may:

-   arrange to receive their child support entitlement directly from the
    paying parent (known as private collection). or
-   ask Child Support to collect their child support entitlement from
    the paying parent on their behalf (known as Child Support
    collection)

Private collection

For FTB, it is assumed that private collection customers will receive
their full child support entitlement. If a customer advises they are not
receiving their full child support entitlement, they may need to apply
for Child Support collection (and ask for any child support arrears to
be collected).

Child Support collection

FTB customers can choose which assessment method is used during the
financial year to estimate their annual maintenance income for a Child
Support collection period. If a customer changes the assessment method,
their FTB may be affected.

If a customer changes from Child Support collection to private
collection, their ongoing FTB rate can be affected.

If a customer advises Centrelink of direct payments from the paying
parent (non-agency payments), refer the customer to Child Support.

MIT - assessment of maintenance income

Maintenance income includes child support and spousal maintenance. It
can be received as a payment or the value of a benefit
(non-cash-maintenance).

A one-off payment or asset worth more than $1500 may be assessed as
capitalised maintenance income.

The MIT is applied when calculating the customer's rate of FTB Part A
when child support or spousal maintenance is received.

Estimating annual maintenance income during the financial year

An FTB customer's annual maintenance income is estimated using one of 3
assessment methods:

-   Entitlement Method is used for private collection periods
-   Child Support collection customers can choose either the Modified
    Entitlement Method or Disbursement Method. If a customer changes the
    assessment method being used, their ongoing FTB rate may be affected

A retrospective change in the child support assessment may affect a
customer's FTB rate.

FTB reconciliation

Maintenance reconciliation is an automatic process that occurs after the
end of the relevant financial year, as part of FTB reconciliation. A
customer's annual maintenance income is recalculated based on actual
maintenance income received, including their child support entitlement
for periods of private collection, and the actual dates of any child
support changes. The MAT and MIT are then applied to the customer's
income tested FTB Part A rate.

The Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) ensures that customers Child Support
collection who receive payments on an irregular basis over more than one
financial year receive the same amount of FTB over time as customers who
receive child support payments regularly.

Customer complaints

Customer complaints about decisions made by the agency are handled
through the normal review process. If the complaint is about Child
Support, refer the customer to Child Support complaints. Contact details
are available in Complaints, see Level 2 Complaints.

Disclosure of information

Family assistance staff must not disclose personal information to Child
Support other than as required or authorised by child support
legislation or by consent of the customer. There are protocols for
contact between Centrelink and Child Support.

The Resources page contains contact details for complaints and for help
with complex cases (for social workers and Indigenous Service Officers),
and information about the roles of staff within Services Australia in
relation to child support and family assistance and complaint
resolution.

Contents

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

The Child Support Scheme information for Centrelink

Private collection information for Centrelink staff

Child Support collection for Centrelink

How to group children on a customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) record

Where to find child support information on Centrelink systems

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support agreements and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing child support received for child disability expenses for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Ongoing contact and child support assessment for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Completing child support forms with Centrelink

Mutual customer matching with Child Support

Child support Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities and automatic reviews

Alignment of Care Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Review of care decisions

Related links

Determining if a payment is child support/maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA)

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
