-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) is applied
when a customer claims more than base rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part
A for a child and care of the child is shared with another person.

Effect on FTB entitlement

A customer required to obtain child support for a shared care child will
only be entitled to a percentage of the base rate of FTB Part A if
reasonable action has not been taken to obtain child support.

Child support

Child support, also known as maintenance, refers to financial and
material support for children from their separated non-custodial
parent(s). The terms maintenance and child support are often used
interchangeably and generally have the same meaning. Maintenance is a
term used by Centrelink and includes child support as well as support
for a partner from a previous relationship (spousal maintenance).

Maintenance action

Generally, a customer is considered to be taking maintenance action and
will meet the MAT if:

-   an application is made for a child support assessment for a child
-   a customer has a child support assessment for a child
-   an application is made for a child support agreement to be accepted
    for a child
-   a customer has a child support agreement accepted for a child, or
-   a customer has an exemption from taking maintenance action

Level of shared care

Customers with less than 35% actual care of a child are not required to
apply for a child support assessment for the purposes of the Maintenance
Action Test, although they are eligible to apply for a child support
assessment.

If the level of care increases to 35% or more, the customer will need to
take reasonable action to obtain child support within 13 weeks (91 days)
of the date of the change in the care arrangements to satisfy the
Maintenance Action Test. The customer should apply for a child support
assessment if they have not done so, or inform that there is a child
support case in place if they have been the payer in an existing case.
(See 'only one child support case' below.)

Payer in a child support agreement increases their level of care to more than 65%

Where a customer is a payer in a child support agreement and their level
of care increases to more than 65% and they are receiving FTB for the
child/ren, they must take reasonable steps to change from being the
payer to the payee otherwise they may be deemed to fail the Maintenance
Action Test (MAT).

For MAT implications where there has been a care change in a Child
Support agreement and a child support care suspension period has been
applied, see Process page.

For MAT implications where there has been a care change in a child
support agreement resulting in a child support care terminating event
see Process page

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers
provides further details on the reasonable maintenance action
requirements for these cases.

Only one child support case

Only one child support case

From 1 July 2008, if parents share the care of a child or if each has
one or more children in care, Child Support registers one child support
case, which assesses the entitlements of all parties and determines an
overall payee and payer.

The system will only establish an electronic link with one Centrelink
customer (the child support payee) at the time the link is established.
This means that information received electronically from Child Support
to show that the other party (generally the payer) is not recognised and
the system will not show that the payer has met the MAT.

If both parents are FTB customers, manual coding may be required on the
other parent's record to reflect the MAT status and prevent the payer's
FTB Part A rate being restricted to base rate.

Child support liability

Parents who share the care of a child equally or who each care for a
child from the same relationship must still apply for child support if
eligible. This is because the parent with the greater income may need to
pay child support to the other parent. A shared care arrangement can
affect child support liability.

If a customer cares for a child 14-34% of the time, they are not
entitled to FTB. However, they are considered to be meeting 24% of the
costs of the child and this is taken into account when calculating the
customer's child support liability and may result in a reduction of the
amount of child support they will have to pay.

Income support customers whose income qualifies them to pay the minimum
child support liability will not be required to pay any child support if
they have a child in care for 14% or more of the time.

Same-sex relationships

From 1 July 2009, customers with children from a previous same-sex
relationship may be required to take reasonable action to obtain child
support from the child's other parent.

There may be customers who have children from a previous same-sex
relationship and have a current maintenance exemption code IVF. This
will need to be reviewed in the event that the other parent of the child
is liable to pay child support under the changes to recognition of
parentage. The review could also result in the customer retaining the
IVF exemption or the regrouping of the relevant children into a 'child
of current relationship' status depending on the customer's
circumstances.

Maintenance income

If a customer has shared care of a child, their taxable income for FTB
and Child Care Subsidy (CCS) can still be reduced by 100% of any child
support paid for the child.

If the customer or their current partner receives any maintenance income
for the child, this is still assessed under the Maintenance Income Test.

Before 1 July 2008

Customers with less than 30% care of a child were not eligible to apply
for a child support assessment. If the level of care increased to 30% or
more, the customer needed to take reasonable action to obtain child
support within 13 weeks (91 days) of the date of the change in the care
arrangements to satisfy the MAT.

The Resources page contains information about interim processes for
customers incorrectly reduced to base rate due to no maintenance action
if they are the paying parent in a child support case.

Related links

Deductible Child Maintenance Expenditure

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Who can apply for child support?

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
