-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for applying the Maintenance Action
Test (MAT) when the person who is to pay child support (the payer) is
not living in Australia. Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers required to
obtain child support must still take reasonable action in these cases
for more than base rate FTB Part A to be paid.

MAT requirements

If the payer is overseas, there may be different MAT requirements
depending on:

-   the customer's circumstances and
-   which Stage of the Child Support Scheme applies (Stage 1 or Stage 2)

Child Support is able to accept an application for a child support
assessment for a child if:

-   the payer lives in a jurisdiction having a reciprocal arrangement
    for child support with Australia and
-   proof of parentage exists

Evidence of parentage can include overseas documents. It is up to Child
Support to work out if assessment and/or collection of child support is
possible when the payer is overseas.

Norfolk Island, Cocos (Keeling) and Christmas Islands

From 1 July 2016, residents of Norfolk, Cocos (Keeling) and Christmas
Islands may be eligible for a child support assessment for the first
time.

Due to legislative changes effective from 1 July 2016, child support
assessments can be made where the payer is a resident of the Cocos
(Keeling) Islands, Christmas Island or Norfolk Island.

Additionally from 1 July 2016, FTB recipients who held a Maintenance
Action Test exemption due to the payer residing on Cocos, Christmas or
Norfolk Islands may be eligible for a child support assessment against a
payer residing on one of these islands.

See Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers.

Rejection reasons

Child Support will reject the application if the payer:

-   is in a reciprocating jurisdiction and proof of parentage does not
    exist
-   was not resident in Australia at the time of the application and
    there is not enough information available to determine the
    whereabouts of the payer, or
-   is residing in a non-reciprocal jurisdiction

Exemption granted

In these cases, the customer should be given an exemption from the MAT
without referral to Legal Aid. It is considered unreasonable to force
the customer to continue to pursue child support because of the expense
and length of time involved and because the outcome is likely to be
unsuccessful.

The customer can pursue this action but they do not have to in order to
satisfy the MAT. The customer may request the assistance of the Attorney
General's Department in relation to parentage testing or seeking a court
order.

If the payer is in an excluded jurisdiction, the customer may have court
orders that cannot be accepted by Child Support. These orders can be
accepted by Centrelink and are coded manually.

Non-reciprocal jurisdictions

If the payer is in a non-reciprocal jurisdiction, it is not considered
reasonable to make the customer take maintenance action as Child Support
is not able to enforce collection of a child support assessment or court
order. In these cases, the customer should be granted a MAT exemption.
Advise the customer if the paying parent's place of residence changes at
a later date, they need to contact Centrelink and may be required to
take maintenance action.

The References page contains a link to the Child Support Guide for a
list of places that are reciprocating jurisdictions with Australia for
child support purposes. It also shows which jurisdictions are excluded.
The link contains further information about the administration of these
cases.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk online
form and an example where the payer has entered a reciprocal
jurisdiction (including Australia) and text that must be used in a Q888
letter advising payee they must tell Child Support and Centrelink if
they learn the whereabouts of the payer.

Related links

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Customer cannot make a private arrangement for a Stage 1 child and the
MAT

Disbursement Method

Backdating a Maintenance Action Test (MAT) exemption to take action to
receive child support prior to 1 July of the previous financial year

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
