
Child Support estimates (Pre 1 July 2010) 277-07070000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to follow where a parent elects to
have their assessment based on an estimate of income pre July 2010.
Links on this page may be unavailable to external audiences.

On this Page:

Overview

Where a parent's income varies significantly from that used in the
current child support assessment, the Child Support (Assessment) Act
1989 allows the parent to elect to have their assessment based on an
estimate of income in some circumstances.

This document applies to:

-   WA ex nuptial customers who have an existing estimate that was
    lodged before 3 March 2011. If these customers lodge a subsequent
    estimate within the same child support period, the pre-1 July 2010
    legislation will continue to apply until the end of that child
    support period. Once a new child support period begins the post
    1-July 2010 legislation will apply to any future estimates. For
    further information see Child support estimates (post 1 July 2010).
-   customers that have an estimate lodged before 1 July 2010 for a
    child support period which has not ended

For all other customers, see Child support estimates (post 1 July 2010).

For more information about WA ex nuptial customers, see WA Child Support
ex-nuptial cases.

For details on reviewing or reconciling an estimate, see the:

-   Child support estimates (post 1 July 2010).
-   Child support estimates - Reconcile (pre 1 July 2011)

Authorisations and delegations

The authorisation for accepting or refusing an estimate election is at
the Service Officer (SO4) level or above. This does not prevent an
officer at the SO3 level who has support of their team leader from
carrying out this type of work as long as the final decision to either
accept or refuse is made by an officer at the SO4 level or above.
However, the authorisation for accepting or refusing an estimate
election is at the SO3 level for staff in SAS SETs.

The authorisation for accepting or refusing a retrospective estimate
election is at the ASO5 level.

All authorising officers should complete the authorising checklist and
paste a copy in the estimate approval notepad.

For more information on Authorisations and delegations see Child Support
Services, Delegations and Authorisations.

Related links

Fixed annual rate not to apply applications (CS)

Child Support's information gathering powers

Contact with Child Support customers

Documenting Child Support information in Cuba

Child Support estimates review (Pre 1 July 2010)

Child Support estimates - Reconcile (pre 1 July 2011)

CSAOnline secure message Cuba Process Help

Estimates Cuba Process Help

Letter Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
