
Derived income for Child Support customers 277-07010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about derived income processing for
Child Support customers. Using the most up to date income for customers
is essential for accurate assessment and compliance.

On this Page:

Definition of derived income

A derived income is when Child Support determines a customer's likely
Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for the last relevant year of income from
information available to, or held by Child Support for that year. A
derived income is either:

-   a customer derived income
-   an income manually calculated by Child Support, or
-   an income automatically calculated by Cuba based on Centrelink (CLK)
    or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) information

A derived income, deemed and default incomes are also known as a
provisional income.

Note: an existing provisional income cannot be replaced by another
provisional income for the same amount, even if the new provisional
income is of a different type. The only exception is where a customer
derived income is recorded for the same amount as the existing
provisional income in order to allow lodgement of an estimate.

Derived income - customer derived income

A customer derived income, previously called an income tax declaration
(ITD), is a derived income.

This is a customer's declaration of their adjusted taxable income for a
relevant year. It is also considered a derived income based on
information provided by the customer. A customer derived income can only
be accepted if Child Support is satisfied that it is a reasonable
approximation of the customer's adjusted taxable income (ATI). For more
information the References page contains a link to the Child Support
Guide 2.4.4: Child support income.

Derived income - manual

For incomes for child support periods that start:

-   before 1 July 2008, if only partial income information is available,
    that is less than 10 months, the income is determined by
    complementing it with a pro-rata median income
-   from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2011, a derived income can be determined
    when Child Support has information (from a source other than the
    customer or their tax return) about the income a customer has
    received for at least 10 months in the last relevant year of income.
    This is used to determine the customer's adjusted taxable income for
    that financial year
-   from 1 July 2011, less than 10 months income can be used to
    determine a derived income in some circumstances

Centrelink/Veterans' Affairs automatically derived income

When a new assessment is generated, Cuba has been programed to
automatically derive an income for the last relevant year of income if,
at least 10 months of pension or benefit income information is
available. This information is received from Centrelink (CLK) or the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) and can be viewed in the parents
Income Details window. Centrelink/DVA income information sourced from
Centrelink or Client Identification Compliance (CIDC) can be viewed in
the External Information window.

Related links

Australian Tax Office (ATO) income for Child Support customers

Cuba rules for Child Support customers

Deemed and default income for Child Support Customers

Effect of income changes for Child Support customers

Income processing for Child Support customers

Income processing for incarcerated Child Support customers

Lodgement rules for incomes in Cuba

Notify Child Support customers of income changes

National Redress Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
