
Waivers for Child Support customers 277-04380000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about managing waiver enquiries and
requests.

Child support waivers

A waiver is a special concession granted to a person or organisation
that cancels a debt owed to the Commonwealth. This means the debt can no
longer be collected by the Commonwealth.

Debts to the Commonwealth include:

-   child support arrears
-   overpayments
-   court costs and
-   consolidated revenue debts

Debt waiver is used only when all administrative options likely to
affect the debt have been exhausted. The decision is discretionary.
There is no automatic entitlement to waive a debt.

All outstanding administrative actions or avenues of appeal affecting
the customer's debt should be finalised before a waiver request is
considered.

The Finance Minister and delegated decision makers in the Department of
Finance (Finance) have the authority to waive Commonwealth debts. The
role of the Services Australia is to:

-   investigate the circumstances that gave rise to the debt
-   prepare a recommendation to Finance, and
-   action the decision made by Finance

A customer's penalties may be remitted if Finance authorise the waiver
of their debt. See Child Support late payment and estimate penalties.

Roles and responsibilities

Work associated with waiver applications is managed by these business
areas

Customer Compensation Team

-   Record and allocate waivers
-   Provide waiver submissions and associated documentation to Finance.
-   Manage relationship with Finance

Service Officer in Deceased Customer Management

-   Customer contact
-   Complete Deceased Child Support Customer Management process (or
    confirm that it has been completed)
-   Prepare briefs to assist with waiver recommendations

External Complaints – Child Support

-   Customer contact
-   Prepare submissions to assist with waiver recommendations
-   Research and prepare recommendations for waivers requests
-   Implement approved waiver decisions

Child Support Program Branch

-   Prepare submissions to assist with waiver recommendations
-   Research and prepare recommendations for deceased customer waiver
    requests
-   Provide advice and guidance to Deceased Customer Management and
    External Complaints – Child Support
-   Implement approved waiver decisions

Assistant Director or Service Support Manager (SSM) – EL 1 or above

-   Approve the recommendation to Finance
-   Review waiver submissions

The Resources page contains links to contact details, macro, letters,
Statement of Financial Details, Department of Finance website and the
resource management guide (RMG).

Related links

Change of assessment in special circumstances

Collecting Child Support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Contact with Child Support customers

Correcting errors on Child Support cases

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support

Deceased Child Support customer management

Documenting Child Support information

Income processing for Child support customers

Child Support objections

Obsolete Child Support entries

Open exchange of information for Child Support customers

Child Support late payment penalties and estimate penalties

Personalised Services

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support
decisions

Discharge arrears Cuba Process Help

Discharge irrecoverable debt Cuba Process Help

Documentation Cuba Process Help

Intray management Cuba Process Help

Waiver Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
