
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers with court order or a court registered agreement 277-51070050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for a Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customer to satisfy the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) when they have a
court order or court registered agreement for child support.

Consent orders and maintenance action

There are specific requirements for a customer with a consent order to
take reasonable action to obtain child support.

Court orders when paying parent is overseas

If the paying parent is overseas, the customer may have sought a court
order to enable collection by Child Support. Alternatively they may
already be privately collecting an overseas court ordered amount of
child support.

Registering court orders/court registered agreements

If the customer obtains a court order or court registered agreement they
may register the document with Child Support. The customer may choose to
privately collect their court order/registered agreement amount, or they
may ask Child Support to collect it on their behalf.

Private collection and MAT

Prior to 1 July 2012, if the customer privately collected their child
support, Centrelink assumed the customer received the full amount of the
notional assessment that related to the court order or court registered
agreement.

If the customer advised they could not collect their full agreement
amount privately, they would have failed the Maintenance Action Test for
the child unless they requested Child Support collection or they applied
for an exemption from seeking child support.

From 1 July 2012, if the customer elects to privately collect their
child support, they will be deemed to receive the full Notional
Assessment amount as advised by Child Support. If the customer advises
they are not receiving the full value of their agreement, they will not
fail the Maintenance Action Test.

Note: the value of the agreement is not received from Child Support for
private collect customers, only the Notional Assessed amount is
received. The Notional Assessment is used in the Maintenance Income Test
for these customers. The customer may still request that Child Support
collect on their behalf where they cannot collect the full value of the
agreement.

Ending a court order or court registered agreement

To end a court order/court registered agreement before it is due to end,
a person must apply to the Family Court.

If the receiving parent is no longer the main carer of the children
stated in the court order/agreement, Child Support can stop collection
of child support payments. Only one of the parties needs to apply to
recommence collection.

Normally, a court order or agreement ends when:

-   the paying parent dies
-   the child turns 18 years of age
-   the child becomes a member of a couple
-   the child is adopted

However, the court order may state that child support is to continue
after any of these events.

Related links

Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Centrelink action for Child Support Prescribed Income Test for a Stage 1
customer

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
