
Enh1ment Method 277-51080050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how, for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment
customers, annual maintenance income is estimated during the relevant
financial year using the Entitlement Method.

On this Page:

How the Entitlement Method is used

The Entitlement Method is used to estimate annual maintenance income
received from a person if the customer collects the maintenance income:

-   privately or
-   via Child Support where the customer has not asked for the
    Disbursement Method to be used, or under the Modified Entitlement
    Method comparison the Entitlement Method results in a higher
    estimate than the Disbursement Method estimate

Under the Entitlement Method, Centrelink assumes customers will receive
their full child support entitlement.

When a child/case end is transferred by Child Support for a Child
Support Collect customer on the Disbursement method, the system
retrospectively changes the case to Private Collect and applies the full
maintenance entitlement amount.

This retrospective change in assessment results in the customer having
their annualised maintenance income assessed under the Entitlement
Method. In the majority of cases, this will result in a decrease in the
customer’s ongoing rate of FTB Part A. This change in annualised
maintenance income can also invoke Mandatory Continuous Adjustment,
causing a further reduction to the customer’s ongoing rate of FTB.

Note: this is not caused by incorrectly entered/ended case data or a
system problem. However, it can lead to an unintended and unexpected
reduction to the customer’s ongoing rate. Occurrences of this issue must
be reported to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for escalation to the Policy
(Advice) Assessment Team for a workaround to be considered. See the
Resources page for a link.

Effect of changes to child support entitlement

If a customer's child support entitlement changes during the financial
year, annual maintenance income is recalculated so that each entitlement
amount is apportioned for the period it applies in the financial year.
Current child support entitlement is assumed to continue to the end of
the financial year.

Maintenance income is estimated in this way to reduce the risk of a debt
being calculated during the FTB reconciliation process. If a projected
overpayment is identified, the customer's ongoing rate may be reduced by
the mandatory continuous adjustment calculation.

A change in annual maintenance income may affect the customer's FTB Part
A rate no earlier than the date paid to plus one day.

Details of maintenance income assessment can be viewed from the MIT
Explanation Summary (MNEX) screen.

If FTB is granted for a past period, all changes in the customer's child
support entitlement will be taken into account in working out the annual
maintenance income that applies over the period.

FTB reconciliation

Annual maintenance income is recalculated based on child support
entitlement for private collection periods plus any Child Support
disbursements received during the financial year.

Maintenance reconciliation may result in an adjustment to the customer's
FTB Part A rate if annual maintenance income is different to maintenance
income estimated during the financial year. Any adjustment of FTB at
reconciliation depends on income reconciliation and other family
circumstances.

Customers with a child support case registered for collection by Child
Support may benefit from the Maintenance Income Credit during FTB
reconciliation.

The Resources page contains examples of using the Entitlement Method to
estimate annual maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
during the financial year and a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Related links

Child Support collection for Centrelink staff

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Determining if a payment is child support/ maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Disbursement Method

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Private collection information for Centrelink staff

Relevant period for maintenance for Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Where to find child support information on Centrelink systems

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
