
Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support 277-51010020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of providing proof of parentage to
Child Support so they can be satisfied that the persons to be assessed
in respect of the costs of the child are the parents of the child.

Evidence required for proof of parentage

When a parent or a non-parent carer asks Child Support to make a child
support assessment, Child Support needs to be satisfied that the persons
to be assessed in respect of the costs of the child are parents of the
child.

For child support purposes the term 'parent' has its common meaning of
the biological mother and father of a child. It also includes:

-   an adoptive parent
-   if the child was born as the result of an artificial conception
    procedure, a parent of the child under section 60H of the Family Law
    Act
-   if the child was born because of a surrogacy arrangement, a parent
    of the child under section 60HB of the Family Law Act

Customers should not delay a child support application while waiting for
evidence of parentage as Child Support assessment starts from the date
the application is lodged.

Evidence of parentage should generally be provided directly to Child
Support or Centrelink within 5 days of applying for a child support
assessment.

If no evidence of parentage is available, customers may need to seek
legal advice. Customers should apply for a child support assessment
before seeking legal advice if they know or suspect who the parent is
but do not have evidence of parentage.

If the parent is unknown or cannot be identified, the customer can apply
for an exemption from seeking child support.

Person named on birth certificate not child's parent

Child support does not have to be claimed from a person named on the
child's birth certificate if the customer says that person is not the
child's parent. This may occur for religious or cultural reasons, or a
friend or new partner may have wanted to do it.

The customer still needs to take reasonable action to obtain child
support from the child's other parent to receive more than base rate of
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for the child.

There is no requirement for the customer to seek to remove the person's
name from the birth certificate, although the customer may wish to do
this by contacting Births, Deaths and Marriages in the State that issued
the birth certificate. They may be asked to seek legal advice, but
requirements vary between States.

-   If another person is named as the parent, evidence of parentage is
    needed for the customer to obtain child support from them. The
    decision by Child Support or the court will be based on the evidence
    available.
-   If the customer cannot name the other parent or does not wish to
    obtain child support from them, they should be referred to a Social
    Worker to seek an exemption from applying for child support.
-   Where the customer indicates that the person named on the birth
    certificate is not the child’s parent, but they are unable to name
    the other parent, the Secretary or Delegate needs to be satisfied
    that the person named is not the other parent. Evidence that the
    person is not the other parent could be provided through a court
    ruling, a DNA test, or a separate statutory declaration from each
    party.

Note: a customer may be required to take child support action if the
current partner is proven not be the parent of the child/ren. For coding
instructions, see How to group children on a customer's Family Tax
Benefit record.

DNA testing

Child Support cannot be satisfied that a person is a parent of a child
solely on the basis of the results of paternity tests (DNA testing).

However, the parent who previously disputed parentage may be willing to
sign a statutory declaration confirming parentage following a positive
DNA result. If not, the customer seeking a child support assessment will
need to seek a court order declaring who the parent is, based on the DNA
test. Legal Aid may assist with the viability of DNA testing and a court
declaration of parentage.

The Resources page contains a link to the online Child Support Statutory
Declaration (CS4649), for payee or payer to complete as evidence of
parentage.

Related links

Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Centrelink action when an application for child support assessment is
rejected by Child Support

Customer cannot make a private arrangement for a Stage 1 child -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefits (FTB)
customers

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support for children born as a result
of a surrogacy arrangement or via artificial conception procedure
(including children of same-sex couples)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Parent advises Centrelink they want to pay child support

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
