
Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim 277-51070020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Service Officers to follow when
recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
FTB) claim.

On this Page:

Child support and FTB claims

If a customer provides child support details on their Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) lump sum claim for a previous financial year, the details are
recorded on separate screens to those used for FTB claims for the
current year. Child support details are used to calculate a customer's
rate of FTB Part A for children for whom child support action is
required.

From the 2011-12 financial year onwards, all details relating to child
support will be transferred electronically via the Child Support Data
Exchange process.

For FTB claims for 2008-09 through to 2010-11, customers could choose to
self-assess child support details, or to give permission to Centrelink
to obtain child support details directly from Child Support
electronically.

Information recorded on the lump sum claim screens does not affect
instalment payments in the current year. If the customer is claiming
instalment payments for the current year as well as a lump sum for a
previous year, then both sets of child support screens need to be
recorded.

Child support data

If there is existing child support data for the previous financial year
because the customer has received instalment payments for part of the
year and then lodges a lump sum claim for another period of that same
year, the lump sum claim child support details will be used to reconcile
the instalment period. The information recorded on these screens is not
to be used to assess ongoing FTB entitlement as it is a self-assessment
by the customer.

Information on these screens may be updated if the customer provides
extra information after lodging the claim. Any change will result in a
reassessment of the claim if it has already been finalised.

Child support details provided by the customer for their FTB lump sum
claim are recorded by selecting the Maintenance Details Selection
(FMPYS) screen.

-   For the financial years 2008-09 through until 2010-11, child support
    details were recorded via the Maint LSC Group Summary (MLGS) screen
    after adding the payer group and linking children to the group.
-   For earlier years, child support income details are recorded on the
    Maintenance Recipient Details (FMPYD) screen and child support
    action on the Child Maintenance Previous Year (CHMPY) screen.

Data matching limitation: 'one case issue'

From 1 July 2008, if parents share the care of a child or if each has
one or more children in care, Child Support registers only one child
support case instead of two. The system will only establish an
electronic link with one Centrelink customer (generally the child
support payee) at the time the link is established. This means that
information will not be received electronically from Child Support to
show that the other party (generally the payer) has met the Maintenance
Action Test (MAT).

In these cases, additional coding is required to ensure that the
customer is recognised as meeting the MAT and the customer must
self-assess rather than match with Child Support.

Adequate care details

For FTB lump sum claims for 2010-11 onwards, the claim will remain
pending if adequate care details are not available for customers who
advise they (or their partner) had a child support assessment during the
relevant year for a child they are claiming FTB for. Care assessment
data from Child Support is used for any child support assessment period.

ATO FTB claims

Child support details provided on an FTB lump sum claim lodged with the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) before 1 July 2009 are recorded on
separate ATO claim screens.

Related links

Alignment of Care processing for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

Calculating and recording the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Child support Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities and automatic reviews

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
