
Notional assessment relating to child support agreements 277-02020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information about notional assessments relating
to child support agreements including the processes for generating and
varying a provisional notional assessment (PNA) and finalising a
notional assessment (NA).

Notional Assessments

When Child Support has accepted a child support agreement, in most
instances a notional assessment (NA) is made to be used when calculating
the Family Tax Benefit Part A (FTB Part A) payable to the customers. The
NA represents the child support assessment if there was no agreement in
place. NAs apply to all agreements that vary the rate of child support
payable and some court orders for non-periodic payments, where the
application for acceptance was received by Child Support on or after 1
July 2008.

A notional assessment is applicable if a court has made

-   a statement under section 125
-   an order under section 124 for non-periodic payments, that reduce
    the annual rate of child support payable

A notional assessment is not applicable if the court has made:

-   a departure order under section 118,
-   an order under s124 for non-periodic payments that do not reduce the
    annual rate of child support payable,
-   an order under section 123A for a lump sum to be credited against
    the liability payable

To be sure what type of order has been made, see Court varied
assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders (CS), and Lump Sum child
support.

Before the NA is finalised, a provisional notional assessment (PNA) is
generated and the customers are notified in writing. If a parent feels
that a PNA does not reflect their circumstances, they may seek a
variation of the PNA before it becomes a NA. The PNA becomes a NA 23
days after the PNA is generated if all requests to vary it have been
finalised.

A customer may be calling to report a change that affects both their
child support assessment and their NA. For example, if an agreement is
based on a modified formula assessment, where the agreement increased
the assessment by $2000 per annum, an estimate of income may need to be
made for the assessment as well as generating a new PNA.

Note: system limitations may result in part of or all of the agreement
being recorded as a ‘Stage 1’ liability on the system. The system is not
able to continue a Stage 2 Agreement liability for a child if the payee
has less than 35% care of that child, even if the child is still covered
by the Agreement and the payee is still entitled to receive the
Agreement child support.

The Resources page contains links to external websites, Notional
assessments examples.

Related links

Applications for a child support assessment

Agreements between Child Support customers

Change in Child Support care levels (post 1 July 2010)

Change of assessment in special circumstances (CS)

Child support estimates (Post 1 July 2010)

Documenting Child Support information

Minimum annual rate to nil - Reducing child support assessments

Post separation income for Child Support customers

Terminating events (Stage 2) (CS)

Updating Child Support customer and assessment details

Court varied assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders (CS)

Lump Sum child support

WA Ex-nuptial child support cases - Payee ceases to be an eligible carer
with no terminating event and the agreement still applies – pre 15 May
2019

Agreements Cuba Process Help

Assessments Cuba Process Help

Care Cuba Process Help

Post Separation Income (PSI) Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
