
Matching a child support child between Centrelink and Child Support 277-51150020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the child identity matching process between Child
Support and Centrelink.

Indexing manager facility

The Indexing Manager Facility consists of a number of External Customer
Matching (ECM) screens used in the identification and linking of mutual
customers for the purposes of customer data exchange between Centrelink
and external agencies.

Child matching between Centrelink and Child Support is attempted
automatically once the child support receiving parent has been
successfully matched. An attempt is made to match all children linked to
the receiving parent and their current partner with a child support
child. For any child support child not matched, Child Support Unit staff
will need to manually match the child.

A link is established when the child support child's personal and
address details is matched to a mutual Centrelink child/customer through
automatic matching. If a link has not been established, the Child
Support customer identification number (CIN) will be automatically
recorded on the Centrelink customer's record.

Unclear and multiple match records will be stored in the National Index
and made available for manual indexing through the Index Manager
Facility suite of screens.

If a child is not matched but the receiving parent has been matched, the
total child support entitlement from the paying parent will still be
loaded onto the customer's record. Separate entitlement and maintenance
action details for the child will not be updated but will be stored
until a match is made.

Children matched prior to July 2010

Child identity matching was done on the Maintenance Match Child (MNMC)
screen on customer records. This screen can no longer be used but still
displays details of matched and unmatched children. If 1 of these
children needs to be unlinked, the case must be referred to mySupport.

Improved matching means some existing matched customers will fail
authentication when data is exchanged. If this occurs, a Manual
Follow-up (MFU) will be created to correct the relevant details.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport, the ICT Security Portal
intranet page, and an explanation of child matching MFUs.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
