
Finalising a change of assessment (COA) application 277-03120040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes and administrative tasks Internal
Decision Makers (IDM) and Contracted Decision Makers (CDM) must follow
when an agreement is received during a change of assessment (COA)
application and when finalising a COA.

Agreements received during the COA process

Customers may make agreements before, during and after the COA
application has been lodged.

Note: an agreement is taken to be 'made' on the last date the agreement
was signed.

For limited agreements made:

before the COA application was lodged

-   the annual rate must be equal to or greater than the annual rate
    payable under the assessment
-   action the agreement as per Agreements between Child Support
    customers

at the same time or after the COA application was lodged

-   decide if it is just and equitable to accept the agreement, see the
    References page for a link to the Child Support Guide 2.6.17, Would
    a change be just and equitable?
-   make a determination about the provisional notional assessment as
    this will determine the rate of FTB payable to eligible Part A
    customers

Binding agreements that are properly made before or after the COA
application was lodged must be accepted.

Immediately action a COA application lodged against a provisional
notional assessment (PNA) where an agreement has already been accepted.

Decision Makers (DM) liaise with Agreement Service Officers when an
agreement is received during the COA process and after a decision has
been made. Agreement Service Officers ensure the agreement meets
legislative requirements and undertake Cuba functions such as recording
the agreement and processing decisions and outcomes.

Finalise COA application

To provide customers with certainty and consistency, a COA decision
should be made to cover the longest period possible while giving due
consideration to the circumstances of the case and the objectives of the
Child Support Scheme.

When assessing if a longer term decision is appropriate it is important
to consider the circumstances of the case and the grounds of the
application.

It is important to remember that the type of decision and how the
decision gives effect to a variation will also affect the administrative
options available. Some longer term decisions can be made while still
providing a relatively high level of flexibility.

The Resource page contains links to macros, letter templates, separated
parents calculators decision maker tools, and Child Support contact
details.

Related links

Change of assessment enquiries

Change of assessment in special circumstances

Manage and process a change of assessment application

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
