
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Child Support collection works and how the
maintenance income is assessed for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers.

On this Page:

Child Support collection

Customers can ask Child Support to collect child support on their behalf
if they have a:

-   current child support assessment
-   court order or court registered agreement for child support, or
-   child support agreement registered with Child Support

Child Support transfers child support details to Centrelink for FTB
customers.

Child Support transfers any payments made by the paying parent to the
customer's nominated bank account. View disbursed payments on the
MNAP/MNGP screens.

Child Support follows up on non-payment of child support for collect
customers and can penalise the paying parent if child support is not
paid on time.

Refer Child Support collect customers to Child Support if:

-   they have not received a child support payment from Child Support
-   the child support payment received is less than expected
-   they have received child support directly from the paying parent

Maintenance Income Test

Child Support collect customers on the Disbursement Method may have
their FTB rate incorrectly affected when Child Support transfer a
child/case end. See Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the
customer elects to suspend or end a child support assessment for further
information.

For FTB instalment customers, there are 2 methods used to estimate
annual maintenance income during the financial year. The methods are the
Entitlement and Disbursement Method.

Customers may change the assessment method at any time.

At FTB reconciliation, the actual amount of child support collected is
used to work out maintenance income for Child Support collect period.

After the end of the financial year, Child Support collect customers may
benefit from the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC). The calculation of MIC
occurs during FTB reconciliation or when they lodge a lump sum claim.

Child Support transfers the details of a customer’s child support
entitlement and disbursements to Centrelink via the data exchange.

Stopping Child Support collection

Customers can ask Child Support to stop collection at any time if they
can arrange to receive child support directly from the paying parent.
FTB customers who privately collect their child support are deemed to
receive their full child support entitlement.

The Resources page contains Child Support contact details.

Contents

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Centrelink action for Child Support Prescribed Income Test for a Stage 1
customer

Centrelink action when a Child Support collection customer is owed or
receives child support arrears

Child support debt recovery from Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Related links

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Changing from Child Support collection to private collection: effect on
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support collection customer advises Centrelink of direct payments
from paying parent (non-agency payments)

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer has a court order or a court
registered agreement

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support
entitlement privately

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Deductions options online

Where to find child support information on Centrelink systems

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
