
Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness 277-50070020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the definition and assessment of a couple
separated due to illness. Customers who advise they are no longer able
to live in their home with their partner due to illness, but who still
consider themselves to be partnered or in a member of a couple
relationship with that person, are treated as an illness separated
couple.

On this Page:

Definition of separation due to illness

Although the definition of an illness separated couple applies if 1 or
both members of the couple are no longer able to live in their home, a
couple may only be considered an illness separated couple if they are
not residing together, or are residing together in a care facility.

Members of a couple who permanently live in an aged care facility that
provides low (hostel type) or high level (nursing home type) residential
care will be considered illness separated. This will apply regardless of
whether they are sharing the same room or different rooms in the care
facility.

Payments for a couple separated by illness

An illness separated couple may be eligible to receive the following
extra assistance:

-   a higher rate of payment. Certain allowance and pension customers
    may receive the equivalent of the single rate of payment. Parenting
    Payment (PP) and other allowance customers may be eligible for a
    special rate which is above the member of a couple rate of payment
    but less than the single rate. Similarly, a respite care couple are
    entitled to the single rate of payment, however their rate of Rent
    Assistance may be affected differently
-   single rate Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA), where applicable
-   single rate Pension Supplement, where applicable
-   as the illness separated rate is higher than the member of a couple
    rate, the couple can have a higher level of income before their
    payment is reduced to nil by application of the partnered income
    test. A pensioner couple can also have a higher level of assets
    before their payment is reduced to nil by application of the
    partnered assets test
-   increased rate of Rent Assistance (RA)

Note: although illness separated couples may be paid a higher rate of
payment, equivalent to the single rate of payment, the assessment will
still take into account the combined income and assets as if they were a
regular member of a couple.

After entering the appropriate 'illness separated' code on the Marital
Status (MS) screen, the records of the customer and their partner will
continue to be linked and correctly display as 'member of a couple'.

Illness Separated provisions

Members of a couple who are residing in a retirement village or
Supported Residential Service (SRS) that is providing a low level
(hostel type) or high level (nursing home type) of care are considered
to be in a care type similar to an aged care facility.

The facility must be providing the care. If the care is provided by an
external source, such as Home and Community Care, which the couple could
also receive in their own home, the SRS or Retirement village would not
be considered an aged care facility and the couple would not be
considered illness separated.

A customer can be treated as a member of an illness separated couple if:

-   the customer is unable to live at home due to illness or infirmity
    and
-   have increased, or likely to have increased expenses because of the
    separation (it would be unlikely that a couple separated in this
    manner would not have increased expenses), and
-   the inability to live together is likely to continue indefinitely

A couple separated due to 1 or both members of the couple accessing
approved respite care are not considered to be an illness separated
couple because approved respite care is for a temporary but definite
period.

A couple that does not meet the Illness Separated criteria might meet
the criteria for a Respite Care couple and receive the higher single
rate of payment if they are accessing approved respite care for a period
of at least 14 days.

Assessment of inability to live at home due to illness or infirmity

It is not the intention that medical evidence is required for the
majority of assessments. A couple, who have left their home due to
illness or infirmity, will be accepted as illness separated in
situations where:

it is apparent to Services Australia that the illness or infirmity of 1
or both members of a couple prevents them from living together, and/or

there is supporting evidence of illness or infirmity, for example, where
the ill or infirm member of the couple:

-   permanently lives in an aged care facility that provides low
    (hostel) or high level (nursing home) residential care, or
-   is a patient in a normal hospital ward and has been classified as a
    nursing home type patient, or
-   is residing in a psychiatric facility, or
-   has had an Aged Care Assessment Teams (ACAT) assessment that
    indicates care is needed on an ongoing basis, or
-   has current care needs that indicate that the couple cannot live
    together (this could be based on information the agency already
    holds on care needs provided to assess entitlement of a carer to
    receive Carer Allowance (CA) or Carer Payment (CP) in respect of the
    ill or infirm member of the couple)

Where the illness or infirmity that prevents the couple living together
is not apparent and no other supporting evidence is available, the
customer may be requested to provide supporting evidence from a treating
doctor or relevant health professional.

Note: it is not necessary for a care situation to exist for the illness
separated rate to be paid and an illness separated couple should not be
confused with former members of a couple whose relationship has ceased
as a result of ill health.

Financial hardship assistance for fees and charges in Residential Aged Care

The Aged Care Act 1997 has 'financial hardship' provisions for people
who have difficulty in paying their residential care payments and
relevant ongoing expenses. Financial hardship assistance may be
available to residents who do not have the income or assets to utilise
to pay their costs of care. Each case is considered on an individual
basis, based on a resident's financial circumstances. Financial hardship
provisions allow for financial assistance to be provided for fees and
accommodation payments on application to Services Australia.

See Aged Care Financial Hardship Assistance - Overview for further
information.

Assessment of living expenses

It can be assumed that most couples separated due to illness will have
an increase, or will be likely to have, an increase in their living
expenses. In the residential aged care situation, where 1 or both
members of the couple move to residential aged care, the aged care
resident would be subject to a number of residential aged care fees. For
further information on aged care fees, the Resources page has an
external link to the myagedcare website.

The requirement for customers to pay residential aged care fees is
likely to mean their expenses will increase and therefore the illness
separated provisions should apply as the couple would not have access to
the economies of sharing expenses when living together. For example, for
a pensioner couple in receipt of the maximum rate of payment and with no
assets, the person moving into aged care would be subject to the basic
daily fee. This is a fee they would not have been liable for if the
couple had remained together and their capacity to share expenses is
reduced, which the illness separated provisions is intended to
recognise. Therefore, where 1 or both members of a couple are in aged
care, illness separated provisions should be applied without further
investigation of the couple's financial circumstances.

For all other situations, the assessment of living expenses should only
be applied on a very selective case-by-case basis. When assessing
whether the customer's living expenses have increased or are likely to
increase due to illness separation, Service Officers should take into
account factors such as transportation, medication, and the loss of
ability to pool resources. For example, where the customer or their
partner have moved to hospital indefinitely or moved in with family for
care purposes, it may not be appropriate to apply an illness separated
assessment, as this may not result in an increase in living expenses.

Assessment of indefinite separation

'Likely to continue indefinitely' generally means it is highly probable,
based on available evidence that the term of the separation is for a
period of time that is unknown or unstated. However, in some
circumstances it may be difficult to determine whether a situation is
likely to continue indefinitely when first making an assessment.

For example, in the case of a partnered customer who has entered a
rehabilitation centre, in many situations the treatment will be for a
specified period of time, such as 3 months. Where evidence is presented
in relation to the length of time the separation is known or stated to
be, the partner does not qualify for illness separated.

However, where it is not possible for the centre to determine a specific
or defined period of treatment, a Service Officer should look at the
full circumstances of each case and may exercise their discretion to pay
the customer and partner at the illness separated rate.

This can include psychiatric care, aged care facility, community based
care and hospitalisation as a 'nursing home type' patient.

Assessment of Illness Separated prior to 8 February 2005

On 8 February 2005 a Network News Update was issued explaining that
customers who reside in serviced units or hostel units in Retirement
Villages no longer automatically qualify for the illness separated rate.

From 20 September 2004 customers are required to qualify according to
the above criteria.

However, as updated policy advice was not issued to the network until 8
February 2005, customers who entered serviced units or hostel units
before 8 February 2005 will not be re-assessed unless their
accommodation changes. No overpayments are to be raised on the
difference between the illness separated rate and the combined member of
a couple rate for customers who entered serviced units or hostel units
in Retirement Villages prior to 8 February 2005.

Rent Assistance (RA)

The RA thresholds and maximum rate payable will depend on a customer's
circumstances. Customers who are partnered and who have to live apart
due to ill health or for respite care can each be paid the full rate of
single RA instead of half of the member of a couple rate.

If a couple do not qualify as an illness separated couple or a respite
care couple they may qualify for RA as a temporarily separated couple.

Note: where couples qualify for RA as a temporarily separated couple,
the coding of the relevant temporary relationship qualifier code 'Tmp
Sep/Both Left Home' (TEB), 'Tmp Sep/Left Home' (TEC) or 'Tmp Sep/Ptnr
Left Home' (TEP) will not adjust their income support payments to the
single rate.

Carer Allowance (CA)

Members of a couple who reside together in a Hostel can be regarded as
illness separated. When the Carer Allowance (CA) income test was
introduced, 20th September 2018, it became compulsory to capture the
current partner details of a CA claimant/recipient. Illness separated
provisions do not affect the rate of payment of CA where the care
receiver is their partner. CA is paid at a fixed rate regardless of
relationship status.

Providing commercial care arrangements are not in place for the
provision of personal care for the care receiver in the Hostel and as
long as the carer continues to provide daily personal care, this type of
accommodation can meet the definition of a 'private residence' for CA.

If assessed as a temporarily separated couple, Services Australia will
be required to update the couple's relationship status and address
details.

Rehabilitation and probation

Customers claiming or receiving a Centrelink payment who are attending a
rehabilitation program for a set period of time or customers who are on
probation and have restrictions on where they can reside as part of
their parole requirements would generally not be regarded as an illness
separated couple. They may however be considered as not being a member
of a couple under Section 24 of the Social Security Act 1991 and
therefore eligible for the single rate of payment. The decision would
still be based on individual's circumstances taking into account a lack
of ability to pool resources resulting in financial difficulty. See
Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations.

Living separately and apart - 1 member of a couple institutionalised due to a severe and debilitating illness

Where 1 member of a couple has entered a nursing home (or other approved
institution), to reside on a permanent or indefinite basis due to a
severe and debilitating illness, they may be considered to be living
separately and apart where:

-   the incapacity of the institutionalised partner is severe,
    debilitating, and of a permanent nature (such as Huntington's
    disease or the advanced stages of Alzheimer's disease), and
-   the institutionalised partner is totally and permanently incapable
    of providing their partner with such things as companionship,
    comfort, physical, intellectual or emotional support

In these circumstances, they do not meet the 5 factors that determine a
member of a couple as per Social Security legislation. See References
for a link to Social Security Guide, 1.1.M.120, Member of a couple.

Under these circumstances, a couple may be assessed as single (paid the
single rate and assessed under the single income and assets test) as
opposed to being assessed as illness separated (paid the single rate but
the partnered income and assets test apply).

Assessment of living separately and apart

As the relationship is considered to have ceased due to ill health,
under the provisions of living separately and apart, the individuals are
deemed to be single and paid a single rate of income support payment.
The single income and assets test provisions will apply to individuals
assessed as living separately and apart.

If the customer entering care is considered to be living separately and
apart and, regardless of whether the partner remains in the former
principal home, the incapacitated person's share (as either
tenant-in-common or joint tenants) of the principal home continues to be
an exempt asset for up to 2 years (longer if further exemptions are
met). The incapacitated customer's exemption of the principal home will
cease after 2 years in care unless another exemption applies.

The customer's individual circumstances should be considered when making
a determination.

The application of the living separately and apart - 1 member of a
couple institutionalised due to a severe and debilitating illness
assessment can be a sensitive topic for customers. Particularly elderly
couples, who may not be able to emotionally disconnect from their
partner, regardless of the financial impacts. Making this assessment
will separate the customers' records as if they were single. If a
customer still strongly believes and states that they are a member of a
couple with their partner, the records are not to be unlinked. In these
situations, the customer and partner will be considered to be an illness
separated couple.

Living separately and apart should not generally be accepted if the
couple are living apart solely because of ill health, employment and/or
economic reasons. All other options should be explored before a
determination is made that a couple are living separately and apart.

Policy contains examples and further information about provisions for
members of a couple that are living separately and apart. See the
References page for links to the Social Security Guide.

The Resources page contains scenarios of an illness separated couple and
an attachment showing the effect on the income and asset tests for an
illness separated couple who reside in a retirement village or low level
aged care. It also has links to the Carer Allowance Questionnaire
(SA381), the Services Australia website, contact details and an external
link for myagedcare.

Related links

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

Carer Allowance (CA) carer is absent

Change of address to an aged care home

Change of care for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Creating a Q999 or Q888 letter

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

Customer is separated from their partner due to respite care

General 14 day notification provisions

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Income Test for illness separated or partner in prison customers

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Rates and Thresholds

Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers

Rent Assistance (RA) verification

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Payment rates and thresholds

Updating address details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
