
Parent advises Centrelink they want to pay child support 277-51010030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a person who is to pay child support (the
paying parent or non-resident parent) may apply for a child support
assessment for a child.

Effect of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

If the person to receive child support (the payee) is claiming more than
base rate FTB Part A, the payee may need to apply to satisfy the
maintenance action test.

An application for a child support assessment can only be made by a
parent of an eligible child. In some cases, it is not applicable for a
customer to take action to obtain child support.

The parent can begin paying child support directly to the receiving
parent when Child Support advises them how much to pay. Child Support
cannot collect money from the paying parent unless the receiving parent
asks Child Support to collect child support on their behalf.

The paying parent (or their current partner) may be entitled to more FTB
if they are paying child support. This is because the full amount of
child support paid is deducted from their taxable income under the FTB
income test as child maintenance expenditure.

Formal agreement and Child Support assessment

A parent of an eligible child may also make a formal agreement for child
support with the payee and have this agreement registered by Child
Support.

Customers are to contact Child Support directly, either [] online or by
phone, to apply for a child support assessment. Refer the customer to
Child Support. For contact details, see Child Support.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information about child support options for parents and contact details
for Child Support.

Related links

Centrelink action when an application for child support assessment is
rejected by Child Support

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Deductible Child Maintenance Expenditure

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer wants to register a child support
agreement

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
