-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines for staff, the circumstances under which parents
can suspend their case due to reconciling with the other parent or a
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer requests to end their child support
assessment.

Parents who reconcile

Parents reconciling is not a terminating child support event. Child
Support gives customers the choice of either:

-   suspending the child support case for a maximum of 6 months
-   ending the child support case

For Family Tax Benefit (FTB), the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) ceases
to apply from the date of reconciliation for children of that
relationship.

Customer reconciling elects to suspend case

A Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity is automatically created for Families
and Child Care (FCC) to contact the customer to confirm their
relationship status and the date their relationship status changed if:

-   the customer is not linked to the payer on the customer's Centrelink
    record or if the date from which they were linked is different to
    the date advised by Child Support (A020MN), or
-   the customer separates from the payer before the end of the 6 month
    suspension period, but they are still linked on the customer's
    Centrelink record (A022MN)

If the couple separate again within 6 months, the payee will have the
previous child support assessment reinstated without having to make a
new application. The child support assessment only comes back into force
from the date the parents re-separate.

If the customer remains reconciled with the other parent for 6 months,
Child Support will end the child support case once they confirm with the
customer that they are still partnered. Details of the end case will be
sent to Centrelink so that the customer's record is automatically
updated. If the couple separate after the case has ended, the customer
is required to reapply for child support.

If the customer advises of separation, there are key tasks they should
consider in order to protect their personal information. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal information.

Payer not a parent of the child

An FTB customer may choose to end their child support case where the
payer is found not to be a parent of the child. This may occur because:

-   a court making a section 107 decision. The court is making a
    decision that Child Support should never have accepted the original
    application. The court may or may not require the payee to repay the
    money to the payer, or
-   the payee electing to end their child support assessment because
    there is evidence that the payer is not a parent of the child (such
    as a DNA test)

If a child support case is retrospectively ended or retrospectively made
invalid, consideration needs to be given to whether the:

-   original payer continues to be considered a parent of the child/ren
-   original payer is no longer considered a parent of the child/ren but
    is considered a partner or former partner of the payee
-   payee has to repay the money to the original payer

If the original payer is no longer considered a parent of the child/ren
and:

is not considered a partner or former partner of the payee, the amounts
paid are not considered maintenance income and should be removed from
the Maintenance Income Test (MIT), even if the payee is not required to
repay any money

is considered a partner or former partner of the payee and there is:

-   a section 107 court decision that the payee is required to repay the
    money to the original payer, the amounts paid are not considered
    maintenance income and should be removed from the MIT
-   no section 107 court decision that the payee is required to repay
    the money to the original payer, the amounts paid are still
    considered maintenance income and remain assessable under the MIT

Customer reconciling elects to end case

As parents reconciling is not a terminating child support event, a
request to end the child support assessment is required from the payee.

Child Support will discuss with the customer their options in relation
to any outstanding child support arrears.

Other circumstances to end case

Other circumstances where a child support case can be ended include
where:

-   there is a fear of family and domestic violence on the payee or
    their family if they continue to receive or pursue child support
-   customer advises Child Support of reconciliation

A child support payee in receipt of FTB (or their current partner is in
receipt of FTB) can also voluntarily end their case where none of the
above reasons apply. Child Support staff will discuss the potential FTB
Part A implications and offer to transfer the parent to Families to
discuss the potential impacts of this decision on FTB Part A
entitlements.

If a payee wants to end their case the customer should be referred to
Child Support. For contact details, see Child Support. Alternatively,
customers can complete the Ending a child support assessment (CS1671)
form, which is available from the Services Australia website.

Note: Child Support will still need to speak to the customer before the
case can be ended.

Centrelink decision no longer required from 1 July 2018

Before 1 July 2018 (15 May 2019 for WA ex-nuptial cases) if the customer
or their partner were in receipt of FTB Part A at more than the base
rate, secretary approval was required to end the child support case.

Child Support no longer needs Centrelink approval to accept an election
to end an assessment from:

-   15 May 2019 for WA ex-nuptial cases, and
-   1 July 2018 for all other cases

If a parent or their current partner is receiving, or is entitled to
receive more than the base rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A,
their rate may be reduced to base rate if they do not have a MAT
exemption.

Child Support will discuss the implications of the election to end on
their FTB Part A entitlement and will confirm whether the customer or
their current partner is claiming FTB or whether they intend to claim
FTB at the end of the financial year. Child Support will offer to
transfer the parent through to Families staff to discuss the potential
impacts before making a decision to end the case. This may mitigate any
unexpected and unnecessary financial hardship for the parent. This may
include further discussions around whether an exemption may be
appropriate.

Note: Secretary approval was still required to end a child support
assessment on a WA ex-nuptial case between 1 July 2018 and 14 May 2019.
See WA Child Support ex-nuptial cases.

Centrelink decision before 1 July 2018 and WA ex-nuptial cases before 15 May 2019

Before 1 July 2018 and 15 May 2019 for WA ex-nuptial cases in some
circumstances Child Support would refer the case to Centrelink for
approval.

Circumstances included if the child support payee or their current
partner was receiving FTB Part A at above the base rate, including
customers receiving less than their legislative rate due to a payment
choice.

Approval to end cases could only be given where it was considered the
customer would continue to satisfy the Maintenance Action Test.

If the current partner of the payee was in receipt of FTB for the child
and they were legislatively entitled to receive FTB at more than the
base rate, the case could not be ended. The request would not have been
approved. The payee was advised of the decision if rejected by
Centrelink.

If an 'end case' was approved, customers that were receiving a rate of
FTB at or below the base rate due to income, were advised that if there
was a change in their income which could entitle them to more than the
base rate, they would need to meet the requirements of the MAT in order
to be eligible to receive their full legislative entitlement.

End case requests approved/rejected by Child Support

In the following circumstances Child Support staff can make the decision
to approve or reject a request to end a case (or assessment for a child)
on behalf of both Child Support and Centrelink:

-   parents reconcile
-   full maintenance action test exemption has already been granted
-   court decision - payer is not the parent of the child
-   the payer is not a parent of the child and the payee applies for
    child support against the actual parent

Child Support decision

Child Support can end an assessment without a request from the payee if:

-   a child support terminating event has occurred, for example, the
    child leaves their care or the child or the payer dies
-   an objection against the child support assessment is successful
-   the payer is successful in applying to a court for a declaration
    that the payee is not entitled to an administrative assessment of
    child support payable by them

Reduction in FTB rate when case ended due to retrospective change to assessment

When a child/case end is transferred from Child Support for a Child
Support Collect customer on the Disbursement method, the system
retrospectively changes the case to Private Collect and applies the full
maintenance entitlement amount.

This retrospective change in assessment results in the customer having
their annualised maintenance income assessed under the Entitlement
Method. In the majority of cases, this will result in a decrease in the
customer's ongoing rate of FTB Part A. This change in annualised
maintenance income can also invoke Mandatory Continuous Adjustment,
causing a further reduction to the customer's ongoing rate of FTB.

Note: this is not caused by incorrectly entered/ended case data or a
system problem, however it can lead to an unintended and unexpected
reduction to the customer's ongoing rate. Occurrences of this issue must
be reported to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for escalation to the Policy
(Advice) Assessment Team for a workaround to be considered. The
Resources page has a link.

The Resources page contains suggested text for the (Q999) letter to be
sent to advise FTB customers of the outcome of their request to end a
child support assessment. It also contains a link to the Level 2 Policy
Helpdesk and contact details for Child Support and social workers.

Related links

Action required when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer no longer
entitled to child support

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Completing the Ending a child support assessment (CS1671)

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Ending a Child Support assessment

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
