
Calculating and recording the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims 277-51190020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) process,
which allows families with a child support entitlement registered for
collection by Child Support to access their unused Maintenance Income
Free Area (MIFA) from previous financial years to offset the effect of
child support arrears on Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

On this Page:

2008-09 to 2010-11 claims

For 2008-09 to 2010-11 financial years, customers can indicate on their
FTB claim that they would like child support details to be obtained
directly from Child Support rather than providing these details
themselves. Where a customer does provide the details themselves the MIC
is manually calculated for FTB lump sum claims.

2011-12 onwards

From the 2011-12 financial year onwards, customers will no longer have
the option to self-assess their child support. All details relating to
child support will be transferred electronically via the Child Support
Data Exchange process and the MIC will be automatically assessed.

Eligibility for MIC accrual

The MIC is designed to ensure that FTB customers who receive child
support payments on an irregular basis over more than one financial year
receive the same level of FTB over time as those receiving child support
payments on a more regular basis.

The MIC was not available to customers who claimed FTB as a lump sum
through the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) before 1 July 2009.

The MIC first became available to customers during the FTB
reconciliation or lump sum claim payment for the 2006-07 financial year,
from July 2007.

When a customer receives arrears of child support, the MIC balance will
be used to reduce the amount of arrears calculated under the maintenance
income test during FTB reconciliation or lump sum claim assessment.

Child support or private collection

The MIC only applies to child support entitlements registered for
collection by Child Support. The MIC is not available to private collect
customers, who must collect their full child support entitlement to
continuously meet the reasonable maintenance action test. Private
collect customers unable to privately collect their full child support
entitlement are required to swap to Child Support collection or apply
for an exemption.

From March 2009, periods of private collection are taken into account
for MIC accrual and accrual apportioning. This affects customers who
change from Child Support collect to private collect (or vice versa)
during the financial year. Customers can still only accrue for periods
of Child Support collection, however this change ensures that the amount
received and the amount entitled to receive are more accurately
calculated. This change does not affect the overview or depletion
calculations which continue to use the annualised amounts received and
entitled to receive during Child Support collect periods.

From 1 July 2012 MIC calculations will extend to include children aged
16-19 years who are in full time secondary schooling to align with the
Maintenance Income Test (MIT).

MIC accrual

Accruals to a MIC balance represent the unused amount of MIFA. MIC will
only accrue in relation to a child support child and can only accrue for
periods the child support case was registered for collection by Child
Support.

The MIC accrual amount is the lower of the customer's global maintenance
entitlement and their Maintenance Income Free Area (MIFA), less the
total maintenance income received.

Where there is more than one MIC balance on the customer's record, the
MIC accrual amount is apportioned between each MIC balance. An accrual
to a MIC balance cannot exceed the underpaid amount for that child
support case for the financial year.

MIC depletion

Depletion from a MIC balance will occur if the financial year has ended
and the amount of child support received in the financial year is more
than the amount due.

The MIC depletion amount is the lower of:

-   the arrears amount (the difference between the amount received and
    the child support entitlement)
-   the MIC balance.
-   The affecting maintenance income used in the reconciliation
    calculation is reduced by this amount.

Unlike MIC accrual, MIC depletion can occur during periods the customer
is not eligible for FTB.

Separation during the financial year

Parents who separated during the financial year each retain their MIC
balance from the previous financial year for their child support case.
The customer's MIC balance cannot be used to offset child support
received by their ex-partner during the period they were a couple. The
ex-partner's MIC balance may be depleted due to child support arrears
they received in that period.

The Resources page contains examples of MIC calculations, and links to
MIC calculation worksheets which can be used when manually assessing the
MIC for lump sum claimants.

Related links

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child support issues

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum and past period claims

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
