-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how annual maintenance income is calculated under
the Modified Entitlement Method to estimate maintenance income to affect
a customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A rate. The Modified
Entitlement Method is used for periods of Child Support collection where
the customer has not chosen the Disbursement Method.

Estimating annual maintenance income during the financial year

For FTB instalment customers, annual maintenance income is estimated
during the financial year using either the Entitlement Method or the
Disbursement Method.

For private collect customers, the Entitlement Method is used

For Child Support collect customers, a customer can choose to be
assessed under the Disbursement Method otherwise a Modified Entitlement
Method is used

For Child Support collect customers on the Modified Entitlement Method:

-   Maintenance income is assessed from 1 July of each financial year
    using the Entitlement Method
-   Whenever Child Support advises new disbursement details or changed
    entitlement information for the customer, the system calculates
    annual maintenance income using the Entitlement Method and the
    Disbursement Method and uses the method that results in the higher
    amount to work out the customer's ongoing FTB Part A rate

Maintenance income is estimated in this way to reduce the risk of
overpayment due to changes in maintenance income during the financial
year. If maintenance income increases during the year, customers can
further reduce the risk of overpayment through a number of FTB payment
choices.

Details of the annual maintenance income assessment can be viewed from
the Maintenance Income Test (MIT) Explanation Summary (MNEX) screen. A
breakdown of the annualised amount of maintenance income by maintenance
entitlement group can be viewed on the FTB Maintenance Assessment
Explanation (REXFTBM) screen.

The effect of annual maintenance income on the customer's FTB Part A
rate can be viewed on the Rate Explanation (REXFTBA) screen.

FTB reconciliation

When FTB reconciliation occurs after the end of the financial year,
annual maintenance income is recalculated based on all Child Support
disbursements received, child support entitlement for private collect
periods, and other maintenance income such as capitalised maintenance.

The customer's total annual maintenance income is the sum of the annual
amounts from each person the customer (and their partner) are entitled
to receive child support from. Customers with a child support
entitlement registered for collection by Child Support may benefit from
the Maintenance Income Credit during FTB reconciliation.

FTB lump sum claims

From 2011-12 onwards, customers can no longer self-assess their child
support, therefore lump sum claims from customers with child(ren) from a
previous relationship are assessed using information from Child Support.

For 2008-09 to 2010-11 financial years, customers had the option to give
Centrelink permission to obtain child support payment details directly
from Child Support rather than self- assessing.

Prior to 2008-09, customers were asked to provide details of any child
support income as part of their lump sum claim (they were able to
self-assess). Details were recorded on separate screens to those used
for a current financial year and were used to assess their FTB Part A
rate for the relevant financial year.

The Resources page contains examples of applying the Modified
Entitlement Method to work out annualised maintenance income during the
financial year.

Related links

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Australian Tax Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim
screens

Child support agreements and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Disbursement Method

Entitlement Method

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

Relevant period for maintenance for Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
