
Processing guide for deceased customer letters 277-22021547

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if a letter needs to be sent
when a child support customer or child is deceased, including when it is
appropriate to make customer contact before sending the letter.

Note: all staff must check for and process any un-actioned Deceased
Client Letter intrays when taking calls or actioning other intray types.

Letters generated

Letters generated in Cuba for customers who are deceased or are
associated with a person in any case who is deceased, have their status
automatically changed from keyed to pending by the Deceased and Related
Clients Letter Batch.

This ensures no letters (except a Payer Account Statement (PAS)), are
issued to customers without first being reviewed and released by staff.
In this process, a deceased customer is a customer with an active death
record with or without proof of death recorded.

The Deceased and Related Clients Letter batch is broad in scope to
ensure no vulnerable customer is missed. However, this often results in
letters being pended for customers who don’t have a deceased customer
association in their current case. For example, customers who are now
parents in an active Child Support case but previously had a child
record.

A PAS will only pend where the customers themselves are deceased.

A Payee Overpayment Summary (POS) will pend for all customers who have a
deceased association, including those where the receiving parent is not
deceased.

A pended deceased customer letter is identified by:

-   a pending letter status in Cuba
-   a Deceased Client letter intray, or
-   a Deceased Client Statement intray

Staff will manually review and update the status of a letter, the day
after a letter has generated in Cuba.

Letter status

Letters generated in Cuba for deceased customers will have the following
status:

-   Pended: A letter has generated and is not yet reviewed. Letter has
    not been released
-   Reviewed: A letter has generated, been reviewed and released
-   Deleted: A letter has generated and been deleted after being
    reviewed. Letter will not be released

Note: a letter with the status of pending will remain pending in the
Cuba system for one month. A Deceased Client Letter intray will generate
after that time.

When a letter generates it will have a status of keyed. The Deceased and
Related Clients batch will change the status to pended for any in scope
customers when it runs overnight.

Staff may set a letter status to 'reviewed' on the day the letter is
generated in Cuba, if the letter is appropriate to be released. This
will prevent the status from changing to pended and an intray
generating.

The Resources page has troubleshooting tips for Transaction statements
and Excess Cash letters, and a link to the Deceased Customer End
Assessment letters macro.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
