
Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 277-51190000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine the correct FTB entitlement for
customers paid FTB instalments in the previous financial year.
Maintenance reconciliation is part of the overall reconciliation
process.

Annual maintenance income

Annual maintenance income is estimated during the year to calculate a
customer's fortnightly rate of FTB Part A. Maintenance income changes
are applied retrospectively which may invoke Mandatory Continuous
Adjustment to help reduce the chances of an overpayment at
reconciliation.

Maintenance reconciliation is an automatic process that occurs after the
end of the relevant financial year, as part of FTB reconciliation. A
customer's annual maintenance income is recalculated based on actual
maintenance income received, including child support entitlement for
periods of private collection, and the actual dates of any child support
changes. The Maintenance Action Test (MAT) and Maintenance Income Test
(MIT) are then applied to the customer's income tested FTB Part A rate.

FTB and child support payments

FTB Part A is limited to the base rate for a child support child for any
period action to obtain child support was required but not taken.

Before to 1 July 2012, if an ACTual child support amount was recorded
for a customer who privately collected an amount that was less than the
child support entitlement and no exemption applied, the customer would
fail the MAT and would be limited to the base rate for the relevant
child support child for that period.

From 1 July 2012, customers will not fail the MAT if they are privately
collecting an amount less than the amount assessed by Child Support. The
customer will be deemed to be receiving the child support assessed
amount, unless a partial exemption has been granted.

From the 2011-12 financial year onwards, customers who claim FTB via a
lump sum claim will have their child support details supplied directly
to Centrelink via the electronic data exchange. Customers no longer have
the option to self assess their child support details within their lump
sum claim.

From 1 July 2007, customers with a child support entitlement registered
for collection by the Child Support program may benefit from the
Maintenance Income Credit (MIC). This is calculated during FTB
reconciliation and will only accrue in relation to a child support
child. From 1 July 2012 MIC calculations will extend to include children
aged 16-18 years who are in full time secondary schooling to align with
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) and the Maintenance Income Test (MIT).

Completed reconciliation

Once reconciliation has been completed, re-reconciliation may
automatically occur if Child Support retrospectively increase or
decrease the child support assessment for a private collect customer for
a financial year that has already been reconciled. If the assessment is
retrospectively:

-   decreased the customer may receive arrears of FTB
-   increased the customer may incur an FTB reconciliation debt. In this
    scenario the customer can apply for a formal review of the FTB
    reconciliation debt with Centrelink. However if they want to appeal
    the retrospective increase to their child support assessment they
    will need to contact Child Support

If necessary, maintenance income details are adjusted on the Override
Maintenance Income (MNOI) screen to achieve the correct FTB
reconciliation result.

Customers with a blind pensioner exemption for the entire period are
exempt from maintenance reconciliation. They are exempt from both the
Maintenance Action Test and the Maintenance Income Test.

The results of maintenance reconciliation for a financial year can be
viewed from the FAO Reconciliation & Claim Summary (FRCS) screen.

Contents

Calculating and recording the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child support issues

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Related links

Amending maintenance income details on the Override Maintenance Income
(MNOI) screen

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim
screens

Child support Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities and automatic reviews

Customer enquiries about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump
sum claim

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Mutual customer matching with Child Support

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
