-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to action a customer request to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) to review a Child Support decision
to refuse an extension of time to object (EOT refusal) or review a Child
Support decision where the application has not been made within the
required timeframes (AAT EOT application).

On this page:

Review of a decision refusing an extension of time to object (EOT refusal)

If a customer is dissatisfied with a Child Support decision, they may
object. The Objection must be lodged within 28 days (or 90 days for
parents who reside overseas in a reciprocating jurisdiction) of the date
they received notification of the decision.

If an objection is not lodged within 28 days (or 90 for reciprocating
jurisdictions), a customer can lodge an objection and an application for
an Extension of Time (EOT) to object. If Child Support does not grant
the EOT to object, this is called an EOT refusal.

Following an EOT refusal, the customer can make an application to the
AAT to review the EOT refusal decision. Note: care percentage decisions
are exempt from this timeframe.

If a customer makes an application to the AAT to review the EOT refusal,
the AAT will make initial contact with the Appeals Support Team (AST)
seeking applicant details and a copy of the decision. See Administrative
Appeal Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support decisions.

Once the AAT has considered the information in our response, they will
either notify the AST that the review will not be continuing, or they
will request further information from the AST by sending a ‘Request for
statement’, and providing a ‘Record of Application’.

For an AAT review of a Child Support EOT refusal, the ‘Request for
statement’ requires documents that:

-   give reasons for Child Support’s decision not to grant the EOT
-   sets out the findings of fact, and/or
-   refers to the evidence on which the findings were based

Note: if the review continues, Child Support must provide all documents
to the AAT within 28 days.

Application to the AAT for an extension of time for review (AAT EOT application)

A parent must apply for an AAT first review of an objection decision
within 28 days (or 90 days for parents who reside overseas in a
reciprocating jurisdiction) of the date they received the notice of the
decision from Child Support.

Note: if a customer applies for a review of a care percentage objection
decision from 1 July 2010, the usual time restrictions on making an
application to the AAT for an AAT first review do not apply.

If the period for applying for review to the AAT has ended, the customer
may make an application for review and ask the AAT to consider an EOT to
lodge the objection.

The AAT will contact the Appeal Support Team (AST) to notify Child
Support that they are considering an application from the customer. In
the initial contact the AAT will seek applicant details and a copy of
the relevant objection decision. See Administrative Appeal Tribunal
(AAT) applications against Child Support decisions.

As this is not yet a review, all communications regarding information
requested by the AAT from Child Support are recorded in Cuba in the
applicant’s Communication window, stacked under the ‘Request for
applicant detail’ notepad.

The AAT will use the date Child Support notified the customer of the
objection decision to determine whether the review was lodged in time
with AAT, or whether an AAT EOT application is required.

Once the AAT has considered the information in our response to that
initial request, they will either notify the AST that the review will
not be continuing, or they will request further information from the
AST.

As a full application for review has not yet been made and accepted by
the AAT, section 29AC and the usual requirements to provide information
to the AAT in subsection 37(1) of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Act do not automatically apply.

However, under subsection 93(2) of the Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act, the Tribunal may make a request for the subsection
37(1) type information. Child Support must provide that information
within 28 days.

If the AAT is considering an AAT EOT application they will send a
‘Request for documents – subsection 93(2)’

This will require documents that:

-   give reasons for Child Support’s decision (the underlying objection
    decision that the customer wants the AAT to review (if the AAT
    grants the AAT EOT application)
-   sets out the findings of fact, and/or
-   refers to the evidence on which the findings were based

The AAT will also need details of any relevant contact with the
applicant after the underlying objection decision was notified to them.
The AAT will need to see what information/discussions were held with the
party about their right to apply to the AAT for a review of the
objection decision, to determine whether the customer rested on their
rights to seek a review.

Under subsection 93(2) Child Support must provide all these subsection
37(1) type documents to the AAT within 28 days.

Process for disclosing documents

Documents for disclosure to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (and
review parties) are:

-   complied electronically by the Appeals Support Team
-   saved in PDF format and stored in the AST shared drive
-   edited using Adobe Acrobat
-   submitted to AAT through ‘Bluezone’ (FTP server)
-   hard (paper) copies sent to the parties of the review, if required

Roles and responsibilities

Operations Management Division

Service Officers at the APS5 level:

-   manage the Appeals Support Team (AST) mailbox
-   communicate with the AAT in relation to administrative matters
-   create and manage appeals records in Cuba and the AAT database

Child Support, Indigenous & Tailored Services Division

Service Officers at the APS3 and APS4 level:

-   manage the AST mailbox
-   communicate with the AAT in relation to administrative matters
-   create and manage appeals records in Cuba and the AAT database
-   prepare the AAT file
-   despatch the file to the AAT and the customers
-   process the AAT decision
-   finalise the appeals process, and
-   store and transfer AAT files

Service Support Officers (SSO) at the APS5 level:

-   check files for completeness and compliance with privacy provisions
-   make decisions to escalate 'exceptions' to the Senior Advisors
-   suspend disbursements (where appropriate)
-   provide guidance to APS3 and APS4 Service Officers for escalated
    matters
-   make non-disclosure applications to the AAT, and
-   implement the AAT decision

Note: Service Officers below the APS5 level who have the support from
their team leader may carry out the roles and responsibilities of an
SSO.

The Resources page contains a link to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support decisions procedure
for AAT for relevant AAT and Appeals Support Team (AST) tools and
resources, guides for file preparation, records management and document
templates.

Related links

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support
decisions

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) applications against Child Support
objection decisions

Management of files sent to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
(CS)

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) submissions and requests for
additional information from Child Support

Processing Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) hearing details and
additional documents (CS)

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) review dismissed or withdrawn (CS)

Processing an Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) decision (CS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
