
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer separates 277-50080050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

If you have concerns about a child’s safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

For information on Child Care Subsidy (CCS) changes in relationship
status, see Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

This document outlines the information required when a person in receipt
of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) separates
from their partner. A person is considered to be separated when a
marriage or de facto relationship ceases to exist and the couple are
living permanently or indefinitely apart.

On this Page:

Confirmation of separation

Confirmation of the separation is only required where the FTB and/ or
CCS customer is claiming or receiving an income support payment. A
separate procedure applies if the customer or separated partner receives
an income support payment. If there is doubt regarding the customer’s
separation or there is a possibility they may claim an income support
payment in the immediate future, then verification should be requested.

Separated under one roof

In most cases they will no longer be living in the same house, however
in some situations the couple may claim to be separated under one roof.
If there is any doubt about the bona fide of the separation, or the
customer is claiming Separated Under One Roof (SUOR) or there is a
possibility they may claim an income support payment in the immediate
future, then verification should be requested.

In some cases, a relationship may not clearly seem to have dissolved but
may still be considered as a separation. Such circumstances include:
illness leading to an end of the relationship, for example, an
institutionalised customer, or a couple unable to live together in the
family home due to illness, or a pensioner permanently living in an
institution, hospital or retirement village. Discretion can be used to
treat some customers as separated in a limited number of cases.

Note: if a customer is advising they are separated under one roof,
always ask the Family and Domestic Violent (FDV) Risk Identification
Question before issuing the Details of your child's care arrangements
(FA012) and Relationship details - Separated Under One Roof (SS293):

Are you, or has anyone else been, concerned about your or your family's
safety?

If yes, explore further as per the FDV Risk Identification and Referral
Model (RIRM) to clarify the customer's circumstances. Consider if it is
appropriate to issue the FA012 and SS293 to customer's ex-partner. In
some instances where there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the
customer's safety at risk

If no, advise the customer of the forms that will issue to their
ex-partner and ask the additional question: Is there any other reason we
shouldn't send these forms to your ex-partner to confirm your
separation?

-   If yes, explore further as per the FDV RIRM to clarify the
    customer's circumstances. Consider if it is appropriate to issue the
    FA012 and SS293 to customer's ex-partner. In some instances where
    there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the customer's safety at
    risk
-   If no, issue the forms

Details to be checked when customer separates

There is a requirement for FTB and/or CCS customers to provide details
of address, income, child custody, child care and child support after
separation to ensure payments are correct.

When a customer advises they have separated from their partner, the
Service Officer must check whether the following customer details have
changed:

-   Their address or accommodation details. Staff must key ‘No’ in the
    Make partner the same: field to ensure the address update is not
    applied to the partner record
-   Payment destination details. Staff must ensure their bank account
    details are correct and ask if they wish to have payments made to
    the same account. If they have payments made to a joint account,
    advise them that the former partner will have access to their
    payment and they should open an account in their own name. See
    Changing payment destination
-   Entitlement to an income support payment or additional services or
    benefits
-   Income estimate
-   Children in their care. For children of the former relationship
    remaining in their care, check that they are aware of any initial
    maintenance action that needs to be taken and whether any child
    support arrangement has been made

Note: a Maintenance Action Requirement Notification (MARNL) letter
should be automatically issued to a customer or their current partner if
they are required to take reasonable action to obtain child support for
a child in their care and they are within their 91 day Deciding
Maintenance Action (DMA) period. A reminder MARNL is also sent to them
21 days after the initial MARNL is sent if:

-   they are still within the DMA period
-   no child support assessment data has been received, and
-   the initial letter was sent on or before day 63 of the DMA period

The MARNL letter is displayed as a ‘NOTFAOOSC’ letter on the History
Summary (HS) screen.

-   Nominee arrangement. When a customer, who has their partner
    appointed as their nominee, advises they have separated they must be
    asked at first point of contact if they wish to cancel the nominee
    arrangement. A request for cancellation of the arrangement must be
    actioned immediately. The request does not have to be in writing

Customers who incorrectly held/hold the 'RHH' MAT exemption for periods of separation

Prior to 1 July 2016, there was a known issue which impacted customers
who were re-separating from a person against whom they previously had a
child support case. In some cases, rather than reverting to No
Maintenance Action (NMA) at the end of their 91 day Deciding Maintenance
Action (DMA) period, child/ren incorrectly had a 'Reconciliation' (RHH)
MAT exemption code applied, resulting in the child/ren being treated as
permanently exempt from the MAT and payments made to the customer at
above the base rate of FTB Part A.

From 1 July 2016, the RHH MAT code was enhanced to ensure that when a
customer re-separates, RHH will no longer automatically apply after the
DMA period.

Customers who incorrectly held the RHH code as at 1 July 2016 were
reassessed and had a new automatic MAT code of Pseudo DMA Event (PDE)
applied to their records from 1 July 2016 only. This stimulated a
Maintenance Action Requirement Notification (MARNL) letter to be issued
to the customers as it would have with a DMA period. As with DMA
processing, where they do not take action within 21 days of the first
MARNL being sent, a second MARNL is sent. If they did not take
reasonable action to obtain child support within 91 days of 1 July 2016,
their MAT was automatically updated to NMA at the end of the 91 days.

Note: the clean-up to insert 'PDE' for customers who incorrectly held
the RHH MAT code as at 1 July 2016 only targeted customers where the
last un-deleted MAT code prior to the incorrect RHH was 'DMA'. Customers
who had a MAT code other than DMA preceding the RHH were not selected
for the clean-up and therefore may still retain the incorrect RHH, until
such time as a new DMA event occurs post 1 July 2016. Any customers
identified as potentially incorrectly holding the RHH MAT code post 1
July 2016 should be referred to Child Support Unit (CSU) to determine if
the RHH is correct. Where the RHH is incorrect, CSU will refer the case
to the National ICT Referral Officer (NIRO) to have 'PDE' manually
coded.

Pseudo Deciding Maintenance Action (PDE) MAT code

'PDE' is an automatic code which is displayed on the Maintenance Action
(MNMA) screen and results in DMA on the Maintenance Action Result (MNMR)
screen. From the December 2016 release, PDE became a manual code which
can only be entered by staff with relevant access.

Proof of divorce

Proof of divorce is not required unless it is needed to verify
separation. If a customer has been separated for 12 months or longer and
they advise they are now divorced, verification should not be requested
unless there is doubt about their relationship status.

The Resources page contains links to mySupport and forms that may need
to be sent to the FTB/CCS customer when they advise they have separated
from their partner.

Related links

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) claims

Change in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Permanent vacation of principal home

Changing payment destination

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Claiming JobSeeker Payments (JSP)

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS)

Family and domestic violence

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
