
New Employment Services Model - Workforce Australia

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​The New Employment Services Model (NESM) will replace the jobactive
program from 1 July 2022. This page provides resources to support you
through these changes. ​

What are you looking for 

  -------------- -------------- -------------- ---------------- --------------
  [] Messages    [resources     [Resources     [vodlink]Video   [NNU link] NNU
                 link] Training link]          learning         
                                Resources                       

  -------------- -------------- -------------- ---------------- --------------

  [update icon] Page last updated: 05​/08/2022​

[Expand all sections]

What you need to know 

Existing job seekers (including Disability Support Pension recipients
with participation requirements) will transition to the relevant
Workforce Australia service on 1 July 2022. The Department of Education,
Skills and Employment will contact them to confirm arrangements prior to
1 July.

NESM changes do not apply to job seekers engaged in any of the
following:

-   Community Development Program
-   Disability Employment Services
-   ParentsNext

 

Changes starting from 1 July 2022 include:

Rebranding
Workforce Australia will replace Jobactive. Existing references to the
current jobactive Employment Services Model and associated providers
will be replaced in all Services Australia & DESE staff and customer
facing applications such as Websites, customer online services, myGov,
Centrelink and DESE systems etc. Services Australia staff will not see
these changes applied until 1 July 2022.

A new points-based system
Jobseekers with compulsory Mutual Obligation or Participation
Requirements will be subject to a new points target. This will replace
the current activities based model and will allow job seekers greater
flexibility to choose how and when they fulfil their mutual obligation
requirements. The Targeted Compliance Framework will remain unchanged,
however the focus will shift to a points-based requirement. The Job
Seeker Compliance Framework for CDP jobseekers will remain business as
usual.

Job Seeker Snapshot
The Job Seeker Snapshot will replace the JSCI. The snapshot will be more
dynamic with questions targeted to individual customer circumstances.

Workforce Australia Online
This is a new digital platform for all Australians. It will provide
services including resume tools, online learning and job matching
services.

Workforce Australia Provider Services
They will provide an enhanced and more tailored services by focusing on
job seekers who need more support. Community Development Program and
Disability Employment Service Program will continue to be available.

Job Plans
Will be simplified and streamlined with reference to job seekers
achieving a monthly points target. The points target will replace
activities described in the job plan. Job Plans will be simplified for
job seekers and Centrelink Managed cohorts.

Transition to Work
Enhancements to the Transition to Work programme, including expansion of
eligibility and extension of programme length for some disadvantaged
participants (from 18 months to 24months).

Jobseeker registration and referral processes
New registration and referral processes will be introduced for volunteer
jobseekers. These job seekers will be referred to Workforce Australia
Online for Volunteers. There will be no maximum timeframe that these
jobseekers will be able to access this service. 

Data exchange
Improved technology and data exchange between Services Australia and the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment (DESE) will ensure staff
see updated information in near real time. This will also ensure Job
seekers do not need to provide the same information multiple times to
Services Australia and their Employment Service Provider.

Messages

-   Targeted Compliance Framework - Mutual obligation requirements
    resume for job seekers​​ - New 29​/7/2022
-   NESM: Finalise Generate Compliance Action workflow before starting
    the compliance investigation​​ - New 6​/7/2022
-   NESM - Errors when accessing the Job Seeker Snapshot​​ - New 5/7/2022
-   Targeted Compliance Framework - Contingency arrangements for job
    seekers in Workforce Australia, DES and ParentsNext​​ - Updated
    11/07/2022
-   Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS) - start of a new Apprenticeship Wage
    Subsidy from 1 July 2022​ - New 4/7/2022
-   Contingency arrangements for Capability Assessments - New 4/7/2022
-   ​​ Process Direct - Use Quality Management Application (QMA) to
    complete Participation Compliance Workflows​​> - New 1/7/2022
-   New Employment Services Model (N​​ESM) - Impacts to Student Payments
    and Student new claim transfers​ - New 30/6/2022​​
-   New Employment Services Model (N​​ESM) - Impacts to ABSTUDY Payments
    and ​new claim transfers​ - New 30/6/2022

Closed messages

-   ​DESE planned system outage​ - Closed
-   ​Workforce Australia is replacing jobactive from 1 July 2022 -
    Closed

Training

-   Has commenced from 30 May 2022.
-   A new overarching high level training product has been developed for
    most staff, with more targeted products developed for operational
    and processing staff (i.e. Participation Solutions Team).
-   Training for existing staff has been scheduled to occur between 30
    May - 1 July 2022.
-   For new staff, existing training products to include the changes
    under NESM will be updated and available from 1 July 2022.
-   Service Delivery Faculty SharePoint

Video Learning 

Additional training and Process Direct support material is available on:

-   ​Process Direct entry hub
-   Service Delivery Faculty SharePoint

[TABLE]

​​​​​

​

Resources

Additional Resources 

-   NESM information pack
-   New Employment Services Model (NESM) - Workforce Australia
-   Staff Talking Points – New Employment Service Model, Workforce
    Australia - updated 11/6/2022
-   Staff Talking Points - The new points based system for meeting
    mutual obligation requirements

-   [Frequently asked questions for staff]Frequently asked questions for
    staff
-   [Media coverage – Changes to PBAS/NESM]Media coverage – Changes to
    PBAS/NESM
-   [Workforce Australia - Job Seeker Transition Letters May - June
    2022]Workforce Australia - Job Seeker Transition Letters May - June
    2022
-   [Workforce Australia - Participation Solutions Team - Single Page
    Support]Workforce Australia - Participation Solutions Team - Single
    Page Support

Public information (Services Australia/external websites)

-   Department of Education, Skills and Employment - Workforce Australia
-   Help to get work with jobactive - JobSeeker Payment - Services
    Australia
-   Looking for work and job hunting - Looking for work - Services
    Australia
-   Mutual obligation requirements - Services Australia
-   Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers - Services
    Australia

Taskcard

-   [Registering access to ESSWEB 2.0]Registering access to ESSWEB 2.0

Process Direct 

Participation and compliance workflows will be transitioned to Process
Direct under the Single Staff Interface (SSI) project. This will deliver
an end to end staff processing experience.

-   SSI - What's available in Process Direct
-   Process Direct entry hub
-    Reporting ICT issues in Process Direct​

Yammer 

-   New Employment Service Model - Group

Feedback

​
​
​
​
​
​

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
